Taking Stock
of the
Caribbean
Growth Forum

               January
                 2016
Taking Stock of the Caribbean
       Growth Forum
        January 2016




                                i
Note: Because of the limited information this note is based on, its conclusions should be treated as
preliminary, subject to vetting by the more in-depth assessment. The report seeks to catalyze
discussion among CGF stakeholders on the way forward for the forum and to identify issues the in-
depth assessment should address.

The report was prepared by a team including Mr. Syed Mahmood Akhtar (Lead Author and Lead
Operations Officer, World Bank) and Mr. Leonardo Aleixo Lemes (co-Author, Country Officer, World
Bank) under the overall guidance of Ms. Cecile Thioro Niang (Program Leader for the Caribbean,
World Bank). Substantive inputs and written contributions were provided by Ms. Sylvia Dohnert
(Executive Director, Compete Caribbean), Mr. Alberto Mestas (Senior Consultant, Compete
Caribbean), Ms. Kari Grenade (Economist, Caribbean Development Bank) and Ms. Cecile Kappen
(Consultant, World Bank).

Mr. Inder Ruprah (Regional Economic Advisory, IADB), Desiree Mitchel (Caribbean Department, IADB)
provided additional inputs. Government focal points from various CGF participating countries also
gave feedback.

The team is grateful for this unparalleled support and feedback, particular from the assessment
countries.




                                                                                                   ii
Contents
Executive Summary....................................................................................................................................... iv
Contents ....................................................................................................................................................... iii
I.     Introduction........................................................................................................................................... 1
II.    Methodology ......................................................................................................................................... 3
III.   CGF: Core Features and Expectations .................................................................................................... 4
V.     The Reform Agenda Recommended by the CGF .................................................................................. 11
VI.    The Reform Implementation Record.................................................................................................... 17
VII. Assessing the Value Added of the CGF ................................................................................................. 22
VIII. Experience with Stakeholder Dialogue across Countries ...................................................................... 29
IX.    Suggestions for Improving CGF Effectiveness....................................................................................... 31



Annex 1 Risks and Mitigation Measures Identified by the CGF ..................................................................... 37

Annex 2 CGF Value Added: Questions for the Next Stage of this Assessment ............................................. 39

Annex 3 Grenada: Concreteness of Recommended Actions versus Implementation Record........................ 40

Annex 4 Mapping World Bank Support to CGF Reforms in 12 Countries ...................................................... 43

Annex 5 Updated List of CGF Analytical Work Produced .............................................................................. 49

Annex 6 CGF Framework and Implementation Plan ..................................................................................... 52




                                                                                                                                                                 iii
                                         Executive Summary
This Stocktaking Report assesses implementation and performance to date of the Caribbean Growth
Forum (CGF) in the 12 participating countries,i determines the value it has added, and identifies areas to
improve in this participatory policy reform process.

The World Bank Group initiated the CGF in partnership with the Inter-American Development Bank, the
Caribbean Development Bank, and Compete Caribbean, with support from the United Kingdom Agency
for International Development, the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the European Union, InfoDev, the
Competitive Industries and Innovation Program, Caribbean Export, the Caribbean Community Secretariat,
and the University of the West Indies.

In June 2012, as the CGF was launched, many Caribbean countries were grappling with difficult external,
fiscal, and financial issues (See Box 1 for CGF milestones). Recession, or at least anemic gross domestic
product growth, prevailed in most. The CGF was created in this context to provide the private sector and
civil society a methodology for shaping national and regional reforms and to help track the
implementation of actions launched to spur sustainable growth. To date, the CGF has engaged more than
2,500 representatives from business associations, civil society leaders, government, media, the private
sector, and indigenous groups.

Together, these groups focused on three thematic areas: logistics and connectivity, investment climate,
and skills and productivity, under which participating countries identified 495 reform actions in
consultation with private sector representatives and civil society leaders. Governments prepared road
maps for implementation that included milestones and time lines, taking their cue from the consultation
outcomes. They were to act on recommendations and report implementation progress to national
stakeholders through accountability workshops. To date, 6 of 12 countries have held their first
accountability workshop, and 4 of these have held a second accountability workshop. Six countries remain
in the preparatory phase.

While endorsement of the CGF appears strong, progress is mixed in hosting accountability workshops and
in implementing recommendations, due to a variety of factors discussed further in this report. In addition,
regional reforms were identified during the consultative phase, but it was more difficult during the first
implementation phase to identify regional champions that could take action on these reforms.

Despite mixed results, preliminary data for 212ii recommended actions shows that 53 percent of these
have been fully or partially completed. National chapters during the Third Regional CGF in June 2015
unanimously reiterated their interest in the exercise, either by using the CGF model in whole or leveraging
its tools and monitoring mechanisms, and integrating them into existing national multi-stakeholder
platforms. As the CGF embarks on Phase II of the implementation of reforms, the Stocktaking Report
provides an overview of the progress, challenges, and opportunities each national chapter faces in
implementing these recommendations.




                                                                                                         iv
Key Lessons Learned

The CGF is influencing the way governments conduct business. These include:

Positive impacts

   •   Generating and disseminating knowledge to support implementation of reforms.
   •   Helping governments prioritize and better focus the reform agenda.
   •   Converting objectives into time-bound actions.
   •   Strengthening government accountability.
   •   Giving the range of stakeholders a voice, particularly private sector and civil society
       representatives, helping to establish social capital.

Areas for improvement

      Better define reforms, set realistic time lines and associated performance indicators for each.
      Include structured feedback-loops to help assess reform implementation and achievement of
       objectives, and identify additional actions.
      Enhance continuity of stakeholder involvement throughout the process with more regular
       feedback.
      Scale up outreach and media engagement to better engage all stakeholders and solidify social
       capital.




                                                                                                         v
I.   Introduction

 1.      The Caribbean Growth Forum (CGF) was launched in 2012 amid growing concern about slow
 growth in the majority of Caribbean countries. After good growth and improvement in human
 development between the 1950s and the 1980s, the region began suffering the impact of the reduction
 in trade preferences among major trading partners in Europe and North America. As growth stagnated,
 unemployment and debt ratios rose substantially. The social fabric weakened, crime rates jumped, and
 vulnerability to external shocks and climate change increased. Past attempts to address these challenges
 through the articulation of development strategies and reform agendas bore little fruit as political issues,
 financial-resource constraints, and limited government focus on results inhibited implementation.
 Reforms driven by external players, such as donors, also suffered.

 2.      The CGF was conceived in this context as a platform to catalyze implementation of homegrown
 development agendas through stakeholder engagement, greater government focus on results, and a
 culture of transparency and accountability.

 3.      The forum draws strength from its diversity of stakeholders, but this also poses challenges.iii It
 must align multiple agendas and interests, and prioritize, resource, and program a variety of reform
 actions with appropriate implementation time lines. The diverse economic structures, performance,
 governance, and political economies, as well as the role of crisis in triggering reform actions, also need to
 be taken into account. Similarly, the experience (or lack thereof) and effectiveness of existing mechanisms
 for public-private dialogue in each country has affected the implementation of the CGF methodology. This
 assessment does not go into all these issues in-depth, but a more detailed assessment at the end of Phase
 II may address them.

 4.      The CGF began as a regional public-private dialogue mechanism for member countries backed by
 a methodology to foster dialogue that (1) is operated through an institutional structure consisting of a
 Steering Committee to guide the overall strategic direction; (2) an Advisory Board to guide the
 development and implementation of the CGF’s work program; and (3) a Coordination Secretariat to carry
 out day-to-day operations. Annex 6 illustrates the implementation framework.

 5.       It was intended to add value in a number of ways. The initial round of national stakeholder
 dialogues, spread over several weeks between November 2012 and July 2013, aimed to help articulate
 objectives and identify related actions. It was designed to generate social capital to build societal
 consensus around development agendas. A short, but formal list of objectives and broad
 recommendations for action—with action areas converted to specific, time-bound milestones—was
 expected to help governments focus on improvements under three broad themes: (1) investment climate,
 (2) logistics and connectivity, and (3) skills and productivity.iv A requirement to report every six months
 through an accountability workshop, meanwhile, was intended to generate a stronger sense of
 accountability within government agencies than had existed. Indications discussed in later sections
 suggest that some of this is happening, but varies by country (see Box 1 for detail of the CGF organization,
 thematic focus and stocktaking).




                                                                                                            1
6.        Notwithstanding its mixed experience, endorsement of the CGF appears strong. Stakeholders feel
that it is useful and can be a powerful catalyst for collective action involving multiple stakeholders, and
drive homegrown reforms and regional collaboration. This assessment concludes nonetheless that several
areas of the forum need improving to realize full potential.

7.       Even in countries where the CGF has significantly advanced, such as the Dominican Republic,
Grenada, and St. Lucia, several areas of improvement were identified. For example, many stakeholders
who participated in the national dialogues have not been engaged in subsequent exercises, such as the
accountability workshops. As a result, the social capital created early in the elaborate stakeholder
dialogues risks dilution over time. Within government, different officers engaged in CGF-related activities
at different times without a critical mass involved from the early stages. In many cases, this has thinned
out the institutional memory of the CGF within governments. While the accountability workshops have
proven useful, the lack of interaction between government and stakeholders during the implementation
period risks sapping momentum between them.

8.      Scope also exists to improve the programming of reform actions, in particular by better
distinguishing between medium-term actions (that may be implemented within a year) and longer-term
actions. Other factors, including the allocation of financial resources for the implementation of reforms
and the concreteness of reform actions, also seem to have had impact on the implementation record.

9.      Finally, stronger buy-in from governments could help overcome some of these weaknesses.
Examples include a formal petition to request and assign implementation responsibility to high-level
government representatives. In addition, a mechanism could be established to link CGF reform
implementation to budget exercises in following years, as discussed in this note (see Section IX) for further
discussion).

10.    This note reviews the work of the CGF to date. It also (1) takes an inventory of recommended
reforms, and (2) assesses preliminary reform performance as well as (3) the value the CGF has added in
its member countries.v vi




                                                                                                           2
      Box 1: Caribbean Growth Forum—Establishment and Focus

      Establishment

            Launch: June 2012 at a regional event in Kingston, Jamaica.

            Participating countries: Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada,
             Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, The Bahamas,
             Trinidad and Tobago. Barbados. Guyana and Haiti participate as observers only.

            Regional events: Three held since launch, including in The Bahamas in June 2013, in St. Kitts
             and Nevis in June 2014, and in St. Lucia in June 2015.

            Supporters: World Bank Group initiated in partnership with the Inter-American Development
             Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank, and Compete Caribbean. Supporters from the United
             Kingdom Agency for International Development, the Canada Department for Foreign Aid, Trade
             and Development, the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the European Union, InfoDev, the
             Competitive Industries and Innovation Program, Caribbean Export, the Caribbean Community
             Secretariat, and the University of the West Indies.

            Organization: A Steering Committee, an Advisory Board, and a Coordination Secretariat.

      Focus and Stocktaking

            Thematic focus: Actions focus on three broad themes: investment climate, logistics and
             connectivity, skills and productivity.

            Recommendations: Participating countries identified 495 recommendations under these, in
             consultation with private sector representatives and civil society leaders.

            Accountability workshops: In addition to the yearly national dialogues, countries are meant to
             hold biannual workshops to make recommendations and report implementation progress to
             national stakeholders.

            Milestones: Actions are deemed (1) “on track” if more than half of the milestones related to
             the action have been crossed, (2) “in progress” if less than half have been completed, (3)
             “delayed” if work has started but no milestone has been crossed, and (4) “not started” if no
             initiative has been taken. An action is “complete” when all milestones have been crossed.




II.     Methodology

  11.   This stocktaking assesses the working of the CGF based on (1) a database of reforms
  recommended by stakeholders in several countries during the CGF deliberations; (2) a database of
  implementation progress on the recommended reforms in various countries; (3) face-to-face interviews

                                                                                                               3
   with stakeholders in Grenada and St. Lucia; (4) focus group discussions with key CGF participants, and (5)
   an online survey of a broader group of CGF participants.vii The first data set covers policies, reforms, and
   other actions suggested and agreed by the government, civil society, and private sector representatives
   during the national consultations in the 12 countries. It comprises roughly 500 actions agreed and
   published on monitoring dashboards each government uses to report on progress.

   12.      The second set arises out of the monitoring mechanisms in the CGF countries, including the
   biannual accountability workshops, described in detail on page 18–19. As Box 1 notes, actions are deemed
   on track, in progress, delayed, not started, or completed, based on the passing of milestones. The analysis
   in this note is based on data provided by the CGF focal points.

   13.      CGF value added is assessed with guidance from an analytic framework (see Annex 2), with
   interviews in two countries with government officials, private sector representatives, academics and other
   civil society stakeholders, two focus-group discussions involving key CGF participants from the 12 CGF
   countries, and an online survey of a broader group of CGF participants carried out by the Inter-American
   Development Bank. The stocktaking aimed mainly to catalyze discussion among CGF stakeholders on the
   way forward drawing on experience so far.

III.   CGF: Core Features and Expectations

   14.      The Caribbean Growth Forum is a multi-stakeholder platform launched in June 2012 at a regional
   event in Kingston, Jamaica, where policy makers, civil society and private sector representatives from 15
   Caribbean countries discussed growth issues. Supported by several donors,viii it has aimed to help identify,
   prioritize, and implement reforms and actions to better enable economic growth in the Caribbean. It aims
   to do this while promoting private sector, academic, and civil society participation in public policy making,
   and has regional and country-specific dimensions.

   15.      The CGF was not launched in a vacuum; it was expected to add value to existing processes by
   better engaging stakeholders in the development agenda. Clearly, participating countries had been
   implementing such agendas before the CGF. The forum was established on the premise that a stakeholder
   dialogue occurring in several countries simultaneously would benefit formulation and implementation of
   those agendas and enrich them with wide-ranging views, aspirations, and knowledge. It would enhance
   mutual understanding among government and nongovernmental stakeholders, generating broad buy-in
   and, in turn, signal stakeholder’s expectations to government. The CGF was also meant to foster a culture
   of transparency in policy delivery, building on new knowledge gathered and disseminated throughout the
   initiative on key areas of focus.

   16.     Importantly, however, existing institutions or public-private dialogue mechanisms were either in
   place or being set up in some countries, and these were not sufficiently leveraged to avoid misalignment
   with similar initiatives.

   17.    The CGF process was expected to increase the implementation prospects of reform agendas.
   Stakeholder engagement in setting the agenda was expected to generate momentum for implementation.
   Stakeholders would remain engaged and, through a structured accountability mechanism, follow up with


                                                                                                              4
the government to ensure implementation of recommended actions. Thus, in each country, the initial
round of stakeholder meetings that led to the setting of priorities and recommended actions in each
priority area were to be followed up by Accountability Workshops every six months. Here governments
would report on the implementation status of each recommended action. Governments were expected
to rate the implementation status of each action as well as “Civil Society Observatories”, generating an
implementation scorecard, then further summarized in a “traffic lights” report. The observatories were
established as part of the CGF methodology, but so far have only been set up in the Dominican Republic
(the Grenada and St. Lucia observatories are underway).

18.      Governments were expected to undertake a number of actions after the initial round of
stakeholder meetings. They were to appoint focal points to coordinate implementation, allocate
responsibilities and resources within government, and establish an implementation monitoring
dashboard. Where stakeholder recommendations were not specific enough, governments were expected
to translate broad recommendations into concrete actions with an implementation schedule. To generate
momentum, a set of actions were identified that could be implemented within 12 months. But
stakeholders were free to recommend other, more impactful, actions that could take longer.

19.    The regional character of the forum was expected to further drive reforms. It would provide
opportunity to do the following:

       Discuss regional issues whose resolution would require initiatives going beyond a single country.
       Create peer pressure that would generate learning that could motivate and help countries carry
        on the CGF reform initiatives.
       Disseminate policy research prepared by the World Bank Group, Inter-American Development
        Bank, Caribbean Development Bank, and Compete Caribbean.

Since the first event in 2012, three follow-up regional events have taken place: in The Bahamas in June
2013, in St. Kitts and Nevis in June 2014, and in St. Lucia in June 2015.

The Bahamas meeting, one year into the program, hosted by the Prime Minister with participation from
a range of ministers, allowed about 400 national stakeholders to assess each other’s priorities and
exchange ideas with technical specialists and peers on solutions to the challenges in different countries.
Prominent private sector representatives and other attendees sent a strong signal about both ownership
and the credibility of the initiative.

The June 2014 technical level event allowed knowledge sharing, stocktaking, and capacity building among
CGF focal points, government officials, and private sector attendees to support reform implementation
across national chapters. In St. Lucia this year, participants deliberated on future direction, including a
discussion on cutting-edge topics in competitiveness that could get CGF attention.

The St. Lucia regional forum in June 2015, hosted by the Prime Minister with similar participation as in the
Bahamas meeting, presented the lessons from the implementation of the CGF and explored innovative
ways to enhance competitiveness, support pro-growth policies and create jobs by adopting new strategies
around two key pillars: i) trade and competitiveness and ii) entrepreneurship and innovation.




                                                                                                          5
  20.     If the regional gatherings can address regional issues, generating peer pressure, collective
  commitment, and learning among peers, then the CGF can add value beyond typical country-level
  stakeholder dialogue platforms. While the Bahamas Communiqué of June 2013 confirmed the
  commitment of all parties to inclusive and participatory policy making, accountability and transparency in
  policy implementation—as well as to the CGF initiative itself—further analysis is needed to determine
  how much this commitment on paper has translated into reform actions on the ground.

  21.     Development partners divided their share of support for the CGF agenda based on their level of
  engagement and activity in each country. On core CGF exercises, the World Bank Group facilitated follow-
  up on accountability mechanisms in the Dominican Republic and seven countries within the Organization
  of Eastern Caribbean States, while the Inter-American Development Bank and Compete Caribbean
  supported the process in The Bahamas, Belize, Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.

  22.     The core CGF exercise has support from Compete Caribbean,ix the Inter-American Development
  Bank, the Caribbean Development Bank, and the World Bank. For the Dominican Republic, the
  Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and regional events, the World Bank mobilized about $1.3
  million over three years from its own budget and grant funding from partners.x Compete Caribbean
  allocated an additional $500,000 for implementation of some of the reforms.

  23.     The World Bank amount helped conduct analytical work (67 percent) and convening work (33
  percent), that is, the CGF national deliberations, regional events, and national accountability workshops
  in 7 countries. This was about $350,000 for seven countries for three years, or 50,000 per country per
  year. This covered consultants’ expenses (facilitators, integrators), preparatory missions, and the
  organization of 16 events. In the case of Compete Caribbean, the program spent $447,500 for national
  consultations, the Bahamas event, and some of the accountability workshops. Compete Caribbean also
  established a $500,000 CGF Facility after the June 2013 event, to support implementation. These funds
  supported 10 technical cooperation activities to help implement specific CGF actions throughout the
  Caribbean.

  24.      The CGF was not conceived as an initiative to develop a line of business for development partners
  (that is, from consultation to prioritization and funding). However, additional funding and targeted
  technical assistance from governments and development partners could have created important incentive
  for maintaining reform momentum. Funding—either in ongoing projects or in new ones—could have
  made reform implementation more satisfactory.

IV.   The Working of the CGF: Varying Country Patterns and Commitment

  Launching the national chapters

  25.       The follow-up to the June 2012 CGF launch has varied. Twelve countries formally joined,
  established national CGF chapters, and held multi-stakeholder consultations between November 2012
  and June 2013. They did so at varying speeds and with a diverse record of achievements so far (Table 1
  lists the countries and their achievements). Barbados, Guyana, and Haiti, while not opting-in, participated
  as observers.


                                                                                                           6
26.     Roughly 2,700 people participated in the first round of national level meetings in the 12
countries. These resulted in close to 500 recommendations (see Section V). Each country was then
supposed to start acting on the recommendations and report implementation progress to the national
stakeholders through Accountability Workshops at regular intervals in Phase I (ideally every six months).
The provision for such accountability mechanisms is good practice, especially where civil society
participates in the accountability process. Citizen Report Cards are one such mechanism of accountability.
These citizen surveys enable assessment of the quality of public services and help steer government
strategy and allocation of resources to meet public demand.xi So far, good progress has been made with
such mechanisms in only a few countries, with the Dominican Republic being the most advanced.

Follow-up to the national dialogues

27.      Commitment to the CGF varies. The exercise has advanced in six countries (Dominican Republic,
Grenada, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines). And six others completed
the consultative phase but have not yet gone much further (Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Belize,
Dominica, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago). Accountability workshops have been held in the six advanced
countries: once in two of them (St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines) and twice in the four
others (Dominican Republic, Grenada, Jamaicaxii, and St. Lucia). St. Vincent and the Grenadines was ready
to hold the Second Accountability Workshop in April 2015, but lack of funds and the approaching regional
event postponed it. Altogether, 21 national events were held in the 12 countries, including Accountability
Workshops. Roughly half of the participants in these events were government officials, 30 percent came
from the private sector, and the rest from academia and civil society.




                                                                                                         7
                        Table 1: Timeline of CGF Deliberations in Participating Countries

                                                                          Phase II: Implementation Start
                           Phase I: Formulation of Priority                September 2013–June 2015
         Country            Actions through Participatory                                2nd
                                                               1st Accountability
                                      Processes                                      Accountability Lead facilitator
                                                                   Workshop
                                                                                       Workshop
     Dominican             November 1, 2012 (launch)—          December 3, 2013       October 25,      World Bank
     Republic              February 28, 2013 (completion                                 2014            Group
                           of working group deliberations)

     Jamaica               May 2, 2013 (launch)—June 6,        February 20, 2014      July 2014      Inter-American
                           2013 (completion of working                                                Development
                           group deliberations)                                                           Bank
     St Lucia              January 22, 2013 (launch)—            March 6, 2014       December 3,       World Bank
                           March 12, 2013 (completion of                                2014              Group
                           working group deliberations)
     St. Vincent and       January 17, 2013 (launch)—            April 3rd, 2014                       World Bank
     the Grenadines        February 22, 2013 (completion                                 TBD            Group
                           of working group deliberations)
     St. Kitts and         February 26, 2013 (launch)—           June 11, 2014           TBD           World Bank
     Nevis                 May 17, 2013 (completion of                                                  Group
                           working group deliberations)
     Grenada               December 11 , 2012 (launch)—          June 25, 2014       12 February       World Bank
                           March 15, 2013 (completion of                                2015            Group
                           working group deliberations)
     Antigua and           November 19, 2012 (launch)—            Delay Due to           TBD           World Bank
     Barbuda               February 27, 2013 (completion       Political Cycle (no                      Group
                           of working groups deliberations)   date confirmed yet)
     Bahamas, The          April 4, 2013 (launch)—June 23,      Delay due to tax         TBD         Inter-American
                           2013 (completion of working           reforms issues                       Development
                           group deliberations)                                                           Bank
     Dominica              March 22, 2013 (launch)—May           Preparation in          TBD           World Bank
                           2, 2013 (completion of working           progress                              Group
                           group deliberations)
     Suriname              March 18, 2013 (launch)—April         Preparation in          TBD         Inter-American
                           19, 2013 (completion of working          progress                          Development
                           group deliberations)                                                           Bank
     Belize                June 5, 2013 (launch)—July 18,         Delay due to           TBD         Inter-American
                           2013 (completion of working             conflicting                        Development
                           group deliberations). No Final      leadership on CGF                          Bank
                           Report
     Trinidad and          May 8, 2013 (launch)—June 7,       Delay due to lack of       TBD         Inter-American
     Tobago                2013 (completion of working            buy into the                        Development
                           group deliberation). No Final      accountability phase                        Bank
                           Report
                     TBD = to be determined, green = done, red = not done.


28.     Participating CGF countries may be divided into three categories based on progress: advanced
CGF, moderate CGF, and early-stage CGF.xiii The descriptions following are not a comprehensive account
of the experience in these countries, and only illustrate broad differences between the country types.
Importantly, the categorization is based merely on the number of accountability workshops held in each
country and implementation record, as these workshops provided information on the degree of



                                                                                                                       8
implementation of reform actions. In Phase II, this categorization could be improved by assessing the
resulting impact (macro, social, and institutional).

Advanced CGF countries: (Dominican Republic, Grenada, St. Lucia)

29.      Strong accountability is an important feature in the Dominican Republic, driven by the observatory
set up through the CGF. The country also has a long-standing Competitiveness Council, which served as
the focal point for the CGF, and was key in mapping the reforms the CGF helped accelerate. The strong
interest and high-level support at the Ministry for Industry and Commerce also contributed to the
acceleration of reforms in the country. Hence, the accountability process allowed a rethink of reforms. It
has helped identify more specific goals and gauge the needs of the private sector and contributed to more
discipline in the collaboration between government and the private sector. Nonetheless, (1) the difficulty
of carrying out legal reforms, and (2) limited funding has constrained reform implementation.

30.     In Grenada, the CGF has been able to transcend political cycles and reforms identified through
the CGF have become part of the National Strategy Plan 2030. The Social Partners committee, which is
currently monitoring the International Monetary Fund (IMF) program, is set out to serve as the civil society
observatory for the CGF, maintaining the same multi-stakeholder elements. A framework for reporting
progress on CGF actions to the committee now needs to be implemented.

31.     In St. Lucia, turn out was strong during the initial dialogue phase and the private sector
participation in subsequent work was also strong. Stakeholder interest was bolstered by the involvement
of the multilateral partners, which helped counter the perception that it could turn into another
government-led talk shop. However, it is important to note that the first government focal point —the
National Competitiveness and Productivity Council—was replaced, resulting in two parallel and
independent public-private dialogue processes. It is important to ensure the two processes complement
each other, to set up a civic observatory, and arrange more interaction between accountability workshops
to pressure government to deliver. Although many reforms that came out of the initial consultations were
already on the government’s agenda, the CGF helped prioritize them. CGF participants feel that it is critical
to have a champion in government to keep agendas moving forward.

Moderate CGF countries (Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Vincent and the Grenadines)

32.     In Jamaica, when the CGF was introduced, the National Competitiveness Council was already in
place. The CGF methodology helped better engage the private sector and streamline the thematic groups.
The country was also beginning negotiations with the IMF over a new arrangement which would include
selected elements of the Government’s Growth Agenda. The Growth Agenda Sub-Committee, informed
by the CGF exercise, has been set up to advance the Government’s Growth Agenda. The eight-member
committee meets regularly and uses a methodology for tracking implementation progress that is based
on the CGF accountability framework.

33.     St. Kitts and Nevis has no a homegrown public-private dialogue framework or platform. Ad hoc
funding has handicapped the CGF exercise. Some had expected that, after the CGF process had generated



                                                                                                           9
recommendations, funding for implementation from the donor community and government would
follow, but this has not materialized.

34.     The CGF in St. Vincent and the Grenadines has advanced significantly even as natural disasters
have impeded or diverted attention away from reforms. Funding during implementation was a major
constraint. But the country completed the first accountability workshop and is keen to undertake the
second.

Early Stage CGF countries: (Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Belize, Dominica, Suriname, Trinidad and
Tobago)

35.       In the Bahamas, the CGF helped inform the National Development Plan: Vision 2040, which
provides a roadmap for the future development of the country. Nevertheless, the actual CGF value added
fell short of expectations. The country has no shortage of studies, but is deficient on implementation.
Officials need to determine the role the CGF can play after the initial launch, for example, in supporting
implementation of reforms, and possibly including as a delivery unit and as a rapid response facility to
help fill knowledge gaps that impede reform implementation.

36.     The Economic Development Council in Belize, meanwhile, used the CGF consultation process and
broad themes, which are now part of the council. From the Belizean perspective, given institutional
arrangements already in place, the CGF was not meant to be a standalone initiative or program, but to
support other initiatives. According to stakeholders there, the next CGF phase could be used in a smaller
set of countries where homegrown programs are nascent, and where the CGF value added could be
adapted to the local public-private dialogue institutional arrangements.

37.     In Dominica, the CGF process started off well and had stakeholder support, but lacked a champion
within government and high-level commitment, the latter partly explaining the former.

38.    In Suriname, initial momentum existed to implement the actions, as the country was quite
advanced in identifying medium and long-term action plans for competitiveness and growth. But, as in
Dominica, this was lost due to lack of high-level commitment and follow up from the government. The
budget and government plans support some actions that are part of the government’s action plan, but
the CGF methodology has not been leveraged sufficiently to support reform implementation and
stakeholder accountability. Appetite exists to use the CGF framework further, but the country needs more
hands-on support to implement it.

39.       The CGF exercise in Trinidad and Tobago did not identify concrete details for implementation
using a particular framework, in that existing public-private dialogue mechanisms drove agreed reforms
prior to the CGF launch. Instead, the CGF consultations identified general objectives and actions.
Participants during the initial consultations for the three thematic groups also seemed to lack the
knowledge and time to propose well-informed next steps or reform actions. The time lines were also
difficult to meet due to varying levels of information on different themes.




                                                                                                       10
 Following the 2013 CGF meeting in the Bahamas, the Trinidad and Tobago chapter became relatively
 dormant, with little follow up given that an existing reform program under the Economic Development
 Board was already working on many of the issues identified through the CGF consultations. For the CGF
 methodology to have worked, more hands-on engagement from government was needed (a champion
 within government should have been identified). It should also have created a link between its own
 ongoing efforts and the CGF process. Without this, such exercises may turn into a talk shop with little
 interest for the private sector. Finally, as implementation was meant to start, Trinidad and Tobago was
 fully invested in preparations to host a regional business event. This appears to have distracted the
 government.

V.   The Reform Agenda Recommended by the CGF

 Thematic breakdown of actions recommended at national workshops

 40.     The focus on the three broad themes—again, logistics and connectivity, investment climate, and
 skills and productivity—was decided at the initial CGF meeting in Jamaica in 2012. The
 recommendations that emerged from the CGF national deliberations reflect these themes (Figure 1), with
 further break down of the three areas in Figure 2. The distribution of recommendations across these three
 themes do not reflect any strong preference.

                Figure 1: Overall Distribution of CGF Recommendations by Major Theme

                          Share of Recommendations by Topic Areas

                                     Skills
                                     27%                          Logistics
                                                                    35%




                                                IC                 Logistics   IC   Skills
                                               38%




 41.    At the country level, the picture is different, with widely differing priorities, as judged by the
 number of recommendations (Figure 3). Logistics and connectivity comes out on top in and the Bahamas,
 Grenada, and Jamaica. For stakeholders in Belize, the Dominican Republic, and St. Vincent and the
 Grenadines, investment climate is by far the most important priority. It is also important in Antigua and



                                                                                                       11
Barbuda, although here it competes with logistics and connectivity. Finally, skills and productivity is the
top priority in Trinidad and Tobago (by far) and in Dominica.


                               Figure 2: Distribution of CGF Recommendations by Subtheme

                Logistics & Connectivity                                                                Skills and Productivity
                   Energy 9%
                                                      Transportatio
                                                                                   Skills analysis                                Productivity
                                                         n (Air,
                                                                                   and links with                                    16%
                                                        maritime,
                                                      ground) 27%                   markets 7%

      ICT 24%
                                                                                                                                         Tripartite
                                                                                                                                       framework /
                                                                                                                                         National
                                                                                                                                       productivity
                                                                                                                                       councils 24%

                                                       Decentralizati
                                                         on 10%
                                                                                   Education and
                                                                                   labor policies
                       Trade
                                                                                       53%
                     facilitation
                        30%

 ICT = information and communications technology.


                                                                  Investment Climate

                                        Taxation, firms,
                                       registry disputes
                                       and settlements                                           Access to finance
                                              13%                                                      18%




                                           Governance and                                     Doing business
                                             investment                                         and SMEs
                                           promotion 38%                                     development 30%




                                    SME = small and medium enterprise.




                                                                                                                                                      12
       Figure 3: Distribution of CGF Recommendations by Major Theme and Country (% share)



                   70

                   60

                   50

                   40

                   30

                   20

                   10

                    0




                                    Logistics   Investment climate   Skills



42.    Numbers alone do not provide a full picture. Of course, analysis based solely on number of
recommendations is fraught, since numbers do not necessarily reflect the potential impact of the
recommendations. For example, a reform to an important law may count as a single recommendation,
but may carry profound impact. Stakeholders may have also refrained from making recommendations in
some cases in areas where ongoing programs existed. For example, education quality, skills, and
productivity issues are of utmost importance to the competitiveness of the Dominican Republic. That they
were not highly prioritized in the CGF may be because the government was implementing the parallel
Dominican Initiative for Education Quality, using the same methodology and with the support of the World
Bank Group, other development partners, and broad-based civil society participation.

43.     Assessing whether a strong thematic preference exists in the recommendations in individual
countries therefore requires analysis of the nature of the recommendations. If the priorities as indicated
in the figures stand this scrutiny, and if the CGF country-level deliberations were inclusive and
participatory, then the above data do indeed reveal societal priorities.

Concreteness of the recommendations at the country level

44.     CGF recommendations vary in concreteness. A range of participants typically attend CGF
deliberations—sometimes even students, or the indigenous community (as in Dominica)—with
advantages and disadvantages. On one hand, it provides broad perspectives, knowledge, and insight,
improving support for the recommendations. But this can produce a heterogeneous mix of

                                                                                                       13
recommendations, some pitched in very general terms and that cannot be acted upon, and others more
solid. The effectiveness of the CGF exercise in balancing the need for broad support, yet substance in its
recommendations is therefore important. Table 2 lists three types of recommendations emanating from
the CGF process in the various countries: very general, partly concrete, and concrete recommendations.

                                 Table 2: Examples of Recommendations by Concreteness
         Nature of
      Recommendation                                                Example
                                  Increase participation in education and training (Antigua and Barbuda)
                                  Improve governance, accountability and sustainability (Belize)
     Very general
                                  Strengthen the relationship between the private sector and the trade unions
                                   to improve productivity (Dominica)
                                  Examine the feasibility of creating a “single sea space” within the
                                   Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (Antigua and Barbuda)
     Partly concrete
                                  Create an initiative for micro-insurance (Dominican Republic)
                                  Enhance legislation to facilitate enforcement of contracts (St. Lucia)
                                  Introduce flat fee to register businesses (Dominican Republic)
     Concrete                     Enact a small business development act (Grenada)
                                  Create a national productivity council (St. Kitts and Nevis)

45.     Table 3 summarizes the grading of the concreteness of the recommendations for each country.
Roughly 28 percent of the recommendations were concrete, with 51 percent partly concrete. But
countries differed significantly, with the proportion of concrete recommendations ranging from a low of
3 percent (Trinidad and Tobago) to a high of 67 percent (Jamaica).

                       Table 3: Breakdown of Recommendations by Degree of Concreteness
 Country               Total Number of           Concreteness Ranking of Recommendation        Percent of Concrete
                       Recommendations      1 = general   2 = partly concrete 3 = concrete     Recommendations
 Antigua and Barbuda   48                   5             31                  12               26
 Belize                46                   24            19                  3                7
 Dominica              40                   0             23                  17               43
 Dominican Republic    60                   2             35                  23               38
 Grenada               45                   14            23                  8                18
 Jamaica               46                   0             15                  31               67
 St. Kitts and Nevis   33                   8             18                  7                21
 St. Lucia             52                   8             25                  19               37
 St. Vincent and the   28                   7             17                  4                14
 Grenadines
 Suriname              44                   4             27                  13               30
 Bahamas, The          17                   7             7                   3                18
 Trinidad and Tobago   36                   21            14                  1                3
 TOTAL                 495                  100           254                 141              28


46.     This assessment of concreteness relates to the recommendations made by the participants during
the first phase, which included representatives from government, private sector and civil society.
Governments, in their follow-up, may further solidify actions by specifying implementation milestones for
these. Grenada’s example illustrates this point below. A “golden rule” of the CGF was that government
would not modify the results of the national deliberations in subsequent stages. To support the
governments in preparing road maps for implementation, the CGF Secretariat facilitated a “CGF

                                                                                                                 14
integrator” to help public officials define concrete enough milestones that could be tracked during
implementation. This exercise sometimes resulted in more concrete reform dashboards, while in other
cases the stakeholders’ proposals remained very general.

47.     The implementation record for degree of concreteness of recommended actions: Are more
concretely defined actions likely to have a better implementation record? This hypothesis was tested for
Grenada. In addition to the assessment of concreteness, data were collected on the state of
implementation of the 44 recommended actions. The data are as reported by the government at the 2nd
National Accountability Workshop (February 12, 2015). The scores are binary with 1 indicating completed
action and zero not completed. The scores on these two dimensions for each of the 44 actions are
provided in Annex 3. Table 4 provides the average implementation score for each category of
recommended action.

     Table 4: Relationship between Concreteness of Recommendations and their Implementation

          Concreteness        Number of             Number                Average
            Category        Recommended           Implemented       Implementation Score
                                Actions        (by February 2015)     (% implemented)
                1                  14                  10                    72
                2                  23                  11                    48
                3                  7                    4                    57
        Note: Score 1 to 3 in increasing concreteness.

48.     The results are counterintuitive, since it appears that the least concrete recommendations have
the best implementation record. There is at least one explanation for this. As mentioned, our measure of
concreteness is based on the way in which the action was phrased at the end of the national stakeholder
workshops. In many cases, the government subsequently identified more specific actions within each
category, and the implementation record relates to these. Thus, for example, action 2.3 under the
Investment Climate pillar—Train and empower public servants and statutory employees—which scored
only 1 on the concreteness definition, was later specified as a series of workshops on topics such as
performance management skills, customer relations, and communications. It appears that since a number
of such workshops were organized, the action has been shown as “implemented”.

49.      In this case, implementation may have been rendered easier because the more general action
was subsequently defined more concretely. But this raises the question whether the mere organization
of a few workshops truly satisfies the spirit of the original stakeholder recommendation. It may be argued
that the organization of some skills-building workshops are low-hanging fruit that build momentum, but
that more in-depth and medium- and long-term actions (such as ensuring on-the-job application of the
training received in the workshops) are required to achieve impact. This points to a couple of larger issues.
These include, (1) the appropriate programming of actions to satisfy a CGF recommendation (this includes
the distinction between short-term actions, such as workshops, which get the momentum going, and the
medium and long-term actions that lead to impact) and (2) the need to evaluate to what extent the more
specific government actions lead to the outcomes and impact expected from stakeholders original
formulations. Given the short time since national workshops were held, it is still too early to evaluate the
impact of the reform outcomes.


                                                                                                          15
50.     A different example, but with similar implications, is action 1.4 under the Investment Climate
pillar—Enact a Small Business Development Act. This is a fairly concrete action, but it has not yet been
implemented. This reflects the lengthy procedures usually involved in legislative actions. In this case, the
sponsoring agency, the Grenada Industrial Development Agency, drafted the Act, held stakeholder
consultations on the draft, got approval from its board, and sent it to the Legal Affairs Ministry for vetting.
In other words, while implementation has progressed, it may have been too ambitious to expect this to
be completed within 12 months, again raising the issue of realistic programming of actions.xiv

51.     It would also be useful to assess reform implementation status for its intensity and whether
reform benefits are for the few or the many. This issue may be taken up in a more in-depth assessment
of the CGF.


Recommendations at the regional level

52.      Regional proposals have come out of national deliberations. Some national CGF chapters noted
the importance of regional reforms (Table 5). Implementation of regional actions is not the responsibility
of a single country, however, even though regional treaties are frequently stalled due to ratification delays
in national governments.

                         Table 5: Some CGF Recommendations with Regional Character
          CGF Chapter                               Activities with a Regional Dimension
Antigua and Barbuda      Facilitate free movement of people within the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
                         (OECS)
                         Establish a “single air space” within the OECS

Dominica                 Establish a Maritime Transport Regulatory Agency to monitor rates and charges by
                         shipping lines
                         Eliminate the cartel of the international shipping lines

Dominican Republic       Improve regional cultural and transport links

                         Increase Caribbean-markets-related knowledge

Grenada                  Improve air connectivity—regional and international

                         Conduct public awareness campaigns on regional opportunities/initiatives

Jamaica                  Prepare a national master plan for development of a logistics hub

St. Kitts and Nevis      Improve access to trade and logistics information available for islands of the region

                         Provide incentive and facilitate the expansion of services offered by cruise liners in St
                         Vincent, Grenada, St. Lucia, and Dominica to include the rest of the islands

                         Expand Port Zante to serve as a subregional hub

St. Lucia                Establish an online, one-stop shop for standardized information on trade and transport

                         Review all studies on the rationalization of airports and seaports

The Bahamas              Improve knowledge of regional trade opportunities


                                                                                                                     16
  53.     Results in this area are particularly limited. The CGF has involved regional actors (CARICOM,
  Secretariat for the Caribbean States, the Caribbean Development Bank) and other development partners
  with regional offices (United Nations Development Programme, European Union) in the regional events,
  including in concrete discussions on how to find solutions to these regional challenges. This has yielded
  limited results, however, and a deeper analysis of this dimension would aid understanding of the
  complexity of a regional agenda.

VI.   The Reform Implementation Recordxv

  54.     Preliminary data suggests mixed progress in implementing recommendations in the six
  countries where CGF implementation has been stronger. Of the 495 recommendations made so far in
  the 12 CGF countries, 173 were in logistics and connectivity, 189 in investment climate, and 133 under
  skills and connectivity. Preliminary data on implementation progress is available for 212
  recommendations. Of those, 58 are fully completed, 54 partially completed, 82 are delayed and 18 have
  not started.

  55.       As noted earlier, the data distinguish between reforms based on the milestones that have been
  crossed: thus a reform is (1) on track if more than half of the milestones have been crossed, (2) in progress
  if less than half have been completed, (3) delayed if work has started but no milestone has been crossed,
  and (4) not started if no initiative has been taken yet on a recommendation. An action is considered
  “complete” when all milestones have been crossed. This adds a degree of rigor to the initiative.
  Government reporting on milestones is based on their provision of concrete evidence to the CGF
  Secretariat. The following discusses implementation in more detail.

  56.     Data on implementation progress at the six-month point (the first accountability workshops
  roughly six months after recommendations were finalized) and the 12-month (the second accountability
  workshops) are available for four countries: Dominican Republic, Grenada, Jamaica, and St. Lucia,
  summarized in Figure 4.xvi

  57.     These findings reveal important country differences. For example, implementation appears to
  have taken off fairly quickly in the Dominican Republic, with 55 percent of actions reported on track by
  the 6-month point. By contrast, only 5 percent of recommended actions in Grenada and 11 percent in
  Jamaica were on track at that point. Implementation subsequently picked up in Grenada, with 57 percent
  of actions implemented at the 12-month point. But it continued to move slowly in Jamaica, with 26
  percent of the actions implemented at the 12-month point. In St. Lucia, initial momentum appears to have
  slowed. The country’s implementation record was reasonably impressive at the 6-month point (33 percent
  on track), but improved only marginally by the 12-month period (37 percent). A large proportion of
  reforms previously listed as in progress have now slipped into the delayed category. The Dominican
  Republic remained the top performer, with a 70 percent implementation record at the 12-month point.




                                                                                                            17
        Figure 4: Reform Implementation Record at 6- and 12-Month Points in Four Countries




58.      Some reforms are complex and past attempts have been unsuccessful—they may have stalled for
years or not even got off the ground. The Insolvency Law in the Dominican Republic is one such; it was
stalled for seven years, but after resubmission, has passed the lower chamber of congress.xvii The CGF is
addressing several other complex reforms with an extended time frame. These include the following:

       Tax reforms in the Dominican Republic
       Electricity sector reforms in the Dominican Republic
       Infrastructure development in St. Lucia
       Customs in St. Lucia
       Vocational and professional training curriculum reforms in various Organisation of Eastern
        Caribbean States countries
       Reforms of tax incentives for the private sector in Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
        countries

A closer look at the implementation record: Grenada and St. Lucia

59.     The data for Grenada and St. Lucia reveal interesting findings with potentially important
implications. As mentioned before, St. Lucia had early momentum, with 33 percent of the 51
recommended actions on track at the six-month point, and another 20 percent in progress. Roughly half
(47 percent) had delayed implementation. No actions fell in the “not started” category. In Grenada, by
contrast, only 4.5 percent (2 of 44 recommended actions) were on track, with 55 percent in progress and
21 percent delayed. Moreover, no work had been initiated on as many as 1 of 5 (21 percent)
recommended actions.



                                                                                                      18
60.      Implementation progress may not follow a linear path. Patterns reversed after the 1st
Accountability Workshop, with implementation picking up momentum in Grenada,xviii and slowing down
in St. Lucia. It was reported at the 2nd Accountability Workshops that 57 percent of the recommendations
had been completed in Grenada, compared to 37 percent in St. Lucia. Within each country, the degree of
implementation progress across the three thematic areas varies (Figure 5). In St. Lucia, logistics and
connectivity stands out as an area with a relatively poor implementation record, the other two thematic
areas being close to the average picture. Only 5 of 19 recommended actions (26 percent) related to
logistics and connectivity were completed, compared to the average of 37 percent for all
recommendations. In Grenada, skills and productivity stands out for the opposite reason—a substantially
above-average implementation performance at the 12-month point, with 4 of 5 (80 percent)
recommended actions implemented compared with the average of 57 percent.

61.      The early implementation performance (at the 6-month point) and subsequent performance
(12-month point) appears have an interesting relationship. Figure 6 relates the 12-month completion
rate to the implementation status at the 6-month point. In both countries, early momentum (or its lack)
affects future performance. Thus, in St. Lucia, only 17 percent of actions classified as delayed at the 6-
month point, were completed by the 12-month point, while 70 percent of actions assessed as in progress
at 6 months were judged as completed at 12 months.

                                          Figure 5: Implementation at 12-Month Point: St. Lucia and Grenada

                                             St. Lucia                                                                        Grenada
                            Implementation status by 2nd Accountabilty                                        Implementation status by 2nd Accountabilty
                                           Workshop                                                                           Workshop
                       80                                                                                90
                       70                                                                                80
                                                                                   of recommendations
  of recommendations




                                                                                    % of total numnber




                       60                                                                                70
   % of total number




                       50                                                                                60
                                                                                                         50
                       40
                                                                                                         40
                       30
                                                                                                         30
                       20                                                                                20
                       10                                                                                10
                        0                                                                                 0
                             Total     Logistics and   Investment    Skills and                                  Total     Logistics and     Investment    Skills and
                                       Connectivity      Climate    Productivity                                           Connectivity        Climate    Productivity
                                              Themes                                                                                Themes
                                         Completed                                                                              Completed
                                         Not completed                                                                          Not completed




The differences are less stark for Grenada, but the same pattern holds: 71 percent of the actions in
progress at the 6-month point were completed at the 12-month point. The completion record for actions
initially delayed (44 percent) is better than in St. Lucia. However, it is a little puzzling that in both countries,
actions that were fairly advanced (on track) at the 6-month point were not as well advanced as one would
expect. The completion rates at the 12-month point for this category is 47 percent in St. Lucia and 50
percent in Grenada, significantly less than for the actions earlier classified as in progress, but not on track.




                                                                                                                                                                         19
                                                          Figure 6: Early Momentum and Subsequent Implementation Performance

                                                                                                                                                                       Grenada
                                                                   St. Lucia
                                                                                                                                                       80




                                                                                                       of 2nd Accountability Workshop based on their
                                                  80
  of 2nd Accountability Workshop based on their




                                                                                                                                                       70




                                                                                                            status at 1st accountability workshop
                                                  70
       status at 1st accountability workshop




                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                       50




                                                                                                                     % completed at time
                % completed at time




                                                  50
                                                  40                                                                                                   40

                                                  30                                                                                                   30
                                                  20                                                                                                   20
                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                  0
                                                        On track     In progress     Delayed                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                            On track In progress Delayed Not started




What does implementation mean?

62.     Table 6 provides examples of milestones associated with three recommended actions, two for St.
Lucia and one for Grenada. Two of these recommended actions were in progress at the time of the 1st
Accountability Workshop and graded as complete at the 2nd Accountability Workshop.

63.       In St. Lucia, for example, a recommended action to “increase levels of connectivity and ICT
[information and communication technology) in the island” had four milestones associated with it for the
first six-month period. Of these, three had been crossed by the time of the 1st Workshop. These included
formulation of a national ICT policy, cabinet approval of the policy and establishment of a framework and
structure to manage its implementation. Additional milestones were identified for the next 6 months (not
listed in Table 6) and assessed by the 2nd Accountability Workshop as having been completed. It is
important to note here that the Caribbean Communications Infrastructure Program was in place and
supporting the reforms either directly or indirectly.

                                                       Table 6: Examples of Milestones Associated with CGF Recommendations
                                       St. Lucia                                                                                                                                  Grenada
 In-progress at 6-month point, completed      On track at 6-month point, but                                                                                        In progress at 6-month point,
 at 12-month point                            incomplete at 12-month point                                                                                          completed at 12-month point

 Recommended action                                                                Recommended action                                                               Recommended action
 Increase levels of connectivity and                                               Develop public-private partnership (PPP)                                         Create structural links between
 information and communication (ICT) in                                            arrangements (investment climate                                                 agriculture and tourism, agro-
 the island (logistics and connectivity                                            theme)                                                                           processing and the wider economy
 theme)                                                                                                                                                             (investment climate theme)

 Milestones (examples)                                                             Milestones (examples)                                                            Milestones (examples)
 •   ICT Policy 2013–2018 formulated                                               •   Request made for technical                                                   •   Grenada Tourism Authority
 •   Cabinet approves ICT Policy                                                       assistance funding for the PPP                                                   trains 21 artisans



                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
 •      Framework and structure established         Policy framework (only milestone         •   GHTA carries out a survey of
        to manage the implementation of the         for 6-month point—achieved)                  its membership to determine
        National ICT Strategy                   •   Public-private partnership policy            the purchase of food locally
 •      Hotspots established in key locations       completed (milestone for 12-month        •   MAREP constructs 5 farm
        in St. Lucia                                point—not achieved)                          access roads
                                                •   PPP Framework consultation,              •   MAREP launches a Youth in
                                                    dissemination and awareness                  Agriculture campaign to
                                                    building held (milestone for 12-             attract youth to agriculture
                                                    month point—not achieved)                •   GHTA organizes nutmeg
                                                                                                 festival to link tourism and
                                                                                                 agriculture sectors
                                                                                             •   MAREP implemented the rural
                                                                                                 investment fund for
                                                                                                 community investment
                                                                                                 projects
GHTA = Grenada Hotel and Tourism Association, MAREP = Market Access and Rural Enterprise
Development Programme.

64.     One of the recommended actions for the investment climate theme in Grenada was “Create
structural links between agriculture and tourism, agro-processing and the wider economy”. This is a rather
general recommendation, but it was translated into specific milestones, several of which are listed in Table
6. These milestones, and some others, were completed by the time of the 2nd Accountability Workshop
and the recommended action was deemed completed. A third example in Table 6, a recommendation for
St. Lucia under the investment climate theme—Development of Public-Private Partnerships
Arrangements—milestones were not completed and the action was deemed incomplete.

65.     An assessment of the “completeness” of reforms supported by the World Bank was also
conducted. This does not refer to the wealth of support the organization provides the Caribbean region
as technical assistance and lending. Instead, it takes a snapshot of how much World Bank projects and
programs support specific reforms under the 3 themes in the 12 CGF countries, irrespective of its active
programs in these countries.xix

66.      In the 12 countries, the World Bank Group supports 20 percent of total reforms (or 106), although
with an uneven breakdown under the themes: it supports 33 percent of logistics and connectivity reforms
(62 reforms), 20 percent of investment climate reforms (40 reforms), but only 3 percent (4 reforms) of
skills and productivity reforms (see Table 7 below for details).

                   Table 7: Number of CGF Country Reforms Supported by World Bank Group
                                                                                  Logistics
                                                                                    and             Skills and
     Thematic Area                                         Investment Climate   Connectivity       Productivity     Total
     Number of reform actions                                     189               173                133           495

     Number of bank supported reform actions                       40                   61              4            105

     Percent of reforms bank supported                         21 percent        35 percent         3 percent     21 percent




                                                                                                                            21
   Key Messages

        Logistics and connectivity gets the most World Bank support (35 percent of reforms) followed by
         investment climate (21 percent).
        With the exception of Grenada, World Bank support is almost systematically absent from the skills
         and productivity thematic area (3 percent of supported reforms).
        The three most supported countries are Jamaica (46 percent), Grenada (33 percent) and the
         Dominican Republic (32 percent). World Bank has very active programs in all three countries.
        The three least-support countries are Suriname (2 percent), Trinidad and Tobago (11 percent) and The
         Bahamas (12 percent). These are also 3 of the 6 identified as “lagging CGF countries”, which have not
         gone beyond completing the consultative phase in the CGF process. The World Bank programs in
         these three are, respectively, nascent, provided on a reimbursable advisory services basis, or
         nonexistent.
        This analysis concluded, counterintuitively, that there was no correlation between the level of
         completeness of actions and World Bank support.

VII.     Assessing the Value Added of the CGF

   67.     The value added of the CGF is assessed using an analytic framework, summarized in Annex 3,
   looking at Grenada and St. Lucia based on a mission to the two countries in April 2015. It involved
   consultations with stakeholders in government, the private sector, and civil society. It asks the following
   questions:

            Was the CGF inclusive and did it succeed in generating broad-based participation in the process?xx
            Was the CGF able to create reform momentum and broad buy-in for reforms?
            Was the CGF effective in translating general aspirations to specific recommendations that are
             appropriate and actionable?
            Did the CGF have any role in ensuring governments put in place mechanisms to follow up on the
             recommendations?
            To what extent did the governments implement the reforms and did the CGF make any difference
             to the implementation record?

   68.     Grenada and St. Lucia were chosen because the CGF exercise has advanced relatively further there
   than in most CGF participating countries. This indicates (1) where the value-added can be if other
   countries advance the agenda; and (2) what the more advanced countries will need to do to consolidate
   their exercises.

   69.       The CGF has added value in a variety of ways in the two countries:

            It helped identify and prioritize actions relevant to the growth agenda.
            It increased government focus on the development agenda.
            It enhanced the accountability of public authorities to the private sector and civil society, and the
             results-orientation of government for the reform agenda.
            It increased government willingness to engage stakeholders in participatory policy making.


                                                                                                               22
       It created the beginnings of social capital by deepening the relationship and dialogue between
        public officials, the private sector, and civil society

70.     In Grenada, for example, government officials, from ministers to agency heads felt that the CGF
exercise had engendered a degree of positive change in the way government and public officials operate.
CGF participants found the convening of a diverse group of stakeholders to discuss development
challenges and identify reform actions to be a useful exercise. All stakeholders, including government,
private sector, and civil society representatives, welcomed the inclusiveness of the process.

71.    At the same time, both governmental and nongovernmental actors in the two countries identified
a number of weaknesses in the exercise. This note recommends several ways the CGF exercise can address
these weaknesses and better leverage its strengths.

Setting a focused reform agenda

72.     The CGF exercise has helped set a focused reform agenda in Grenada and St. Lucia, at least for
the three thematic areas. Having common themes across all countries allows them to learn from each
other and gives them clearly articulated objectives provided a sense of direction. On average, 3–4
recommendations were made for each theme,xxi and 4–5 specific actions for each recommendation, giving
each country a manageable set of 9–12 high-level objectives broken down into specific actions. Several
government officials in Grenada commented that having a short, 2–3 page cascading list of themes,
objectives, recommendations, and actions helped it focus on actions.

73.     The recommended actions can be grouped into three categories: (1) those already part of
government programs and plans, (2) those not part of a government program but embraced by
government during the consultations, and (3) actions either introduced or modified by governments after
the consultations. In the latter, public authorities were attempting to refine reform actions identified
during the consultations, while ensuring consistency with the higher-level recommendations and
objectives.

74.     The CGF exercise has helped government officials in the advanced CGF countries focus more on
the development agenda, linking actions more clearly to specific objectives. Development strategies and
plans in the past were often merely aspirational statements and long lists of vague objectives with little
sense of prioritization or clustering around common themes. Officials in Grenada and St. Lucia indicated
that these strategies and plans often did not lead to focused action. Even where objectives were clearly
laid down, the exercises were not results-oriented and government officials did not feel a strong sense of
accountability.

75.     As mentioned earlier, the experience of Grenada and St. Lucia are somewhat atypical since they
are among the most advanced of the CGF countries. A broader set of information paints a more pessimistic
picture. Thus, according to the majority of respondents to the Inter-American Development Bank online
survey, the CGF made no difference in unlocking the implementation deficit at the national or regional
level compared to previous existing participatory (public-private dialogue) mechanisms. Indeed, two-
thirds of the respondents said that the CGF did not make a difference in unlocking the implementation


                                                                                                       23
deficit at the national or regional level compared to previous existing participatory (public-private
dialogue) mechanisms, while one-third said it did.xxii

76.      However, even in the advanced countries, no large cohort of people inside or outside government
exists that has been continuously engaged with the CGF. Several people have got involved more recently
and are unaware of the dynamics and thought processes that led to the choice of objectives and
recommended actions. Many government officials, as well as nongovernmental stakeholders, appeared
to be unaware, or vaguely aware, of the CGF exercise. In Grenada, for example, some officials indicated
that they first came to hear about the CGF when they were invited to the meetings with the assessment
mission. This is also true of some ministers. On the nongovernmental side, too, important stakeholders
were unaware of the CGF, but agreed that the broad objectives were relevant for their constituency. It
was clear, though, that had more people been involved from the beginning, they could have enriched the
discussions and helped identify a more appropriate set of actions.

77.     Nonetheless, even a small number of actors in government and private sector embarking on such
processes is valuable, in that the results achieved in countries where the CGF process contributed to the
implementation of reforms can have a demonstration effect for others. Reform champions do not appear
overnight. They need to be nurtured. Often there are latent reformers whose reform commitment is
triggered by others. Also important, despite the work of the CGF, the lack of inter-institutional
coordination in the Caribbean is a major weakness. The CGF should focus on ways to strengthen the
delivery capacity of the center of government and to ensure sustained engagement of the private sector.
In both cases a little investment can have substantial results through a multiplier effect.

Enhancing the accountability of public authorities to the private sector and civil society

78.     The accountability workshops have made government officials where these have occurred more
results-oriented in the agendas they have agreed to at the stakeholder consultations, and engendered a
sense of accountability. In Grenada, the lead-up to the 2nd Accountability Workshop led to an
improvement in the implementation record. In St. Lucia, as we saw above, the implementation record
was reasonably good prior to the first Accountability Workshop, but slowed somewhat after that. CGF
participants interviewed in both countries support the biannual monitoring exercise, through which the
government is required to report on progress toward completion of reform actions. Government officials
say the need to report on implementation progress has generated pressure to show results. Even though
public sector stakeholders confessed that the reporting process may not always be palatable, especially
when things are not going well, they felt that it provided a needed reality check.

79.     The monitoring dashboard generates both focus and accountability. The traffic light system’s
green light for actions considered sufficient and a red light if otherwise, has pressured officials to justify
the adequacy of actions, going beyond the mere reporting of actions. The accountability framework is
deemed appropriate by stakeholders as it is action oriented, but they suggest it could be improved by
introducing more interaction between participants during the implementation period (in between the
biannual accountability workshops).




                                                                                                           24
80.      Weaknesses exist in the accountability process nonetheless. Ideally, stakeholder deliberations
that generated an agreed set of objectives, recommendations, and action, should be immediately
followed by an identification of the specific actions to be implemented within a certain time period (say,
12 months), with intermediate milestones to be crossed in the intervening period. The choice of such
specific actions and milestones would be based on a judgment of the feasibility of such actions (something
government agencies charged with implementation will be most concerned about) and the adequacy of
actions in meeting objectives (something stakeholders should be most concerned about).

81.    In some cases, a small number of specific actions, undertaken over 12 months, may be sufficient
to meet a stakeholder objective. In others, where objectives are broader or longer term, a set of actions
implemented in a year may help advance the agenda, but not fully meet the objective. In such cases,
implementation should be treated as ongoing, with a new set of specific actions identified each year to
keep the agenda moving until the objective is substantially achieved. In either case, it is good practice to
have up-front agreement on a 12-month action plan (with specific actions) soon after setting objectives.
Government officials will then know exactly what is expected and gather the resources to start
implementation.

82.       In reality, the CGF process has not always worked like this, even in the advanced countries. In
Grenada, for example, although focal points were appointed in different ministries and agencies for each
broad thematic area, the actions required were not identified beforehand, at least not for all themes.
Rather, just before the first Accountability Workshop, the CGF integrator and/or main focal point in
government, asked different ministries to identify ongoing actions that were independent of the CGF
exercise, but happened to be related to the CGF objectives. The aim was to use these actions to show
implementation progress in the various CGF action areas. Thus, the Grenada monitoring dashboard,
developed in May 2014 just before the first Accountability Workshop in June 2014, identified a set of
actions already taken and a set of expected actions in coming months. Based on these, the Accountability
Workshop categorized each action area (that is, not started, partly implemented, or completed). In this
case, it is hard to assess whether the government took the actions to meet the CGF objectives or if these
were already part of its plans. Hence, an attribution issue exists and identifying the impact of the CGF
process would require a closer evaluation of each reform completed during implementation.

83.      This ex-post approach has a major drawback in the lack of up-front agreement and clarification
on the specific actions expected of the government in each action area, resulting in scrambling at the end
to find actions. This suboptimal approach makes it difficult to assess progress. It also means that the
exercise to judge implementation becomes more subjective than it should be.xxiii Notwithstanding this
initial deficiency, the programming of actions improved in Grenada after the first Accountability
Workshop, with specific milestones identified well in advance of the second workshop.

84.     Reform actions need to be clearly linked to measurable outcome and performance indicators and
baselines. However, some of these features were missing in the methodology during the first phase of
implementation. This would have facilitated the reporting exercise, in that defining when actions are
completed makes the process much clearer, and strengthens the focus on the impact of each reform.
Government stakeholders suggest that in the current scenario the goal posts were not clearly defined and



                                                                                                         25
many delayed activities were reported during the accountability workshops despite the significant work
done to achieve the objectives.

Building social capital through inclusive stakeholder engagement

85.      Government, private sector, and civil society stakeholders appreciate that, under the CGF, a
diverse set of stakeholders came together to discuss development issues, set objectives, and identify
actions. It is possible that the selection of objectives and actions was not optimal in the first round, but it
was useful that the stakeholders generated recommendations within a particular framework, rather than
just talking.

86.    Even in the countries advanced on the CGF agenda, stakeholders, especially in the private sector,
worried the CGF could become a talk-shop—they wanted a process focused on implementation. Here, the
monitoring dashboards and accountability workshops helped focus attention on results and ensured
continued participation and engagement of stakeholders.

87.      Stakeholder engagement triggered by the CGF can spill over into the participating countries. The
CGF exercise started just before the 2013 national elections in Grenada, for example, and the new
government, partly because it won all seats in the legislature, reached out to diverse stakeholders as part
of a more inclusive form of governing. A Social Partners Network was formed, with a Steering Committee
headed by the prime minister, to meet once a month. It also formed the Home-Grown Monitoring
Committee to monitor the implementation and implications of the IMF program in the country. Potential
exists for these exercises each to leverage the strengths of the other. The Social Partners Network can
benefit from the CGF experience and framework, and the Home-Grown Monitoring Committee can work
with the CGF on Accountability Workshops and Civil Society Observatories. Indeed, this has started to
happen; the second accountability workshop in February 2015, the private sector observatory jointly
prepared presentations and coordinated messages with the Social Partners Network. The CGF may thus
get more traction with government in implementing its actions (see below).

Implementation phase coordination and monitoring

88.     In Grenada, government officials suggest the CGF is narrowing the implementation gap in some
areas and is moving in the right direction. But private sector and civil society groups feel that
implementation has been slow and engagement and coordination with stakeholder groups limited in the
period between the accountability workshops.

89.     Coordination among government agencies appears to pose a challenge to the implementation of
reforms. In most cases, while only one government agency has been assigned responsibility for the
implementation of reform actions, coordination, and participation, it is also needed with other public
bodies and the private sector. While the appointment of one lead agency is necessary, the division of
responsibilities among the various players should be clear, otherwise responsible agencies may not take
needed actions, leading to implementation delays.




                                                                                                            26
90.     Private sector and civil society stakeholders say that government consultation with them during
implementation is very limited, in particular the six-month period between accountability workshops. One
exception is the investment climate theme in St. Lucia, the reform actions of which fall mostly under the
responsibility of the Ministry of Commerce. The ministry in turn has set up two task forces (outside the
CGF process), namely the Ease of Doing Business Task-Force and the Trade Logistics Task-Force. These
comprise government representatives, the private sector, and civil society. The former task force, by
virtue of its mandate, monitors implementation of select CGF reform actions under the investment
climate theme.

91.     In St. Lucia, the private sector has also taken it upon itself to conduct an evaluation of the quality
of key reforms through surveys (such as the import licensing issuance system). This could be replicated
across the other two thematic areas. In addition, the private sector, represented by the Chamber of
Commerce, the Manufacturer’s Association, and the Coalition of Service Industries, has set out to jointly
serve as the Private Sector Observatory. The group has requested support from the World Bank to build
its capacity to undertake this role.

92.      In Grenada, the establishment of the Social Partners Network can improve coordination and
consultation. It is getting more and more involved in the implementation and monitoring of CGF reform
actions. In particular, the monitoring committee for the Homegrown Monitoring Committee was recently
tasked to serve as the CGF civil observatory. This is a significant and positive development, particularly as
stakeholders feel that implementation thus far has not been sufficiently participatory or inclusive. The
committee meets monthly and will support the removal of obstacles to implementation. Representatives
of the committee say capacity building is needed to ensure it effectively meets its mandate. The trend in
St. Lucia is similar, though more embryonic. The Chamber of Commerce, the Manufacturer’s Association,
and the Coalition of Service Industries are jointly serving as the Private Sector Observatory.

Sustaining institutional memory of the CGF exercise

93.      Typically, participation of individual stakeholders varied during implementation. Three distinct
groups of participants exist: (1) those involved from the start (from initial consultations to identify reform
objectives, recommendations, and actions) and who remain involved; (2) those initially engaged but no
longer involved; and (3) those not involved in the beginning, but brought in during later stages (either in
the first or second biannual accountability workshops).

94.      The first category is small, diluting institutional memory. Many stakeholders who helped prepare
the reform recommendations were absent from the accountability workshop. No continuous engagement
of stakeholders existed once the process of consultations was over. The output of deliberations was
provided to the government, which then prepared the dashboard and defined and redefined actions.
Social capital was created, but later somewhat depleted as the relationship was not maintained.

95.    It is important to highlight the need for a cohort of people, especially from government, to stay
engaged at all times and support the monitoring and convening of participants to work together in the
implementation of reform actions. Similarly, while having a focal point is necessary, the ability of this



                                                                                                           27
person(s) to convene and leverage participation of other groups and ensure sustained consultation and
participation is key to the implementation of reforms.

Assessing the complexity and feasibility of reforms

96.     Although the consultations involved a wide range of stakeholders, key participants, particularly
technical staff from the government, were missing. This led to the premature inclusion of reform actions
without the required prior analysis and earmarked financing, according to the government agencies
responsible for implementation. In St. Lucia, for example, government officials with technical expertise
and responsibility for the implementation of key reform actions were not present in the Logistics and
Connectivity Working Group. This resulted in suboptimal sequencing of reform actions (prioritizing) with
inadequate time lines for implementation (overly ambitious, especially for reforms that require longer-
term implementation arrangements). It is important to ensure that government technical staff who
understand the specific constraints to implementing different reform actions are part of the next round
of discussions. This would ensure that stakeholders from the private sector and civil society are better
informed of implementation challenges and can appreciate the complexity and limitations involved.

Timing of implementation

97.     Both public and private sector stakeholders recognize that the time lines for completion of reform
actions were not clearly specified or thoroughly discussed among stakeholders. Although the CGF’s
suggested methodology called for two accountability workshops per year (at 6 and 12 months), it was
unclear whether actions needed to be completed by the end of the year or if progress towards completion
was sufficient (for example, in the case of longer-term reforms). The reporting framework would have to
be adapted to introduce the longer-term nature of many actions. A potential next step would be to
convene stakeholders to agree on new time lines that more accurately reflect the effort required and
account for implementation constraints.

Implementation constraints

98.      Chief among these, limited financial resources affect progress toward completion of reform
actions under all themes. In particular, government agencies highlighted that many CGF actions were not
part of financial planning for the previous fiscal year. It is not clear, however, to what extent these reforms
made it into the reform agenda and budgeting process of the various agencies in the current fiscal year.
It may not always be possible for governments to commit the funding up front, during stakeholder
consultations. Nonetheless, an argument could be made for respecting the priorities of stakeholders and
including actions whose funding is not assured up front. The government should then make an honest
attempt to secure funding and, if it fails, give the accountability workshop the reason. This would help
increase credibility with stakeholders.

99.      Limited analytical backing and feasibility assessments are another constraint to meeting the one-
year implementation targets for a wide range of reforms. Limited capacity in government, the private
sector, and civil society are highlighted as impediments to timely implementation.



                                                                                                            28
    Regional collaboration

    100. Public sector stakeholders pointed to the need to look at regional issues separately and organize
    a coordination mechanism for regional peers to advance issues that require cooperation (such as
    transport and regional connectivity). They suggested that while the CGF is a regional public-private
    dialogue platform, regional reforms have not been a great focus in the national chapters, as noted earlier.
    Stakeholders suggested, nonetheless, that the regional event creates a positive sense of competition
    among members.

VIII.       Experience with Stakeholder Dialogue across Countries

    101. Several countries have set up public-private dialogue mechanisms that bring government and
    businesses together to identify issues constraining business and jointly agree on development priorities
    and the design of solutions. Often, the platforms also provide feedback on progress in implementing
    agreed actions. Given the broad similarity in their objectives, the rich experience of public-private
    dialogues provides useful lessons for operating the CGF. Some of the most important, along with examples
    of how specific challenges were addressed by public-private dialogues in particular countries, include the
    following:

           The success of public-private dialogues depends on the political will of governments to implement
            meaningful reforms. Businesses lose interest in dialogue if they do not see their recommendations
            translated into action (see Bosnia example in Box 2).

           Good secretarial facilities (not necessarily a separate secretariat) are needed to formulate
            agendas for meetings, ensure good participation and high quality of discussion, document
            discussions and recommendations, monitor progress in implementing recommended actions, and
            to be a depository of institutional memory.

           Dialogue mechanisms usually work best when they are not stand-alone initiatives but facilitate,
            accelerate, or cement other ongoing initiatives, which require stakeholder support for success.

           A good monitoring and evaluation mechanism helps keep the focus on results by assessing both
            the quality of work of the public-private dialogue platform and government responsiveness in
            implementing recommended actions (see Romania example in Box 2).

           Nongovernmental stakeholders can play wide-ranging roles in the functioning of the dialogue
            mechanisms. In some countries, the private sector has taken the lead in setting up dialogue
            platforms, which have then forged links with the government (see Bangladesh example in
            paragraphs 102 and 103).


    The literature on public-private dialogue also confirms important elements of the needed framework.xxiv
    Experts categorize the capacities effective public-private dialogue mechanisms should have, including for
    agenda definition, public coordination, technical and professional, budget influence, compliance


                                                                                                            29
evaluation ability, legitimacy, officials with high status, adequate representation, and capacity to generate
consensus, to name several.
 Box 2: Case Studies from Bosnia and Romania

 Bosnia: Public-private dialogue generating political commitment to reform
 Bosnia’s “Bulldozer Initiative” is an example of a public-private dialogue that successfully enhanced political will and capacity
 to act at the government level through a bottom-up approach. Using an innovative grassroots and public awareness
 methodology, the initiative mobilized the local business community (across sectors) to “bulldoze” barriers by identifying
 concrete legislative changes and advocating for their adoption and implementation. By delivering fast results, the initiative
 won the confidence of entrepreneurs, empowering them to institutionalize permanent grassroots reform committees. The
 force of this lobby group, the Bulldozer Committee, created political consensus by emphasizing the need to implement
 reforms. Most importantly, it carried investment climate reforms the last mile by delivering concrete recommendation that
 led to quantifiable results in all sectors of the economy. Politicians were provided with a mechanism whereby they gained
 credit for enacting reforms after much of the detailed drafting and canvassing had been done by others, in this case
 businesspeople. It was a win-win situation. Over time, the initiative established a dynamics of reform and public-private
 partnerships that facilitated the tackling of more complicated structural issues in the economy.

 Romania: Evaluating the effectiveness of dialogue mechanisms
 The government of Romania used a tool called the “Evaluation Wheel” to visually evaluate different aspects of the public-
 private dialogue mechanism. This tool is a widely known evaluation instrument, which addresses the essential components of
 an effective public-private dialogue process and measures how well the secretariat is performing tasks along the various
 components (such as the political will of government to implement reforms, the efficiency and effectiveness of the secretariat
 as the dialogue’s “engine”, and ensuring that the right people—those genuinely committed to reform—populate the working
 groups). This approach can help instantly spot possible problem areas or aspects of a public-private dialogue which can be
 strengthened. The Evaluation Wheel also allows for quick comparisons between public-private dialogues, and for the public-
 private dialogue community as a whole to be a valuable aid in tracking public-private dialogue dynamics over time. The
 Evaluation Wheels emphasize on process, structure, and outcome-orientation. Now a “classic” model of public-private
 dialogue, this approach includes a combination of technical working groups, a secretariat, and a high-level governance or
 oversight structure.

 Additional evaluation tools
 Other technological tools aimed at real-time connections may be used for monitoring and tracking. They include early warning
 systems for compliance with agreed commitments. For example, the well-known Smartsheet or Microsoft Project. The
 purpose here is not to be reactive, but proactive on implementation of the agendas and, at the same time, facilitate monitoring
 activities. These can also guide current expenditure items and multilateral source resources allocation to the development of
 specific activities or reforms.



102. Dialogue mechanisms take time to become effective, particularly in countries with a weak
tradition of structured, results-oriented dialogue between government and stakeholders. Thus, while
some quick wins can and should be achieved to establish the credibility of dialogue, it usually takes at
least 3–5 years for substantial results to materialize. Bangladesh is a good example. Business associations
have existed for many years there and, from time to time, have lobbied government for business-friendly
policies. However, these were ad hoc efforts and, until 2008, there did not exist a structured platform
which could ensure regular, and results-oriented, dialogue between the two parties. An interim,
technocratic government established the Bangladesh Better Business Forum in 2008 and, by ensuring
action on the recommendations, quickly established credibility for this structured dialogue mechanism.
Unfortunately, the forum did not survive transition from a technocratic to a political government in 2009.

103. However, the private sector, having seen the benefits of a structured public-private dialogue
platform, got together and, in 2011, established a private-sector led Business Initiative Leading
Development (BUILD) platform. Government established the PSD Policy Coordination Committee within

                                                                                                                                30
  the Prime Minister’s Office. It is chaired by the principal secretary to the prime minister and composed of
  the secretaries of the various private-sector-development-related ministries and agencies, and private
  sector representation from BUILD and the key private sector associations. Being anchored at a senior level
  within the government, but within the bureaucracy instead of within the political government, has meant
  not only sufficiently high-level championship, but also sustainability—it has already sustained three
  changes at the level of the Principal Secretary, and has continued to meet actively. More importantly, the
  PSD Policy Coordination Committee has integrated BUILD as the primary source of reform
  recommendations for its deliberations. The government’s responsiveness to BUILD recommendations has
  led to an impressive record of reform implementation and a robust dialogue process. The results are
  impressive. However, it has taken about six years to reach this point since the first attempt was made in
  2008 to initiate a structured dialogue process in Bangladesh.


IX.       Suggestions for Improving CGF Effectiveness

  104. Based on the above assessment of the work of the CGF thus far, and informed by the cross-country
  experience with public-private dialogues, this section recommends ways to make the CGF more effective
  in the next phase.

  105. The CGF may consider two broad agendas: (1) consolidating the CGF instrument/approach, by
  establishing proof of the CGF concept in additional countries (beyond the three advanced CGF countries,
  Dominican Republic, Grenada, and St. Lucia) and further refining the CGF instrument; and (2) aligning the
  CGF instrument and approach with other dialogue processes in the participating countries, recognizing
  their complementarities and establishing appropriate alignment.

  106. Refining the CGF instrument: This would imply action on three fronts. First, the agenda setting
  process may be improved by generating more specific recommendations during the multi-stakeholder
  consultations and better addressing the regional dimensions of the CGF. Second, the governments may
  get better organized by setting up good coordinating mechanisms and allocating responsibilities more
  clearly within government, ensuring that a critical mass of government officials is involved throughout,
  and establishing permanent working groups for the various themes and delivery units (new or within
  existing institutions). Third, monitoring and accountability may be enhanced by maintaining regular
  monitoring and discussions with stakeholders and developing a monitoring capacity in the various
  government agencies and strengthening the results framework. Specific recommendations along these
  lines include the following:

         Make recommendations more specific during the multi-stakeholder consultative process to avoid
          ambiguity or conflict of interest in defining actions by individual stakeholders at later stages.

         Ensure that technical staff from the government, who understand the specific constraints to
          implementing different reform actions, are involved in setting the reform agenda.

         Strengthen the results framework with measurable performance indicators to better target
          interventions and facilitate assessment of progress. Indicators should be linked to the intended
          impact so that reforms yield tangible results.

                                                                                                          31
      Better link CGF reform implementation to budget exercises in following years.

      Have a critical mass of governmental and nongovernmental people permanently engaged through
       all stages of the CGF exercise is important (that is, through setting of objectives, and identification
       and implementation of actions) and have the needed institutional memory. A critical mass of
       people is also required, especially in government, which is familiar with the CGF and strongly
       committed. Permanent working groups for each of the three broad themes would also be good.

      Have regular monitoring and discussions with stakeholders, more frequent than the half-yearly
       workshops. The various government agencies involved in implementation need monitoring
       capacity. Pockets of good monitoring and evaluation practice may exist in government, and these
       should be leveraged. More quantitative feedback from stakeholders on actions to be
       implemented will be useful.

      Set up good coordinating mechanisms within government, since many actions require
       involvement of multiple agencies. A leader (a delivery unit) to coordinate the implementation of
       actions, especially in cases where it requires different ministries and stakeholder groups, is also
       needed. Defining what is expected of each person is important and currently missing in the
       framework.

      Private sector observatories can possibly make decision-making more participatory by giving the
       private sector a voice and generate data on reform implementation, in between accountability
       workshops. This could raise government accountability. No guarantee exists that the mere
       existence of private sector observatories will make the process participatory or enhance
       government accountability. It will be important therefore to assess the monitoring capacity of
       these, under which conditions they can perform, and to what extent that potential is being
       reached.

      Filling knowledge gaps to influence policy and growth strategies appears to be an important
       subject. Stakeholders expressed interest in continuing work on the three existing themes, but also
       welcomed the prospect of including a sectoral and value-chain approach to promoting growth
       and employment. Sectors that may be considered are energy (reducing energy costs and
       identifying diversified energy sources, including renewable energy), agriculture (food security,
       agro-processing), tourism, including medical tourism, and transport (regional connectivity).

      Better address the regional dimensions of the CGF and get stronger commitment from regional
       partners.

107. One important area is media engagement in the CGF process, which has not been continuous.
Media has only been engaged before events. More is needed, and that is informed by a good
communications strategy.




                                                                                                           32
108. Among its benefits, if handled correctly, the media can provide information about societal
aspirations and concerns, development challenges and opportunities, which can help CGF participants set
development objectives and identify priority action areas. It can communicate CGF activities, boosting
awareness of the issues it is addressing and helping create consensus and buzz around its objectives.
Media can also play an important watch-dog function, especially in the inclusivity of the dialogue process
and the implementation of the agreed actions. Regular media reporting on stalled or slow-moving actions
will complement the pressures created by the six-monthly accountability workshops and any internal
monitoring and evaluation system the government may set up. A well thought-out communication
strategy is thus crucial. Media capacity in the CGF countries therefore needs to be assessed before
engaging it.

109. Positioning CGF within the broader dialogue: Multi-stakeholder dialogue is a core feature of the
CGF. But it exists alongside other dialogue platforms in its countries, some established before and some
after the CGF. These exercises vary in their coverage (some focus on government-business dialogue;
others include a wider range of stakeholders) and degree of activity (some fairly active, others less so)
(Box 3).

 Box 3: Multi-Stakeholder Dialogue Platforms Independent of the CGF

 In Grenada, a Social Partners Network was formed after the 2013 elections, with a Steering Committee headed by the prime
 minister and meeting once a month. A subgroup, called the Home-Grown Monitoring Committee, was formed to monitor the
 implementation and implications of the IMF program.

 In St. Lucia, the Ministry of Commerce has set up two task forces (outside the CGF process): the Ease of Doing Business Task-
 Force and the Trade Logistics Task-Force, which comprise government representatives, private sector, and civil society. The
 former task force has been tasked, by virtue of its mandate, to monitor implementation progress of select CGF reform actions
 under the investment climate theme.

 In Jamaica, the Inter-American Development Bank, as part of its program on competitiveness, catalyzed the establishment of
 the National Competitiveness Council, a public-private dialogue platform aimed at driving reforms to enhance
 competitiveness. The council forms part of the Partnership for Transformation, a broader dialogue forum that covers other
 issues and includes a broader set of stakeholders. This follows the Social Partnership Consultative Committee aimed at creating
 a forum for dialogue on issues geared toward improving the social and economic environment in this country between the
 government and key social partners.

 In Suriname, the Suriname Business Forum was created with support from the European Union. It includes several ministries,
 industry and trade associations (including the Women’s Business Group), academics, and civil society institutions. The forum
 is associated with the Competitiveness Unit Suriname, a government agency charged with analyzing and monitoring
 competitiveness issues and recommending actions to improve it. The broader stakeholder engagement platform, the
 Suriname Economic and Social Council (SESC) established in 2004 through a presidential decree, also exists and may
 complement the dialogue on competitiveness. It is intended to be a structured dialogue between government and various
 societal actors on a variety of social issues (publications of the SESC cover a wide range of issues such as social security, health
 care, community development and public housing).

 In The Bahamas, Parliament passed the National Tripartite Council Bill this year. The proposed council will be a broad-based
 dialogue platform comprising the government, employers, and workers, and be aimed at promoting the practice of tripartism
 in the formulation of social and economic policies and programs. The council is also expected to cover private-sector-related
 subjects such as labor, productivity, and competition.

 In Trinidad and Tobago, the government established the Economic Development Board in 2011. Comprising both private and
 public sector representatives, the board advises the Minister of Planning and Sustainable Development on economic
 diversification and sustainability. It is also mandated to help develop business clusters with a focus on financial services,
 tourism, food sustainability, downstream energy, creative industries, maritime and information and communications


                                                                                                                                   33
 technology. The government established another structure in 2011, the Council for Competitiveness and Innovation. Also
 associated with the Ministry of Planning and Sustainable Development, its mandate is to help enhance competitiveness and
 innovation in the economy.

 aWorld Bank Group. 2015. “Communicating Public-Private Dialogue.” Module 3 of the Quick Guide to Integrating Public-
 Private Dialogue. Washington, DC.



110. The CGF initiative thus needs to be aligned with such exercises to prevent dialogue fatigue and
avoid duplication, and because there are potentially powerful synergies between these initiatives. This
can be explored at two levels. First, there are complementarities between CGF and the competitiveness-
related platforms, such as the Competitiveness Councils, that address similar issues and bring together
government and the private sector. Second, business issues cannot be seen in isolation from broader
social and economic issues. Thus, the presence of broader platforms, such as the Social Partners Network
(Grenada), the Partnership for Transformation (Jamaica), or the Economic and Social Council (Suriname)
provide an opportunity to build additional buy-in for the CGF-triggered recommendations and provide
additional drivers for their implementation.

111. The potential is evident in Grenada, where the CGF and the Social Partners Network can leverage
each other’s strengths. The functioning of the Social Partners Network can benefit from the experience
and modus operandi of the CGF. The Home-Grown Monitoring Committee can synergize with the CGF
work on Accountability Workshops and Civil Society Observatories. Indeed, this has started to happen; for
example, at the second accountability workshop in February 2015, the private sector observatory jointly
prepared presentations and coordinated messages with the Social Partners Network.

112. Another example is Belize, a country where the CGF exercise has not yet advanced much. Even
here, however, the initial dialogue catalyzed by the CGF spilled into the existing dialogue platform, the
Economic Development Council. The council had prepared an agenda of reforms, but was having difficulty
attracting the attention of policy makers and stakeholders to the agenda. The CGF national dialogue
discussed many of the same issues, but its high profile helped throw the spotlight on the issues. This
helped the EDC to advance its agenda, which it did using some of the CGF modalities. Thus, while the CGF
exercise itself has not advanced much beyond the initial dialogue it has added some value to an existing
dialogue structure and helped enhance its effectiveness.

113. Figure 7 summarizes the two-pronged agenda for the next phase of the CGF as recommended
above. The typology presented in the chart categorizes the CGF countries along two dimensions: (1) the
degree to which the CGF exercise has progressed in a country (horizontal axis in the chart), and (2) how
active the other dialogue processes in a country (vertical axis) are. This yields four categories of countries
with corresponding areas of emphasis.




                                                                                                                       34
                           Figure 7: Strategy for the Next Phase of the CGF Based on Country Typology

                                                                                 Institutionalize refined CGF
                                                      Provide broad-based



                                    Very active
         How active are the other                   stakeholder engagement
                                                                                  instrument through other
           dialogue processes?                              platform
                                                                                    dialogue mechanisms
                                                                                 (Grenada, Jamaica, Dominican
                                                   (Belize, Suriname, Bahamas)
                                                                                           Republic)

                                                     Establish CGF proof of
                                                                                  Provide more refined CGF
                                                     concept in the country
                                                                                         instrument
                                                      (Antigua and Barbuda,
                                                                                    (St. Lucia, St. Vincent and
                                    Inactive




                                                      Dominica, Trinidad and
                                                                                 Grenadines, St. Kitts and Nevis)
                                                             Tobago)


                                                  Nascent                                        Very advanced

                                                  stage       How advanced is the CGF exercise?


114. In countries such as the Dominican Republic, Grenada, and Jamaica, where the CGF exercise is
reasonably advanced (albeit a little less so in Jamaica) and other dialogue processes are fairly active, the
main focus can be on leveraging existing public-private dialogue structures. In other countries where the
CGF exercise is reasonably advanced, but other dialogue processes are still nascent (such as St. Lucia, St.
Kitts and Nevis, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines), the focus may be on further refining the CGF
instrument (for example by redefining actions that were too broadly conceptualized, revising
implementation time lines, creating an action plan to support the implementation of reforms, identifying
key performance indicators for each reform action, setting up civil observatories, and so on. This can be
done until other dialogue platforms become active, at which time the refined CGF instrument may be
institutionalized through these platforms.

115. In countries on the left quadrants of the chart—where the CGF exercise is still in a relatively early
stage—the focus should be on establishing the proof of concept of the CGF, that is, proving its usefulness
and relevance. This agenda appears most relevant for Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, and Trinidad and
Tobago. In the Bahamas, Belize, and Suriname, where other dialogue platforms are reasonably active
(such as the Economic Development Council in Belize and the Suriname Business Forum) or promises to
be so (such as the National Tripartite Council in the Bahamas), the CGF may provide a platform for a more
broad-based mobilization of stakeholders around the agenda of the existing dialogue platforms. As the
experience of the Belize Economic Development Council demonstrates, such dialogue platforms may
benefit from the high-profile attention, as well as broader stakeholder buy-in, that the CGF-type dialogues
generate.

116. Finally, it is important to note that implementing this agenda will require clarity on the role of the
CGF. As Box 4 shows, there is a wide range of stakeholder views (with associated expectations) about the
roles the CGF can play. All these can be legitimate roles for a CGF-type exercise. However, greater clarity
is needed on whether the CGF will play all these roles and, if so, will it do so in every country, or select a
subset for each country.

                                                                                                                    35
Box 4: Which Roles Should the CGF Take On?

   Mobilize a wide range of stakeholders (in particular, the private sector) to create awareness and excitement around
    development issues.
   Generate broad-based ownership of solutions and send strong signals to government.
   Help translate broad societal aspirations to specific, actionable recommendations.
   Develop the capacity of governmental and nongovernmental stakeholders to analyze issues, engage in dialogue, and
    monitor implementation progress.
   Help mobilize resources from other players to implement actions.
   Directly support implementation of some actions.
   Help transfer knowledge, within and across countries: peer to peer.
   Better define reforms, set realistic time lines, and associate performance indicators for each one.
   Include structured feedback loop mechanisms to help assess reform implementation and achievement of objectives, and
    identify additional actions.
   Enhance continuity of stakeholder involvement throughout the process with more regular feedback.
   Scale up outreach activities and media engagement to better engage all stakeholders and solidify the social capital.




                                                                                                                      36
                                            Annex 1: Risks and Mitigation Measures Identified by the CGF
RISK                MITIGATION
Resistance to       The Caribbean Growth Forum (CGF) will set clear guidelines and objectives, with specific time frames, and communicate them to all
change              stakeholders. Transparency of process and decision making in the adoption of action plans will also help manage expectations, while
                    reinforcing the idea that the CGF is not a talk shop. As for Phase I, all documents will continue to be published online to ensure
                    transparency and legitimacy of outcomes. During Phase II, the CGF Secretariat will facilitate fine-tuning of the Action Plans, limiting
                    the risk of “capture” and derailment of the efforts.
Accountability      Clear lines of accountability have been drawn between the various stakeholders involved to avoid dilution of effort. This methodology
on reforms          has been agreed with Prime Ministers or Ministers of Finance and puts the government fully “owning” the reform agenda and in the
                    drivers seats, with a clear role for development partners as facilitators, and the private sector as contributor to the discussion and
                    “responsible to ensure that implementation is effective” by means of continuous and sustained engagement throughout the process.
                    In addition, regarding the support in the implementation of the reforms, the World Bank and other development partners have clearly
                    stated that their financial support will be selective and depend on the instruments available.
Participation       The high number of workshops and consultations taking place in the region has led to a shared sense that meetings are useless.
fatigue             Broadening the list of participants to the event and then the working groups, meaning to go beyond the usual suspects and engage
                    the nontraditional actors (youth, small entrepreneurs, and indigenous people), on the one hand, and moving quickly into
                    implementation, on the other, could mitigate this fatigue by showing that the process is truly action oriented. A strong focus on
                    concrete actions as well as the design of an accountability mechanism should create the right incentives to push the reform agendas
                    that have been already discussed.
Lack of             In a context marked by high distrust and skepticism between public and private sectors, CGF facilitators will be particularly sensitive
representation      and will reach out to potential stakeholders on a regular basis, opening up the dialogue as often as possible. Transparency will also be
                    critical in this process and all possible channels will be used to reach out to CGF stakeholders. Finally, the involvement of private sector
                    and civil society in Phase II independent monitoring is also conceived to increase the incentives to open up the process to a broader
                    range of actors.
Politicization of   Mitigation measures consist of: clearly communicating the practical benefits of the process for the whole society, and concentrating
the process         on outreach activities (during the events and beyond) that explain in a simple way that reforms are universal. Outreach to stakeholders
                    engaged across the whole of the political spectrum is key to ensure sustainability and political acceptance. The role of facilitators is
                    also important in the dialogues to moderate the discussions and help people with opposite interests to find consensus around the
                    proposed reforms by focusing on actions that have universal benefits.
Institutional       Initiatives such as CGF can duplicate efforts and pose an extra burden on already stretched institutions and overloaded public servants.
misalignment        The CGF focuses on prioritizing measures that have already been identified in existing action plans and strategic papers. Yet, it does
                    naturally aim to fill the institutional gap in implementation. Therefore, to avoid any misperception, the CGF is organized to use the
                    technical expertise already in institutions, identifying government reform champions that need the initiative’s support to move the
                    government agenda forward, and to fit into the existing strategies. The CGF also aims to map ongoing dialogues to coordinate with

                                                                                                                                                     37
government, the private sector, and other partners to avoid duplication. Where reparation of national development plans and poverty
reduction strategies is parallel to the CGF, dialogue outputs will be included in overall strategies. In some cases, the CGF will piggy
back on existing initiatives that are sector-specific (such as the Suriname Competitiveness Partnership of the Inter-American
Development Bank, and International Finance Corporation credit guarantee reforms in Belize) and broaden the dialogue to include
CGF themes.




                                                                                                                             38
                                      Annex 2: CGF Value Added: Questions for the Next Stage of this Assessment

Aspects of Value-Addition of CGF     Specific Questions
Was the CGF inclusive and did it      To what extent did the CGF provide a voice to different stakeholders in the countries, in particular those who would
succeed in generating broad-             normally find it difficult to speak up?
based buy-in for the reforms?         Is this reflected in the reform priorities chosen?
                                      To what extent was the CGF able to generate buy-in for the reform recommendations?
Was the CGF able to create            Did it make governments sit up and think seriously about reforms?
reform momentum?                      Did it revive stalled reform efforts?
                                      Did it create a sense of urgency and purpose in governments about undertaking reforms?
                                      If reforms were already happening in a country, what was the value-addition of the CGF creating reform momentum?
                                      Did it generate interest in more reforms or in more difficult reforms?
Was the CGF effective in              At what level were the reform recommendations pitched? Were these too general? What is the balance between
translating general aspirations to       general and specific recommendations?
specific recommendations that         If the initial recommendations made by CGF participants were too general, did the CGF succeed in making them specific
are appropriate and actionable?          and actionable?
Did the CGF have any role in          Did the governments develop concrete action plans to implement the recommendations?
ensuring governments put in           Did the governments put in place good mechanisms to ensure the actions plans were implemented (such as assigning
place mechanisms to follow up on         clear responsibilities for different reforms, ensuring adequate coordination, mobilizing financial resources, including
the recommendations?                     donor support, leveraging good-practice knowledge and put in place monitoring mechanisms and stakeholder feedback
                                         mechanisms)?
                                      Did the CGF have any role in ensuring this happened?
To what extent did the                What has been the implementation record so far? What proportion of the recommended actions has been
governments implement the                implemented on time? What proportion has been delayed? What proportion is ongoing and there is a good probability
reforms and did the CGF make             of them being implemented on time?
any difference to the                 Are there any patterns in terms of types of actions/reforms that have been implemented on time and that have been
implementation record?                   delayed?
                                      What are the determinants of good implementation?
                                      Does the record differ by countries? If so, what explains the differences?
                                      What is the role of donor, esp. World Bank Group involvement, in explaining the implementation record?
                                      Did CGF make any difference in the implementation record? If so, in what way? Does the value-addition of CGF differ by
                                         countries?




                                                                                                                                                          39
                                      Annex 3 Grenada: Concreteness of Recommended Actions versus Implementation Record

CGF Pillars, Objectives and Individual Action and Reform                                                                                         Degree of          Implemented
                                                                                                                                                 Concreteness       (Yes = 1; No = 0)
                                                                                                                                                 (Score 1 to 3 in
                                                                                                                                                 increasing
                                                                                                                                                 concreteness)


                                                                                  Investment Climate
Objective 1: Broaden and implement the new broad policy framework that addresses private sector issues and impacts investment capabilities

1.1 Reduce energy cost by investing in renewable energy technology such as tidal. Geothermal and solar photovoltaic and explore grid             2                  0
interconnectivity with neighboring countries
1.2 Revise Investment Promotion Act (2009) to address sector and international treaty obligation deficiencies.                                   3                  1
1.3 Complete the revision of the new proposed Investment Incentives regime                                                                       3                  1
1.4 Enact a Small Business Development Act.                                                                                                      3                  0
1.5 Identify or establish an agency to proactively monitor and evaluate implementation progress with respect to the new broad policy framework   2                  0
Objective 2: Streamline processes and procedures related to the establishment and operation of a business

2.1 Improve Grenada's performance with respect to the 10 quantitative “Doing Business” Indicators.                                               3                  0
2.2 Integrate and synchronize the modernization of Grenada’s e-government infrastructure                                                         2                  0
2.3 Train and empower public servants and statutory employees                                                                                    1                  1
Objective 3: Create better linkages between agriculture and tourism, agro-processing and the wider economy
3.1 Create structural linkages between Agriculture and Tourism Agro Processing & the wider economy.                                              1                  1
3.2 Link guided tourism tours to working agricultural farms/estates.                                                                             1                  1
3.3 Redefine role or mandate of the Marketing & National Importing Board (MNIB) to focus on the export of local produce.                         2                  1
3.4 Stricter enforcement of praedial larceny and phytosanitary import requirements.                                                              1                  1
3.5 Increase the production of agricultural value-added products.                                                                                2                  1
Objective 4: Reduce operating and financing costs and improve access to finance
4.1 Reduce specific Port charges                                                                                                                 3                  0
4.2 Reduce specific Real Estate transaction costs                                                                                                2                  0
4.3 Reduce financing costs for small businesses                                                                                                  2                  1
4.4 Increase access to financing for small businesses                                                                                            2                  1

                                                                              Logistics and Connectivity
Objective 1: Reduce energy cost



                                                                                                                                                                                        40
CGF Pillars, Objectives and Individual Action and Reform                                                                                              Degree of          Implemented
                                                                                                                                                      Concreteness       (Yes = 1; No = 0)
                                                                                                                                                      (Score 1 to 3 in
                                                                                                                                                      increasing
                                                                                                                                                      concreteness)
1.1 Create economic & fiscal incentives for the use and development of renewable energy                                                               2                  0
1.2 Develop energy efficient standards for all buildings.                                                                                             3                  1
1.3 Promote and build capacity to undertake energy audits.                                                                                            2                  0

1.4 Develop “waste to energy” initiatives.                                                                                                            2                  0
1.5 Develop awareness programs to sensitize and educate the population                                                                                1                  1

Objective 2: Improve trade and business logistics services

2.1 Improve Air & Maritime Services                                                                                                                   1                  1
2.2 Strengthen National Agricultural Produce value chain to reduce trade imbalance and to improve value chain logistics to increase competitiveness   2                  1
2.3 Establish export strategy implementation through an export agency                                                                                 1                  0
2.4 Improve port efficiency                                                                                                                           1                  0
2.5 Strengthen regulatory & monitoring framework                                                                                                      1                  0
2.6 Improve doing business climate—Permits                                                                                                            2                  0
2.7 Improve air connectivity-regional and international.                                                                                              2                  1

Objective 3: Harness the transformative power of information communications technology

3.1 Development of ICT (Establish ICT Backbone, E-government Services)                                                                                2                  0
3.2 Review and update current national ICT policy and strategy and create an implementation plan.                                                     2                  0
3.3 Promote opportunities for PPP in ICT infrastructure and services.                                                                                 2                  1
3.4 Promote lifelong training in ICT                                                                                                                  1                  1
3.5 Reduce cost of ICT services to consumers                                                                                                          2                  1
3.6 Implement and enforce service quality and standards                                                                                               1                  0
Objective 4 : Strengthen regional collaboration
4.1 Activate the national procurement authority to interface with regional countries.                                                                 2                  0
4.2 Review and update mandate of the macro planning unit to include the monitoring of all national /regional projects.                                2                  1
4.3 Establish Trade Policies and Agreements Co-ordination and Implementation unit                                                                     3                  1
4.4 Conduct public awareness campaign to sensitize and educate the population on regional opportunities/initiatives                                   2                  1
                                                                                   Skills and Productivity

Objective 1: Develop a policy framework for skills and productivity that impact positively on private sector development and expansion in the context of the “new
economy” of Grenada


                                                                                                                                                                                             41
CGF Pillars, Objectives and Individual Action and Reform                                                                                                   Degree of          Implemented
                                                                                                                                                           Concreteness       (Yes = 1; No = 0)
                                                                                                                                                           (Score 1 to 3 in
                                                                                                                                                           increasing
                                                                                                                                                           concreteness)
1.1 Tourism: Development of a comprehensive training program from nursery to tertiary, and among Industry Stakeholders, to ensure that the                 2                  1
Tourism and Hospitality Sector has a cadre of qualified professionals

1.2 Agriculture: Make Agriculture a major Economic Sector, while forging strategic linkages with other sectors of Grenada’s “New Economy”, while           1                  1
contributing to food and nutrition security, exports, employment especially for young people and foreign exchange earnings.

1.3 Education: The development of an efficient education system that provides for uninhibited access, quality education that will produce a well-          1                  1
educated workforce

1.4 Health: Provision of an efficient and the highest standard of health care throughout the State through an improved public health system and            1                  1
health care facilities. This can be best achieved through a structured program of disease prevention and healthy lifestyle promotion, while facilitating
continuing medical/preventative health care education for all levels of health care practitioners
1.5 Information communication technology (ICT) Develop ICT capacity that will maximize the use of technology for communication and adoption of             2                  0
relevant software to meet Grenada’s developmental needs and enhance competitiveness. In this regard, emphasis would be placed in the use of
hardware and software to maximize productivity in both the private and public sectors




                                                                                                                                                                                                  42
                                       Annex 4 Mapping World Bank Support to CGF Reforms in 12 Countries

Antigua and Barbuda

A total of 48 reform actions were identified in the three thematic areas of which 10 (or 21 percent) are supported by the World Bank. Although
almost half (22 reform actions) fall under the investment climate category, the World Bank supports none of them. The World Bank is primarily
active in the Logistics and Connectivity area, with 53 percent of actions supported (9 of 17 reforms). Finally, one of 9 reform actions in the skills
and productivity area is supported by the World Bank. Note: The World Bank’s program in Antigua and Barbuda is very small.

                                                               Antigua and Barbuda
                 Thematic Area                                          Investment        Logistics   Skills and          Total
                                                                          Climate           and      Productivity
                                                                                        Connectivity
                 Number of CGF reform actions                                22              17            9               48
                 Number of bank-supported reform actions                      0              9             1               10
                 Percentage bank-supported reforms                        0 percent      53 percent  11 percent        21 percent


Belize

In Belize a total of 47 reform actions across the three areas were identified, of which 8 or 17 percent are supported by the World Bank. Nearly half
of the reforms (22) fall into the investment climate thematic area and 5 of those are supported by the World Bank. The World Bank is also active
in the Logistics and Connectivity area through the support of 3 of their 12 reform actions, i.e., a 25 percent involvement. As in the case of Antigua
and Barbuda, the World Bank has no active support in the skills and productivity area although 27 percent of Belize’s reform actions fall into this
category. Note: The World Bank’s engagement with Belize is small but growing.

                                                                       Belize
                   Thematic Area                                         Investment       Logistics     Skills and       Total
                                                                           Climate                     Productivity
                   Number of CGF reform actions                               22             11             13            46
                   Number of bank-supported reform actions                    5               3              0            8
                   Percentage bank-supported reforms                     23 percent      27 percent     0 percent     17 percent




                                                                                                                                                  43
Dominica

Of the 40 reform actions across the three thematic areas, only 7, or 11 percent, are supported by the World Bank. Although nearly half of the
reform actions identified fall into the skills and productivity area, the World Bank provides no active support in this area. The Bank is most present
in the Logistics and Connectivity sector where it lends supports to 4 of the 12 reforms (33 percent) and in the investment climate sector with
support to 3 of the 10 reforms (30 percent).

                                                                      Dominica
                   Thematic area                                         Investment        Logistics    Skills and        Total
                                                                           Climate                     Productivity
                   Number of CGF reform actions                               10             12             18             40
                   Number of bank-supported reform actions                    3              4               0             7
                   Percentage bank-supported reforms                     30 percent      33 percent     0 percent      18 percent


Dominican Republic

The Dominican Republic is the most populated Caribbean country in the CGF (population: 10.3M) and has the highest number of reforms (60
reform actions). Over half of the reforms fall into the investment climate area, with the World Bank supporting 30 percent of these (11 of 37). The
Bank is also very active in the Logistics and Connectivity area, supporting 47 percent, or 8 of 17 identified reforms. As in the case of Dominica and
Belize, the World Bank is, at present, not lending any support to reforms in the skills and productivity thematic area (6 reforms identified).

                                                          Dominican Republic
                  Thematic Area                                 Investment              Logistics      Skills and   Total
                                                                Climate                                Productivity
                  Number of CGF reform actions                       37                      17               6          60
                  Number of bank-supported reform actions            11                       8               0          19
                  Percentage of bank-supported reforms           30 percent              47 percent     0 percent    32 percent


Grenada

World Bank involvement in Grenada is, on average, higher than in CGF countries as a whole, with 33 percent of reforms supported by the Bank.
Half of the 45 reforms identified are in the Logistics and Connectivity area, which benefit from 30 percent World Bank support. The World Bank


                                                                                                                                                   44
also offers substantial support to reforms in the investment climate sector (35 percent or 6 of 17 reforms). Finally, unlike in other CGF countries,
the Bank supports 2 of the 5 reforms in the skills and productivity thematic area.

                                                                       Grenada
                      Thematic Area                                       Investment        Logistics     Skills and       Total
                                                                            Climate                      Productivity
                      Number of CGF reform actions                             17              23              5            45
                      Number of bank-supported reform actions                  6               7               2            15
                      Percentage of bank-supported reforms                35 percent       30 percent    40 percent     33 percent


Jamaica

Within the CGF context, World Bank involvement is highest in Jamaica, where 46 percent of identified reform actions are supported by the Bank.
This involvement benefits exclusively the investment climate and logistics areas, with 58 percent of reforms in each area being supported by the
Bank. Like in many other CGF countries, there is no active World Bank support in the skills and productivity reform actions.

                                                                       Jamaica
                      Thematic Area                                       Investment        Logistics     Skills and       Total
                                                                            Climate                      Productivity
                      Number of CGF reform actions                             12              24             10            46
                      Number of bank-supported reform actions                  7               14              0            21
                      Percentage of bank-supported reforms                58 percent       58 percent     0 percent     46 percent


St. Kitts and Nevis

Of the 33 reform actions identified in St. Kitts, 6 are being supported by the World Bank. All 6 fall into the Logistics and Connectivity thematic area.
The World Bank is not supporting any of the 20 reforms in the investment climate and skills and productivity areas.

                                                                  St. Kitts and Nevis
                  Thematic Area                                             Investment      Logistics     Skills and        Total
                                                                              Climate                    Productivity
                  Number of CGF reform actions                                   8             13             12              33


                                                                                                                                                     45
                 Number of bank-supported reform actions                     0              6              0             6
                 Percentage of bank-supported reforms                    0 percent      46 percent     0 percent     18 percent


St. Lucia

Despite its small size (population: 163,000) St. Lucia has 52 reforms across the three thematic areas. The World Bank lends support to 15 percent
of these reforms, of which 5 are in Logistics, 2 in investment climate and 1 in skills and productivity.

                                                                     St. Lucia
                  Thematic Area                                          Investment     Logistics     Skills and       Total
                                                                           Climate                   Productivity
                  Number of CGF reform actions                                16           20             16            52
                  Number of bank supported reform actions                     2            5               1             8
                  Percentage of bank-supported reforms                   13 percent    25 percent     6 percent     15 percent


St. Vincent and the Grenadines

St Vincent and the Grenadines has listed 28 reforms of which just over half are in the investment climate sector. The World Bank is involved in
supporting 14 percent of all reforms identified. Like in many other CGF countries, the World Bank is lending support to 29 percent of the Logistics
reforms and 13 percent of the investment climate reforms. It is not active in the skills and productivity area.

                                                      St. Vincent and the Grenadines
                 Thematic Area                                     Investment      Logistics          Skills and        Total
                                                                     Climate                         Productivity
                 Number of CGF reform actions                           15            7                    6             28
                 Number of bank supported reform actions                2             2                    0              4
                 Percentage of bank-supported reforms              13 percent     29 percent          0 percent      14 percent




                                                                                                                                                46
Suriname

Suriname has identified 44 reforms of which 18 are in investment climate, 11 in Logistics and 15 in skills and productivity. The World Bank is absent
across the board with the exception of one investment climate reform “establishing a credit bureau”, which is it and Canada’s Department of
Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development.

                                                                     Suriname
                Thematic Area                                           Investment       Logistics     Skills and         Total
                                                                          Climate                     Productivity
                Number of CGF reform actions                                 18             11             15             44
                Number of bank supported reform actions                      1               0              0              1
                Percentage of bank-supported reforms                     6 percent       0 percent     0 percent       2 percent


The Bahamas

The Bahamas, like Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, enjoys less World Bank supports than other CGF members. It has identified 17 reform
actions of which more than half are in the Logistics area. The World Bank supports 2 reforms, one in investment climate (Increase availability/access
to capital and financing) and one in Logistics (Improve knowledge of regional trade opportunities). In total, World Bank support amounts to 12
percent of identified reform actions.

                                                                   The Bahamas
                  Thematic Area                                         Investment        Logistics    Skills and        Total
                                                                          Climate                     Productivity
                  Number of CGF reform actions                               3              11              3             17
                  Number of bank supported reform actions                    1               1              0              2
                  Percentage of bank-supported reforms                  33 percent       9 percent     0 percent      12 percent


Trinidad and Tobago

After Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago is the country where the World Bank is least present in terms of support to CGF reform actions (with 11
percent of support). The World Bank is lending support to 4 of the 36 identified reforms (2 in investment climate and 2 in Logistics). Despite the
fact that 55 percent of reforms fall into the skills and productivity area, the World Bank is not yet present in this sector.


                                                                                                                                                  47
                                        Trinidad and Tobago
Thematic Area                                     Investment    Logistics    Skills and      Total
                                                    Climate                 Productivity
Number of CGF reform actions                           9           7             20            36
Number of bank supported reform actions                2           2              0            4
Percentage of bank-supported reforms              22 percent   29 percent    0 percent     11 percent




                                                                                                        48
                                               Annex 5 Updated List of CGF Analytical Work Produced


World Bank

Making Reforms Work in the Caribbean. A Collective Action Approach to Growth
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19886878/making-reforms-work-caribbean-collective-action-approach-growth

Connectivity for Caribbean Countries. An Initial Assessment
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/07/24/000470435_20140724102013/Rendered/PDF/896920WP0CGF0L0Box0385289
B00PUBLIC0.pdf

Youth Unemployment in the Caribbean
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/05/29/000350881_20140529120809/Rendered/PDF/883620WP0Box385224B00PUBL
IC00April02014.pdf

The New Trade Environment and Trade Performance in the Caribbean
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/07/17/000470435_20140717110916/Rendered/PDF/895320WP0The0N00Box385285
B00PUBLIC0.pdf

Trade and Shared Prosperity in the Caribbean Region
http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2014/07/15/000456286_20140715094311/Rendered/PDF/894240WP0Trade00Box385279
B00PUBLIC0.pdf

ICT for Development in the Caribbean
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17894020/customized-ict-solutions-caribbean-growth

Resilience cities in coastal areas: Best practice - Summary agenda
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17900011/resilient-coastal-cities-economic-social-environmental-dimensions-risk

Developing Geothermal Energy in Small island states
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17900017/got-steam-geothermal-opportunity-growth-caribbean

Flying Solo: Air Connectivity in OECS

                                                                                                                                    49
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17900367/air-transport-oecs-flying-solo

Oil price volatility
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17900370/mitigating-vulnerability-high-volatile-oil-prices-caribbean

Agricultural Risk Management in the Caribbean
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17900369/market-based-agricultural-risk-management-caribbean

Education, Skills, and Productivity in the Caribbean: A Primer
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17893756/quality-education-counts-skills-growth

NCD prevalence and policy options
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17893706/non-communicable-diseases-caribbean-new-challenge-productivity-growth-non-
communicable-diseases-caribbean-new-challenge-productivity-growth

Feasibility and potential for a regional framework for Public-Private Partnerships
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17886508/public-private-partnerships-caribbean-bridging-financing-gap

A review of tax incentives and their impact on growth and productivity
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17886462/promoting-growth-caribbean-tax-incentives-theory-practice

Trade Facilitation in the Caribbean: the case of customs performance
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17886452/trade-facilitation-caribbean-case-customs-performance

Diaspora Investments
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17893727/caribbean-diaspora-source-venture-investment

The challenges to small Caribbean ports: Are there lessons to be learned from recent port reforms in Africa?
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17900368/challenges-small-caribbean-ports-lessons-learned-recent-port-reforms-africa

Compete Caribbean publications

Report on Regional Investment Climate Thematic Area
http://www.competecaribbean.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Merged-Final-CGF_Report_-_Investment_Climate__prepared_by_Prof__Alvin_Wint.pdf

Report on Regional Logistics and Connectivity Thematic Area
http://www.competecaribbean.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Merged-final-CGF_Report_-
_Logistics_and_Connectivity__prepared_by_Mr__John_Lewis.pdf

                                                                                                                                            50
Report on Regional skills and productivity Thematic Area
http://www.competecaribbean.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Merged-Final-CGF_Report_-_Skills_and_productivity__prepared_by_Prof__Keith_Nurse.pdf

Compete Caribbean Private Sector Assessments

PSARs - http://www.competecaribbean.org/studies-reports/surveys/psars

Enterprise Surveys - http://www.competecaribbean.org/studies-reports/surveys

Donor Matrices work in the Caribbean - http://www.competecaribbean.org/studies-reports/donor-matrices

Inter-American Development Bank Caribbean Policy Briefs

Does Size Matter? Yes, If You are Caribbean! (IDB-PB-201) http://www.iadb.org/en/publications/publication-detail,7101.html?id=70876

Don’t Talk to Me about Debt. Talk to Me about Growth (IDB -PB-202) http://www.iadb.org/en/publications/publication-detail,7101.html?id=70937

The Question is Not Whether “To Devalue or Not to Devalue?” But Rather “What to Devalue?”
(IDB-PB-204) http://www.iadb.org/en/publications/publication-detail,7101.html?id=71151
Laments of the Caribbean Businessperson are Based on Facts? (IDB-PB-205) http://www.iadb.org/en/publications/publication-detail,7101.html?id=71284

Spillovers of Global Shocks Over Caribbean Countries: So Large That There Is Little Room to Maneuver. An Impulse Response Analysis (IDB-PB-206)
http://www.iadb.org/en/publications/publication-detail,7101.html?id=71417




                                                                                                                                                     51
                                                     Annex 6 CGF Framework and Implementation Plan



                                                                                           Identification of potential
Consolidation of existing information,                                                  stakeholders from Government,
 diagnostics, analysis on constraints       Preparation and planning with            Private Sector, Civil Society and Media
   and policy recommendations to         government and stakeholders prior to               for each of the 3 themes
 enable private sector development.                   launching                      Identification of 1 facilitator for each
 Stocktaking of existing knowledge                                                           theme/working group




                                                                                     The working groups finalize the Policy
                                         Each thematic working-group works            Recommendations document to be
Launching CGF National Chapters in
                                          for 5-6 weeks with the support of a         presented to the Government Focal
    each Caribbean Country by
                                         facilitator to prepare a list of priority    Point and at the Thematic Regional
 establishing the thematic working
                                            recommendations and identify                          Workshops
               groups
                                                     knowledge gaps
                                                                                          Launch of additional studies




                                                                                                                                52
             ❶                               ❷                                ❸
                                  Identification of persons in
   Transformation of the                                           Identification of external
                                 government responsible for
 Priority Recommendation                                             resources to support
                                 implementation the Actions
  Papers into Action Plans                                             implementation
                                              Plans




             ❹
   Public Accountability                     ❺                                ❻
Workshops every 4-6 months
                                 Monitoring implementation       Evaluation of specific actions
and 'yearly' regional peer-to-
    peer learning events




                                                                                                  53
i
   Participating countries include Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the
Grenadines, Suriname, The Bahamas, and Trinidad and Tobago. Barbados. Guyana, and Haiti are participating as observers only.
ii
    Out of the 495 reforms actions, implementation data is available for 212 reforms for countries where accountability workshops were held.
iii
    In addition to the 12 countries, several hundred stakeholders, 3 multilateral banks, and various donors help drive the CGF agenda.
iv
    It was decided from the outset to keep the focus on the three broad thematic areas, instead of having a sector-specific approach to reform, so that a broad
range of stakeholder priorities could be accommodated while maintaining focus. The choice was based on the need to stimulate a broad-based discussion on
the growth agenda, considering the situation at conception in 2010 –11, which demanded actions across the board.
v
    The note is based on desk research, a set of data for items (1) and (2), and an assessment mission to Grenada and St. Lucia. It also draws from two focus
group discussions with key CGF focal points in the 12 CGF countries, including one also attended by private sector representatives. These focus group
discussions were carried out during the 3rd CGF Regional Meetings in St. Lucia in June 2015.
vi
    The report benefitted from a Compete Caribbean and Inter-American Development Bank assessment of the CGF exercise in four countries. Assessing the
Caribbean Growth Forum Implementation in Participating Countries, July 2015 (draft consultant report by IDB). The countries covered are The Bahamas,
Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
vii
     The online survey was carried out in June–July 2015 by the Inter-American Development Bank as part of its assessment of the CGF. The survey, which looked
at the value added of the CGF, was mailed to 200 participants, 30 of whom responded. Although the response rate is low, the survey did reveal interesting
insights into the working of the CGF as viewed by the participants. For details of the questions and the findings, see Assessing the Caribbean Growth Forum
Implementation in Participating Countries, July 2015 (draft consultant report to Inter-American Development Bank).
viii
     The initiative is facilitated by the World Bank Group, the Inter-American Development Bank, Compete Caribbean, and the Caribbean Development Bank in
collaboration with the United Kingdom Agency for International Development, and the Canada Department for Foreign Aid, Trade and Development.
ix
    Compete Caribbean in turn is funded by the Inter-American Development Bank, the Government of Canada, and the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development
x The largest funder of the CGF was the Canada Department for Foreign Aid, Trade and Development (DFTAD).
xi
    S. Agarwal, D. Post, and V. Venugopal. “Citizen Report Cards: Monitoring Citizen Perspectives to Improve Service Delivery.” How-To Notes prepared by the
authors for the World Bank. See the experience in Karachi, Pakistan and Accra, Ghana on pages 4 and 11.
xii
     Jamaica’s second accountability workshop consisted in a series of three Progress Review Meetings with stakeholders. Each meeting focused on one thematic
area.
xiii
     Information taken from a discussion with the CGF Focal Points on the sidelines of the 3rd Regional Meeting of the CGF in St. Lucia on June 15, 2015.
xiv
     It appears that the agreed CGF methodology is that the stakeholders may agree on reforms that need more than 12 months. But if so, they may put them in
the action plan and monitor implementation for the first 12 months. This way, at least the reform is on the agenda, even though, realistically, it is impossible to
complete in 12 months.
xv
     This section reports on de jure implementation. The next version of this note will analyze de facto implementation and the reasons for a gap between the
two, if any.
xvi
     The 6-month points range between December 2013 (Dominican Republic) to June 2014 (Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis). The 12-month points are October 2014
(Dominican Republic), November 2014 (St. Lucia) and February 2015 (Grenada).
xvii
      The next stage of this assessment will go deeper into the dynamics of this reform.
xviii
      Factors beyond the CGF may have boosted the pace of reform implementation. For example, Grenada is supported by an active IMF program.

                                                                                                                                                                54
xix
     This analysis is based on information and feedback provided by a group of World Bank and International Finance Corporation Task Team Leaders and
program leaders working in the three thematic areas in the 12 CGF countries. The actual percentage of actions supported by the World Bank are larger than
represented in the regional summary analysis, because the World Bank does not have an active program in some CGF countries (The Bahamas), very small
programs (Antigua and Barbuda), or programs in place through limited Reimbursable Advisory Services (Trinidad and Tobago).
xx
    For both the consultative phase (that identifies priorities and recommendations for action) and the national accountability workshops (intended to assess
implementation), a tracking tool has been used to monitor participation. The data the tool produced are being processed and will enable a disaggregated
analysis of participation—by sector: public, private, academia, and so on; and by gender.
xxi
     Stakeholders were asked to limit the priorities to 3–4 to focus on the top challenges and try to meet expectations in the implementation phase.
xxii
      Alberto Mestas. 2015. Assessing the Caribbean Growth Forum Implementation in Participating Countries . Draft consultant report for the Inter-American
Development Bank. July 2015.
xxiii
      This scenario may have varied by action area. For example, where a donor was actively involved in an area (not necessarily due to the CGF but for other
reasons), the actions may have been identified fairly well up front, implemented well, and have been adequate to meet objectives.
xxiv
      R. Devlin and G. Moguillansky. 2011. Breeding Latin American Tigers: Operational Principles for Rehabilitating Industrial Policies and R. Hausman, D. Rodrik
and C. Sabel. 2007. Reconfiguring Industrial Policy: A Framework with an Application to South Africa .




                                                                                                                                                                 55
