                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                 June 5, 2015




    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR
           OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
INTRODUCTION
1. The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are technical reference documents with
general and industry-specific examples of Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). 1 When one or
more members of the World Bank Group are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as
required by their respective policies and standards. These industry sector EHS guidelines are designed to
be used together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which provides guidance to users on
common EHS issues potentially applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of multiple
industry sector guidelines may be necessary. A complete list of industry sector guidelines can be found
at: www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.

2. The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and measures that are generally considered to
be achievable in new facilities by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application of the EHS
Guidelines to existing facilities may involve the establishment of site-specific targets, with an appropriate
timetable for achieving them.

3. The applicability of the EHS Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks established for
each project on the basis of the results of an environmental assessment in which site-specific variables,
such as host country context, assimilative capacity of the environment, and other project factors, are
taken into account. The applicability of specific technical recommendations should be based on the
professional opinion of qualified and experienced persons.

4. When host country regulations differ from the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines,
projects are expected to achieve whichever are more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than
those provided in these EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project circumstances, a full
and detailed justification for any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is
protective of human health and the environment.

APPLICABILITY
5. The EHS Guidelines for Offshore Oil and Gas Development include information relevant to
seismic exploration, exploratory and production drilling, development and production activities, offshore
pipeline operations, offshore transportation, tanker loading and unloading, ancillary and support
operations, and decommissioning. They also address potential onshore impacts that may result from
offshore oil and gas activities.

1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence, and foresight that would be reasonably expected
from skilled and experienced professionals engaged in the same type of undertaking under the same or similar
circumstances globally. The circumstances that skilled and experienced professionals may find when evaluating the
range of pollution prevention and control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, varying
levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative capacity as well as varying levels of financial and
technical feasibility.

                                                           1
                                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                             OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                             June 5, 2015




This document is organized in the following manner:

      1. Industry-Specific Impacts and Management ............................................................................. 2
         1.1 Environment............................................................................................................................. 2
         1.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 18
         1.3 Community Health and Safety ............................................................................................... 26
      2. Performance Indicators Monitoring ......................................................................................... 27
         2.1 Environment........................................................................................................................... 27
         2.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 28
      3. References ................................................................................................................................. 32
      Annex A. General Description of Industry Activities ................................................................... 39



1. INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC IMPACTS AND MANAGEMENT
6. This section provides a summary of EHS issues associated with offshore oil and gas development,
along with recommendations for their management. These issues may be relevant to any of the activities
listed as applicable to these guidelines. Guidance for the management of EHS issues common to most
large industrial facilities during the construction phase is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. The
EHS Guidelines for Crude Oil and Petroleum Product Terminals include information relevant to land-
and shore-based petroleum storage terminals receiving and dispatching bulk shipments of crude oil and
refined products from pipelines, tankers, railcars, and trucks for subsequent commercial distribution.

1.1       Environment

7. The following environmental issues should be considered as part of a comprehensive assessment
and management program that addresses project-specific risks and potential impacts. Potential
environmental issues associated with offshore oil and gas development projects include the following:

        • Air emissions
        • Wastewater discharges
        • Solid and liquid waste management
        • Noise generation (including underwater)
        • Spills
        • Energy efficiency and resource conservation

1.1.1     Air Emissions

8. The main sources of air emissions (continuous or intermittent) from offshore activities include:
combustion sources (boilers, turbines) for power and heat generation; the use of compressors, pumps,
and reciprocating and other engines on offshore facilities, including support and supply vessels and
helicopters; emissions resulting from flaring and venting of hydrocarbons; intermittent emissions (e.g.,
well-testing emissions, safety flaring, engine exhaust, etc.) and fugitive emissions.




                                                                                  2
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




9. One of the most important components of these emission sources is carbon dioxide (CO2). Principal
pollutants include nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), carbon monoxide (CO), and particulates.
Additional pollutants can include hydrogen sulfide (H2S); volatile organic compounds (VOCs); methane
and ethane; benzene, ethyl benzene, toluene, and xylenes (BTEX); glycols; and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs). In some cases, mercaptans and mercury may be present, which require specific
care. Firefighting and refrigeration systems may contain halons and chlorofluorocarbons, which are
Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS). 2

10. Aggregate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from all facilities and offshore support activities should
be quantified annually in accordance with internationally recognized methodologies.

11. All reasonable attempts should be made to implement appropriate methods for controlling and
reducing fugitive emissions in the design, operation, and maintenance of offshore facilities and to
maximize energy efficiency and design facilities for lowest energy use. The overall objective is to reduce
air emissions. Cost-effective and technically feasible options for reducing emissions should be evaluated.
Additional recommendations on the management of greenhouse gases and energy conservation are
addressed in the General EHS Guidelines.

Exhaust Gases

12. Exhaust gas emissions produced by the combustion of gas or liquid fuels in turbines, reciprocating
engines or boilers, used for heat or power generation or to drive machinery such as compressors or
pumps can be the most significant source of air emissions from offshore facilities. During equipment
selection, air emission specifications should be taken into account, as should the use of very low sulfur
content fuels and/or natural gas.

13. Guidance for the management of small combustion source emissions with a capacity of up to 50
megawatt thermal (MWth), including air emission standards for exhaust emissions, is provided in the
General EHS Guidelines. For combustion source emissions with a capacity of greater than 50 MWth,
refer to the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power.

Venting and Flaring

14. Associated gas brought to the surface with crude oil during oil production is sometimes disposed of
at offshore facilities by venting or flaring. This practice is now widely recognized to be a waste of valuable
resources as well as a significant source of GHG emissions.

15. However, flaring and venting are important safety measures on offshore oil and gas facilities, helping
to ensure that gas and other hydrocarbons are safely disposed of in the event of an emergency, a power
or equipment failure, or other facility upset condition. Risk assessment processes (e.g., hazard and
operability study (HAZOP), hazard identificatiosn study (HAZID), etc.) to estimate the implications of
situations of this type should be used in such facilities.




2 See also Oil and Gas UK, “About the Industry,” last updated November 2009,

http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk/knowledgecentre/atmospheric_emissions.cfm.

                                                        3
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




16. Measures consistent with the Global Gas Flaring and Venting Reduction Voluntary Standard 3 (part
of the Global Gas Flaring Reduction Public-Private Partnership) should be adopted when considering
venting and flaring options for offshore activities. The standard provides guidance on how to eliminate or
achieve reductions in the flaring and venting of natural gas.

17. Continuous venting of associated gas is not good practice and should be avoided. The associated
gas stream should be routed to an efficient flare system, although continuous flaring of gas should be
avoided if alternatives are available. Before flaring is adopted, all feasible alternatives for the gas’s use
should be evaluated to the maximum extent possible and integrated into production design. 4

18. Alternative options may include gas utilization for on-site energy needs, gas injection for reservoir
pressure maintenance, enhanced oil recovery using gas lift, or export of the gas to a neighboring facility
or to market. An assessment of alternatives should be made and adequately documented. If none of the
options for the associated gas’s use is feasible, measures to minimize flare volumes should be evaluated
and flaring should be considered as an interim solution, with the elimination of continuous production-
associated gas flaring as the preferred goal.

19. New facilities should be designed, constructed, and operated so as to avoid routine flaring. Cost-
effective options to reduce flaring from existing or legacy facilities that offer sustainable social benefits
(e.g., gas-to-power) should be identified and evaluated in collaboration with host country governments
and other stakeholders and with a particular focus on GHG emissions.

20. If flaring is the only viable solution, continuous improvement of flaring through the implementation of
good practices and new technologies should be demonstrated. The following pollution prevention and
control measures should be considered for gas flaring:

        • Implement source gas reduction measures to the extent possible.
        • Use efficient flare tips and optimize the size and number of burning nozzles.
        • Maximize flare combustion efficiency by controlling and optimizing flare fuel, air, and stream flow
          rates to ensure the correct ratio of assist stream to flare stream.
        • Minimize flaring from purges and pilots—without compromising safety—through measures
          including installation of purge gas reduction devices, vapor recovery units, inert purge gas, soft
          seat valve technology where appropriate, and installation of conservation pilots.
        • Minimize risk of pilot blowout by ensuring sufficient exit velocity and providing wind guards.
        • Use a reliable pilot ignition system.
        • Install high-integrity instrument pressure protection systems, where appropriate, to reduce
          overpressure events and avoid or reduce flaring situations.
        • Minimize liquid carryover and entrainment in the gas flare stream with a suitable liquid
          separation system.
        • Minimize flame lift off and/or flame lick.
        • Operate flare to control odor and visible smoke emissions (no visible black smoke).


3   See World Bank (2004).
4   Ibid.

                                                       4
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




      • Situate flare at a safe distance from accommodation units.
      • Implement burner maintenance and replacement programs to ensure continuous maximum flare
        efficiency.
      • Meter flare gas.

21. In the event of an emergency or equipment breakdown, or when facility upset conditions arise,
excess gas should not be vented but rather should be sent to an efficient flare gas system. Emergency
venting may be necessary under specific field conditions where a flare gas system is not available or
when flaring of the gas stream is not possible, such as when there is a lack of sufficient hydrocarbon
content in the gas stream to support combustion or a lack of sufficient gas pressure to allow it to enter the
flare system. Justification for excluding a gas flaring system on offshore facilities should be fully
documented before an emergency gas venting facility is considered.

22. To minimize flaring events as a result of equipment breakdowns and facility upsets, plant reliability
should be high (>95 percent) and provisions should be made for equipment sparing and plant turn-down
protocols.

23. Flaring volumes for new facilities should be estimated during the initial commissioning period so that
appropriate flaring targets can be developed. The volumes of gas flared for all flaring events should be
recorded and reported.

Well Testing

24. During well testing, flaring of produced hydrocarbons should be avoided, especially in
environmentally sensitive areas. Feasible alternatives should be evaluated for the recovery of these test
fluids, with the safety of handling volatile hydrocarbons considered, either for transfer to a processing
facility or for alternative disposal options. An evaluation of alternatives for produced hydrocarbons should
be adequately documented.

25. If flaring is the sole option available for the disposal of test fluids, only the minimum volume of
hydrocarbons required for the test should be flowed and well-test durations should be reduced to the
extent practical. An efficient test flare burner head equipped with an appropriate combustion
enhancement system should be selected to minimize incomplete combustion, black smoke, and
hydrocarbon fallout to the sea. Volumes of hydrocarbons flared should be recorded.

Fugitive Emissions

26. Fugitive emissions in offshore facilities may be associated with cold vents (collected gaseous stream
that is directly released to the atmosphere without burning in flare), leaking tubing, valves, connections,
flanges, packings, open-ended lines, pump seals, compressor seals, pressure relief valves, open tanks
for Non-Aqueous Drilling Fluids (NADF) (generating diffuse emissions), and hydrocarbon loading and
unloading operations.

27. Methods for controlling and reducing fugitive emissions should be considered and implemented in
the design, operation, and maintenance of offshore facilities. The selection of appropriate valves, flanges,
fittings, seals, and packings should consider the equipment’s safety and suitability requirements as well


                                                     5
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                 June 5, 2015




as its capacity to reduce gas leaks and fugitive emissions. Additionally, all collected gaseous streams
should be burned in high efficiency flare(s), and leak detection and repair programs should be
implemented.

1.1.2      Wastewaters

Produced Water

28. Oil and gas reservoirs contain water (formation water) that becomes produced water when brought
to the surface during hydrocarbon production. Oil reservoirs can contain large volumes of this water,
whereas gas reservoirs typically produce smaller quantities, with the exception of Coal Bed Methane
(CBM) reservoirs, from which a large amount of produced water is initially generated. CBM reservoirs are
infrequently exploited offshore. In addition, in many fields water is injected into the reservoir to maintain
pressure and/or maximize production. The total produced water stream can be one of the operation’s
largest waste products, by volume, and therefore requires management by offshore operators.

29. Produced water contains a complex mixture of inorganic (dissolved salts, trace concentrations of
certain metals, suspended particles), organic (suspended and dissolved hydrocarbons, traces of fatty
acids and other organic compounds), and in some cases residual trace concentrations of chemical
additives (for example, scale and corrosion inhibitors, hydrate inhibitors), which are sometimes used to
enhance the hydrocarbon production process.

30. Feasible alternatives to the management and disposal of produced water should be evaluated and
integrated into facility and production design. These alternatives may include injection along with
seawater for reservoir pressure maintenance, injection into a suitable offshore disposal well, 5 or export to
shore with produced hydrocarbons for reuse or disposal after proper treatment.

31. When disposal wells are the adopted solution, geological and technical aspects should be
considered to avoid leakage of the disposed water to the seabed or shallow confined aquifers. The
conversion of existing wells to injection wells should be considered first, to minimize both geological risk
and the construction costs of dedicated disposal wells.

32. If none of these options is technically or financially feasible and disposal to sea is the only feasible
option, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) should establish mitigation targets for
produced water according to the discharge guidelines provided in Table 1 of Section 2 prior to its disposal
into the marine environment.

33. Treatment technologies to consider include combinations of gravity and/or mechanical separation
and chemical treatment and may include a multistage system, typically including a skim tank or a parallel
plate separator, followed by a gas flotation cell or hydrocyclone. A number of treatment package
technologies are available and should be considered, depending on the application and particular field
conditions.




5   See also as technical reference, U.S. Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (US BSEE) (2009).

                                                         6
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




34. Sufficient treatment system backup capability should be in place to ensure continual operation and
should be available for use if an alternative disposal method—or example, a produced water injection
system—should fail.

35. Where disposal to sea is necessary, all means to reduce the volume of produced water should be
considered, including:

      • Adequate well management during well-completion activities to minimize water production
      • Recompletion of high water-producing wells to minimize water production
      • Use of downhole fluid separation techniques, where possible, and water shutoff techniques,
        when technically and economically feasible
      • Shutting in high water-producing wells

36. To minimize environmental hazards related to residual chemical additives in the produced water
stream, where surface disposal methods are used, production chemicals should be selected carefully by
taking into account their application rate, toxicity, bioavailability, and bioaccumulation potential. 6 In
particular, the use and dispersion of Kinetic Hydrate Inhibitors (KHI) should be assessed to avoid possible
accumulation of poorly degraded residuals.

Flowback Water

37. The water that flows back from the well to the surface after hydraulic fracturing, is generally referred
to as flowback water. If hydraulic fracturing is planned or forms part of the project, 7 as in the case of shale
gas projects or CBM, all environmental aspects—including fracture propagation and related possible
fugitive emissions, fracturing fluid management, and the fate and management of flowback water—should
be evaluated. 8 Flowback water requires considerations separate from or in addition to those bearing on
produced water. Flowback water characteristics depend on the type of fluid (water or diesel) and
chemicals injected to induce rock fracturing and can also be present in large quantities. Flowback water
can thus constitute one of the most important environmental management issues for hydraulic fracturing
operations.

38. Feasible alternatives for the management and disposal of flowback water should be evaluated and
integrated into operational design. Alternatives may include temporary storage in sealed tanks prior to
injection into a suitable offshore disposal well, temporary storage for reuse in further hydraulic fracturing
operations, or export to shore with the produced hydrocarbons for treatment and disposal. If none of
these alternatives is technically or economically feasible, flowback water should be treated according to
the discharge guidelines provided in Table 1 of Section 2 for oil and grease content prior to its disposal
into the marine environment. An assessment of alternatives should be adequately documented. In
addition, an environmental risk assessment on the chemicals mixed with the hydraulic fracturing water—


6 Adequate tools and approaches should be adopted with the intent of assessing the hazards and risks deriving from
the use of any chemicals in the hydrocarbons production. Chemical Hazard Assessment and Risk Management is
one such approach.
7 See International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP) (2013c); and IOGP and International Petroleum

Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA) (2013).
8 Any possible social concerns (for example, related to induced microseismicity) should also be assessed.



                                                        7
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




including their toxicity, bioavailability, and bioaccumulation potential—should be conducted to assess the
maximum site-specific allowable concentrations.

Hydrostatic Testing Water

39. Hydrostatic testing of offshore equipment and marine pipelines involves pressure testing with water
(typically filtered seawater, unless equipment specifications do not allow it) to verify equipment and
pipeline integrity. Chemical additives (corrosion inhibitors, oxygen scavengers, biocides, and dyes) may
be added to the water to prevent internal corrosion or to identify leaks. In managing hydrotest waters, the
following pollution prevention and control measures should be considered:

      • Minimize the volume of hydrotest water offshore by testing equipment at an onshore site prior to
        loading the equipment onto the offshore facilities.
      • Use the same water for multiple tests.
      • Reduce the need for chemicals by minimizing the time that test water remains in the equipment
        or pipeline.
      • Carefully select chemical additives in terms of dose concentration, toxicity, biodegradability,
        bioavailability, and bioaccumulation potential.
      • Send offshore pipeline hydrotest water to onshore facilities for treatment and disposal, where
        practical.

40. If the discharge of hydrotest waters to the sea is the only feasible alternative for disposal, a hydrotest
water disposal plan should be prepared that considers points of discharge, rate of discharge, chemical
use and dispersion, 9 environmental risk, and monitoring. Hydrotest water disposal into shallow coastal
waters and sensitive ecosystems should be avoided.

Cooling Water

41. Antifoulant chemical dosing to prevent marine fouling of offshore facility cooling water systems
should be carefully considered. Available alternatives should be evaluated and, where practical, the
seawater intake depth should be optimized to reduce the need for use of chemicals. An assessment of
alternatives should be adequately documented. Appropriate screens should be fitted to the seawater
intake, if safe and practical, to avoid entrainment and impingement of marine flora and fauna.

42. The cooling water discharge depth should be selected to maximize mixing and cooling of the thermal
plume to ensure that the temperature is within 3 degrees Celsius of ambient seawater temperature at the
edge of the defined mixing zone, or if the mixing zone is not defined, within 100 meters of the discharge
point, as noted in Table 1 of Section 2 of these guidelines.

Desalination Brine

43. Operators should consider mixing desalination brine from the potable water system with cooling
water or other effluent streams. If mixing with other discharge streams is not feasible, the discharge

9 See Oslo-Paris Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic Commission
(OSPAR) (2010a).

                                                      8
                                    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                    OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                    June 5, 2015




location should be carefully selected with respect to potential environmental impacts. In particular, in the
case of coastal and/or brackish water, the reverse osmosis process should be designed to allow
reduction of the salinity of the rejected effluent.

Other Waste Waters

44. Other waste waters routinely generated at offshore facilities are listed below, along with appropriate
treatment measures:

         • Sewage: Gray and black water from showers, toilets, and kitchen facilities should be treated in
           an appropriate on-site marine sanitary treatment unit in compliance with International
           Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) 73/78 requirements.
         • Food waste: Organic (food) waste from the kitchen should, at a minimum, be macerated to
           acceptable levels and discharged to sea, in compliance with MARPOL 73/78 requirements.
         • Ballast and storage displacement water: 10 Water pumped into and out of storage during loading
           and off-loading operations should be contained and treated before discharge to meet the
           guidelines provided in Table 1 of Section 2.
         • Bilge waters: Bilge waters from machinery spaces in offshore facilities and support vessels
           should be routed to the facility’s closed drainage system or contained and treated before
           discharge to meet the guidelines provided in Table 1 of Section 2. If treatment to this standard is
           not possible, these waters should be contained and shipped to shore for disposal.
         • Deck drainage water: Drainage water generated from precipitation, sea spray, or routine
           operations, such as deck and equipment cleaning and fire drills, should be routed to separate
           drainage systems in offshore facilities. This includes drainage water from process areas that
           could be contaminated with oil (closed drains) and drainage water from nonprocess areas (open
           drains). All process areas should be bunded to ensure that drainage water flows into the closed
           drainage system. Drip trays should be used to collect runoff from equipment that is not contained
           within a bunded area and the contents routed to the closed drainage system. Contaminated
           drainage waters should be treated before discharge to meet the guidelines provided in Table 1
           of Section 2.

1.1.3      Waste Management

45. Typical nonhazardous and hazardous wastes 11 routinely generated at offshore facilities include
general office and packaging wastes, waste oils, oil-contaminated rags, hydraulic fluids, used batteries,
paint cans, waste chemicals and used chemical containers, used filters, fluorescent tubes, scrap metals,
and medical waste, among others.

46. At a minimum, these waste materials should be segregated offshore into nonhazardous and
hazardous wastes and shipped to shore for reuse, recycling, or disposal. A waste management plan for
the offshore facility should be developed and should contain a mechanism allowing waste consignments
to be tracked from the originating location offshore to the final waste treatment and disposal location
onshore. Efforts should be made to eliminate, reduce, or recycle wastes at all times.

10   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) (2012a).
11   As defined by local legislation or international conventions.

                                                               9
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




47. Guidance for onshore management of these typical wastes is provided in the General EHS
Guidelines.

48. Additional waste streams that can be associated with offshore development activities include:

      • Drilling fluids and drilled cuttings
      • Produced sand
      • Completion and well work-over fluids
      • Naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORM)

Drilling Fluids and Drilled Cuttings

49. The primary functions of drilling fluids used in oil and gas field operations include removal of drilled
cuttings (rock chippings) from the wellbore and control of formation pressures. Other important functions
include sealing permeable formations, maintaining wellbore stability, cooling and lubricating the drill bit,
and transmitting hydraulic energy to the drilling tools and bit. Drilled cuttings removed from the wellbore
and spent drilling fluids are typically the largest waste streams, by volume and weight, generated during
oil and gas drilling activities.

50. Though various drilling fluids are available, they can generally be categorized into the following:

      • Water-based drilling fluids (WBDF): Fluids for which the continuous phase and suspending
        medium for solids is seawater or a water-miscible fluid. There are many WBDF variations,
        including gel, salt-polymer, salt-glycol, and salt-silicate fluids.
      • Non-Aqueous Drilling Fluids (NADF): The continuous phase and suspending medium for solids
        is a water-immiscible fluid that is oil based, enhanced mineral oil based, or synthetic based.

51. The selection of a drilling fluid should be made after evaluating its technical suitability and
environmental impact. The use of fluids that contain diesel as the principal component of the drilling mud
liquid phase is not good practice for offshore drilling programs and should be avoided.

52. Typically, barite (barium sulfate) is the solid medium used to increase the specific density of most
drilling fluids, with bentonite clays also used as a viscosifier. Drilling fluids can also contain a variety of
other components to enhance their performance and/or to address reservoir compatibility requirements.

53. Drilling fluids are (i) circulated downhole with direct loss to the seabed, along with displaced cuttings,
particularly while drilling well sections nearest to the surface of the seabed, or (ii) recovered for reuse
when returned to the drilling rig via casing or marine riser and routed to a solids removal system. The
direct loss system is to be considered an interim solution for the first drilling phase and applied only when
the chemical content is low and water-based drilling mud is used.

54. In the solids removal system, the drilling fluids are separated from the cuttings so that they may be
recirculated downhole, leaving the cuttings behind for disposal. The volume of cuttings produced will
depend on the depth of the well and the diameter of the hole sections drilled. The cuttings contain
residual drilling fluid.


                                                      10
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




55. The drilling fluid rheological properties and density are adjusted during drilling via solid control
systems; the fluid is eventually replaced (i) when its rheological properties or density can no longer be
maintained or (ii) at the end of the drilling program. These spent fluids are then contained for reuse or
disposal. Disposal of spent NADF by discharge to the sea must be avoided. Instead, NADF should be
transferred to shore for recycling or treatment and disposal.

56. Feasible alternatives for the disposal of spent WBDF and drilled cuttings from well sections drilled
with either WBDF or NADF should be evaluated. Options include injection into a dedicated disposal well
offshore, injection into the annular space of a well, and containment and transfer to shore for treatment
and disposal. When no alternative options are available, residual WBDF might be discharged to sea at
the end of a drilling program, provided that the overall ESIA conducted for the site has considered this
scenario, demonstrating the environmental acceptability of this practice.

57. When discharge to sea is the only alternative, a drilled cuttings and fluid disposal plan should be
prepared, taking into account cuttings and fluid dispersion, chemical use, environmental risk, and
necessary monitoring. Discharge of cuttings to sea from wells drilled with NADF should be avoided. If
discharge is necessary, cuttings should be treated before discharge to meet the guidelines provided in
table 1 of section 2.

58. Guidance for the treatment and disposal of fluids and cuttings shipped to shore is provided in the
EHS Guidelines for Onshore Oil and Gas Development.

59. Pollution prevention and control measures to consider prior to the discharge of spent drilling fluids
and drilled cuttings should include the following guidelines:

      • Minimize environmental hazards related to residual chemical additives on discharged cuttings by
        careful selection of the fluid system. WBDFs should be selected whenever appropriate.
      • Carefully select drilling fluid additives, taking into account their concentration, toxicity,
        bioavailability, and bioaccumulation potential.
      • Use high-efficiency solids control equipment to reduce the need for fluid change out.
      • Use high-efficiency solids removal and treatment equipment to reduce and minimize the amount
        of residual fluid contained in drilled cuttings.
      • Use directional drilling (horizontal and extended reach) techniques to avoid sensitive surface
        areas and to gain access to the reservoir from less sensitive surface areas.
      • Use slim-hole multilateral wells and coiled tubing drilling techniques, when feasible, to reduce
        the amount of fluids and cuttings.

60. Drilling fluids to be discharged to sea (including as residual material on drilled cuttings) are subject to
tests for toxicity, barite contamination, and oil content provided in Table 1 of Section 2. Barite
contamination by mercury (Hg) and cadmium (Cd) must be checked to ensure compliance with the
discharge limits provided in Table 1. Suppliers should be asked to guarantee that barite quality meets this
standard with pre-treatment, if necessary.

61. WBDF and treated drilled cuttings discharge should be made via a caisson submerged at an
appropriate depth to ensure suitable dispersion of the effluent (i.e., a dispersion study demonstrates that
the relevant impact is acceptable).

                                                      11
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                             June 5, 2015




Produced Sand

62. Sand produced from the reservoir is separated from the formation fluids during hydrocarbon
processing. The produced sand can contain hydrocarbons, and the hydrocarbon content can vary
substantially, depending on location, depth, and reservoir characteristics. Well completion should aim to
reduce the production of sand at source using effective downhole sand control measures.

63. Whenever practical, produced sand removed from process equipment should be transported to
shore for treatment and disposal, or routed to an offshore injection disposal well if available. Direct
discharge to sea is not good practice. If discharge to sea is the only demonstrably feasible option, then
the discharge should meet the guideline values in Table 1 of Section 2.

64. Any oily water generated from the treatment of produced sand should be recovered and treated to
meet the guideline values for produced water in Table 1 of Section 2.

Completion and Well Work-Over Fluids

65. Completion and well work-over fluids (including intervention fluids and service fluids) can include
solid material, residual drilling fluids, weighted brines or acids, hydrocarbons, methanol and glycols, and
other types of performance-enhancing additives. These fluids are used to clean the wellbore and
stimulate the flow of hydrocarbons or may be used to maintain downhole pressure. Once used, these
fluids may contain contaminants including solid material, oil, and chemical additives.

66. Feasible disposal options should be considered, including the following:

      • Collect the fluids where handled in closed systems and ship them to shore to the original
        vendors for recycling
      • Inject in a disposal well, where available
      • Ship onshore for treatment and disposal

67. If discharge to sea is the only demonstrably feasible option:

      • Select chemical systems in relation to their concentration, toxicity, bioavailability, and
        bioaccumulation potential
      • Consider routing these fluids to the produced water stream for treatment and disposal, if
        available
      • Neutralize spent acids before treatment and disposal
      • Ensure the fluids meet the discharge levels in Table 1 of Section 2




                                                     12
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials (NORM)

68. Depending on the field reservoir characteristics, NORM may be present in the produced fluids. 12
NORM may precipitate as scale or sludge in process piping and production vessels in which the
concentration of NORM can be higher than in the fluid. 13 Where NORM is present, or NORM precipitation
and/or accumulation conditions are known or expected to exist, a NORM management program should
be developed to ensure worker safety and the use of appropriate handling and waste management
procedures.

69. If removal of NORM is required, disposal options may include canister disposal during well
abandonment, injection into the annular space of a well, shipment to shore for disposal in an engineered
and properly operated landfill within sealed containers, and, depending on the type of NORM and in
cases where no other option is available, discharge to sea with the facility drainage.

70. NORM-containing sludge, scale, or equipment should be treated, processed, isolated, and/or
disposed of according to good international industry practices, 14 so that potential future human exposure
to the treated waste will be within internationally accepted limits. 15

1.1.4    Hazardous Materials Management

71. Hazardous materials (including some chemicals) are sometimes used in offshore oil and gas
operations. General guidance for the management of hazardous materials is provided in the General
EHS Guidelines.

72. The following additional principles should be followed for the management of hazardous materials
offshore:

        • Use chemical hazard assessment and risk management techniques to evaluate chemicals and
          their effects.
        • Select only those chemicals that have been previously tested for environmental hazards.
        • Select chemicals based on the OSPAR 16 Harmonised Offshore Chemical Notification Format or
          similar internationally recognized system.
        • Select chemicals with the least hazard and lowest potential environmental and health risks,
          whenever possible.
        • Avoid chemicals suspected to cause taint or known endocrine disruptors.


12 NORM is defined as “Radioactive material containing no significant amounts of radionuclides other than naturally

occurring radionuclides. Material in which the activity concentrations of the naturally occurring radionuclides have
been changed by some process are included in NORM.” International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP)
(2007).
13
   See IOGP (2008a).
14 For more on the management of NORM residues, see International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (2013).

15 ICRP (2007).

16 The name comes from the Oslo-Paris Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East

Atlantic, http://www.ospar.org/.

                                                        13
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




        • For new offshore oil and gas facilities, Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) should not be
          used; 17 opportunities to change-out ODS-containing devices in existing offshore oil and gas
          facilities as part of on-going equipment maintenance and replacement programs should be
          evaluated.
        • Avoid chemicals known to contain heavy metals of concern, in anything other than trace
          quantities.

1.1.5    Noise

73. Offshore oil and gas development activities generating noise include seismic operations, drilling and
production activities, offshore and nearshore structural installation (especially pile driving), construction
and decommissioning activities, and marine traffic. Noise from offshore activities (especially from seismic
operations) may temporarily affect fish and marine mammals to varying degrees depending on the
strength of the noise, local species present, and their distance from the source. 18

74. Environmental parameters that determine sound propagation in the sea are site specific, and
different species of marine life have different hearing sensitivities as a function of frequency. An impact
assessment should be conducted to (i) identify where and/or when anthropogenic sound has the potential
to create significant impacts and (ii) determine what mitigation measures, if any, are appropriate.
Recommended measures to reduce the risk of sound impact to marine species include the following:

        • Identify sensitive areas for marine life, such as feeding, breeding, calving, and spawning
          grounds.
        • Plan seismic surveys and offshore construction activities so as to avoid sensitive times of the
          year.
        • Identify fishing areas and reduce disturbances by scheduling seismic surveys and construction
          activities for less productive times of the year, where possible.
        • Maximize the efficiency of seismic surveys to reduce operation times, where possible.
        • If sensitive species are anticipated in the area, monitor their presence using experienced
          observers 19 before the onset of sound-creating activities that have the potential to produce
          adverse effects, and continue monitoring throughout the seismic program or construction.
        • When marine mammals are observed congregating close to the area of planned activities,
          seismic start-up or construction should begin at least 500 meters away.
        • If marine mammals are sighted within 500 meters of the proposed seismic array or construction
          area, postpone start-up of seismic activities or construction until they have moved away,
          allowing adequate time after the last sighting.
        • Use soft-start procedures—also called ramp-up or slow buildup—in areas of known marine
          mammal activity. This involves a gradual increase in sound pressure to full operational levels.


17   As defined by the 1989 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer,
http://ozone.unep.org/new_site/en/montreal_protocol.php.
18 See Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC) (2010); International Association of Geophysical Contractors

(IAGC) and IOGP (2011); and further references in section 3.0.
19 See also IAGC (2011); and JNCC (2010).



                                                     14
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                 June 5, 2015




        • Use the lowest practicable power levels to image the target surface throughout the seismic
          surveys and document their use.
        • Where possible, use methods to reduce and/or baffle unnecessary high-frequency noise
          produced by air guns or other acoustic energy sources.
        • For pile driving, use vibratory hammers, air bubble curtains (confined or unconfined), temporary
          noise attenuation piles, air filled fabric barriers, and isolated piles or coffer dams, where
          practical.

1.1.6     Spills

75. Spills from offshore facilities can occur due to leaks, equipment failure, accidents, or human error.
Guidelines for release prevention and control planning are provided in the General EHS Guidelines,
including the requirement to develop a spill prevention and control plan. Additional spill prevention and
control measures specific to offshore oil and gas facilities include the following tasks:

        • Conduct a spill risk assessment for offshore facilities and support vessels. 20
        • Design process, utility, and drilling systems to reduce the risk of major uncontained spills. 21
        • Install a Blowout Prevention System (BOP) during the drilling phase and valves during
          commissioning for production—including subsea shutdown valves, if required—for the reduction
          of risk and to allow early shutdown or isolation in an emergency.
        • Ensure adequate corrosion allowance for the lifetime of the facilities and/or installation of
          corrosion control and prevention systems in all pipelines, process equipment, and tanks.
        • Develop maintenance and monitoring programs to ensure the integrity of well field equipment.
          For export pipelines, maintenance programs should include regular pigging to clean the pipeline,
          and intelligent pigging should also be considered as required.
        • Install leak detection systems. Use subsea pipeline measures, such as telemetry systems,
          Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems, 22 pressure sensors, shut-in valves, and
          pump-off systems, including at normally unattended installations and unmanned facilities to
          ensure rapid detection of loss of containment.
        • An Emergency Shutdown System should be in place in all facilities, able to initiate automatic
          shutdown actions to bring the offshore facility to a safe condition; it should be activated in case
          of any significant release.
        • Implement adequate personnel training and field exercises in oil spill prevention, containment,
          and response.
        • Ensure that spill response and containment equipment, routinely inspected, maintained, and
          operationally exercised and tested, is deployed or available as necessary for response.
          Document and report all spills, as well as near misses. Following a spill or near miss, carry out a
          root cause investigation and undertake corrective actions to prevent recurrence.


20 IOGP and IPIECA (2013).
21 See also National Research Council (NRC) (2014).
22 These may be used in oil and gas and other industrial facilities to assist in the monitoring and control of plants and

equipment.

                                                           15
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                 June 5, 2015




1.1.7     Spill Response Planning

76. A Spill Response Plan (SRP) should be prepared, and the capability to implement the plan should
be in place. A preliminary SRP is recommended, commencing at the project development phase and
based on the initial project design, and it should include community consultation and feedback.

77. The SRP should address potential oil, chemical, and fuel spills from offshore facilities and support
vessel—including tankers—and pipeline ruptures and leaks. The SRP should include all appropriate oil
spill response tools and options in order to allow responders, in cooperation with the appropriate
authorities, to develop response strategies that mitigate environmental impacts to the greatest extent
practicable. The plan should also include the following:

        • A description of operations, site conditions, product(s) characteristics, expected seasonal current
          and wind data, sea conditions and water depth, and logistical support arrangements.
        • A spill risk assessment, defining expected frequency and size of spills from potential release
          sources, including an assessment of foreseeable scenarios. 23
        • Ranking of foreseeable spill scenarios in terms of potential severity, with tiered response
          approaches for each.
        • Identification of persons responsible for managing and participating in spill response efforts, their
          specific training requirements, responsibilities, authority, roles, and contact details.
        • Sensitivity mapping of marine and coastal environmental habitats, associated wildlife, and
          socioeconomic resources that could be affected by spills generated by offshore oil and gas
          development and production activities. 24
        • Cooperative measures with government agencies, if appropriate, and relevant notification
          process and procedures.

78. The SRP should also include the following:

        • Clear demarcation of spill severity, according to the size of a spill, using a clearly defined Tier 1,
          Tier 2, and Tier 3 approach. 25
        • Oil spill trajectory modeling approach, supported by internationally recognized models (in
          accordance with the relevant regulatory jurisdiction prescriptions, if any), for the prediction of oil
          fate and relevant environmental impacts for a number of spill simulations (including worst-case
          scenario, such as blowout from an oil well), with the ability to input local current and wind data.
        • Strategies for managing Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 spills from the offshore installation and support
          vessels.


23 See also IOGP (2013c), as a reference in case of fracking; and IOGP and IPIECA (2013).
24 See, for reference, IPIECA, International Maritime Organization (IMO), and IOGP (2012).
25 See IPIECA (2008). Tier 1 spills are operational in nature, occurring at or near an operator’s own facilities, as a

consequence of its own activities. The individual operator is expected to respond with its own resources. Tier 2 spills
are most likely to extend outside the remit of the Tier 1 response area and possibly be larger in size, where additional
resources are needed from a variety of potential sources, and a broader range of stakeholders may be involved in the
response. Tier 3 spills are those that, due to their scale and likelihood to cause major impacts, call for substantial
further resources from a range of national and international sources.

                                                          16
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                 June 5, 2015




        • For Tier 1 spills, description of the minimum response equipment that must be available on
          board (minimum equipment for Tier 2 and Tier 3 spills may also be included).
        • Arrangements and procedures to mobilize external resources in responding to larger spills and
          strategies for their deployment.
        • Full list, description, location, and use of on-site and off-site response equipment and the
          response times for deployment.
        • Strategies for containment and recovery of floating oil, including use (and limitations) of
          mechanical recovery equipment and chemical dispersants. 26
        • Priorities for response (with input from potentially affected or concerned parties).
        • Methods to maximize recovery and response capabilities (e.g., remote sensing, aerial
          observation and command and control, infrared, RADAR, etc.).
        • Shoreline protection and cleanup strategies.
        • Measures to rehabilitate wildlife such as seabirds, mammals, and turtles.
        • Handling instructions for recovered spilled oil, chemicals, fuels, or other recovered contaminated
          materials, including their transportation, temporary storage, and disposal.
        • Measures to be taken to protect health and safety of oil spill personnel.

79. The SRP should clearly define storage and maintenance instructions for Tier 1 spill response
equipment and relevant routine inspection, testing, and exercises. In addition, each offshore facility and
group of facilities should install and maintain a meteorological and marine data monitoring station for
planning simulation and response activities.

1.1.8     Loading, Storage, Processing, and Offloading Operations

80. Procedures for loading, storage, processing, and offloading operations, either for consumables (i.e.,
fuel, drilling fluids, and additives) or for liquid products, should be utilized to minimize spill risks. Pumps,
hoses, and valves should be inspected and maintained or replaced as necessary.

81. Floating (Production) Storage and Offloading (FSO/FPSO) vessels and Floating (Liquefaction)
Storage Unit (FSU/FLSU) vessels should be subject to inspection and certification by an appropriate
national or international body, in accordance with International Maritime Organization (IMO) requirements.
Double hull vessels are preferred, whenever available. 27

82. All offloading activities should be supervised by the designated Mooring Master, 28 who has the
authority to prescribe whether an “in tandem” or “side-by-side” array should be adopted, according to the
conditions of the sea.


26 NRC (2005).
27 IMO (2005–2006).
28 The qualified person in charge of, among other things, assessing and guaranteeing that the vessel's design and

condition are up to par for the operation, reporting to the Offshore Field Manager for decisions, advising masters of
both FSO/FPSO and export tanker, supervising the vessels' approach, maneuvering into final position, mooring and
positioning of the lightering hoses, monitoring the transfer of oil into the lightering vessel to ensure that no leaks or
spills occur, overseeing the connection of hoses, and maneuvering of vessels upon completion of the operation.

                                                           17
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




83. The conditions and characteristics of the export tankers should be assessed by the Mooring Master
and reported to the Offshore Field Manager 29 prior to commencing offloading operations; only properly
registered and well-maintained double-hull vessels should be utilized.

1.1.9   Decommissioning

84. Where more stringent local regulatory requirements do not exist, internationally recognized
guidelines and standards issued by IMO and OSPAR 30 should be followed for the decommissioning of
offshore facilities. 31

85. IMO standards state that installations or structures of less than 4,000 tonnes, excluding the deck and
superstructure, in less than 75 meters of water should be removed entirely at decommissioning, unless
an alternative use for the structure has been approved. In addition, installations or structures installed
after January 1, 1998 must be designed to be entirely removed. The standards indicate that exceptions
will be considered on a case-by-case basis for installations or structures installed before 1998 that cannot
be fully removed for demonstrable reasons of technical or financial feasibility, but these facilities must be
partially removed to provide a clear water column depth of 55 meters.

86. An OSPAR decision recognizes the entire removal of the facility from offshore locations for reuse,
recycling, or final disposal on land as the preferred option for the decommissioning of offshore facilities.
Alternative disposal options may be considered if justified on the basis of an alternative options
assessment. This assessment should consider facility type, disposal methods, disposal sites, and
environmental and social impact, including interference with other sea users, impacts on safety, energy
and raw material consumption, and emissions.

87. A preliminary decommissioning plan for offshore facilities should be developed that considers well
abandonment, removal of hydrocarbons from flowlines, facility removal, and subsea pipeline
decommissioning, along with disposal options for all equipment and materials. This plan can be further
developed during field operations and fully defined in advance of the end of field life. The plan should
include details on the provisions for the implementation of decommissioning activities and arrangements
for post-decommissioning monitoring and aftercare.

1.2     Occupational Health and Safety

88. The requirements that follow apply to fixed and floating offshore drilling, production and
accommodation facilities. Additional requirements related to hazard prevention for floating facilities are
provided in section 1.1, paragraph “Loading, Storage, Processing, and Offloading Operations.”

89. Occupational health and safety and major hazard issues should be considered as part of a
comprehensive risk assessment of an offshore facility through, for example, a combination including a
HAZID study, HAZOP study, or other risk assessment studies that encompass occupational hazards as


29 The Offshore Field Manager is the company's officer in charge of, among other things, inspecting the facility and
field, writing up reports, and notifying Management of all activities.
30 See the OSPAR Convention, http://www.ospar.org/.

31 See IMO (1989); OSPAR (1998); and the OSPAR Convention.




                                                        18
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




well as major accident hazards (including blowout risk). The results should be used for health and safety
management planning, in the design of the facility and safe working systems, and in the preparation of
safe working procedures. Health and safety management planning should demonstrate that a systematic
and structured approach to managing offshore health and safety will be adopted and that controls are in
place to reduce risks to as low as reasonably practical. Occupational hazards should be identified and
assessed through an Occupational Hazards Management Plan, detailing prevention and mitigation
measures (including operational procedures) to be considered. All workers should be made aware of the
contents of this document through induction training.

90. Offshore facilities should be designed to eliminate or reduce the potential for injury or risk of an
accident. 32 General facility design measures and requirements are provided in the General EHS
Guidelines. In addition, the following issues should be considered in the design of offshore facilities:

      • Environmental conditions at the offshore location (e.g., seismicity, extreme wind and wave
        events, currents, ice formations).
      • Proper selection of materials and development of a monitoring plan to ensure the protection of
        equipment and structures from corrosion.
      • Adequate living accommodations appropriate to outside environmental conditions, plus related
        policies that consider the physical and mental strain on personnel living on production or drilling
        facilities; space for recreation and social activities and/or consideration of a limit to the number of
        consecutive days permitted on the offshore facility.
      • Limited accommodations in production and drilling facilities for staff related to asset operation
        only.
      • Temporary refuges or safe havens located in a protected area at the facility for use by personnel
        in the event of an emergency.
      • A sufficient number of escape routes leading to designated personnel muster points and escape
        from the facility.
      • Handrails, toeboards, and nonslip surfaces on elevated platforms and walkways, stairways, and
        ramps to prevent person overboard incidents.
      • Crane and equipment laydown area positioning to avoid moving loads over critical areas and
        reducing the impacts from dropped objects. (Alternatively, structural protection measures should
        be provided.)

91. Occupational health and safety (OHS) risk management should be based on application of risk
assessment principles to identify hazards, risks, and controls (e.g., HAZID) and should include
communicating to personnel the importance of conducting work activities in a safe and skillful manner,
OHS training for staff, and maintaining equipment in a safe condition.

92. A formal Permit to Work (PTW) system should be developed for offshore facilities. The PTW system
will ensure that all potentially hazardous work is carried out safely and ensures effective authorization of
designated work; effective communication of the work to be carried out, including hazards involved; and
safe isolation procedures to be followed before commencing work. A lockout and/or tagout procedure for

32 National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and National Research Council of the National Academies (NRCNA)
(2011); Transportation Research Board of the National Academies (TRBNA) (2012).

                                                      19
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




equipment should be implemented to ensure that all equipment is isolated from energy sources before
servicing or removal.

93. Offshore facilities should be equipped, at a minimum, with specialized first-aid providers (industrial
prehospital care personnel) and the means to provide short-term remote patient care. Depending on the
number of personnel present and the complexity of the facility, provision of an on-site medical unit and a
doctor may need to be considered. In specific cases, telemedicine facilities may be an alternative option.

94. An alarm system should be installed that can be heard throughout the offshore facility. Alarms for
fire, H2S and hydrocarbon gas leak, and person overboard should be provided.

95. Clear responsibilities for EHS matters should be defined, including identification of a functional role
for managing the facility’s EHS issues. An officer responsible for EHS should be continuously present in
the facility, and health and safety inductions should be provided to the entire workforce prior to mobilizing
offshore and documented.

96. Guidance for the management of physical hazards common to all industries and specifically relating
to hazards from rotating and moving equipment, exposure to noise and vibration, electrical hazards, hot
work, working with heavy equipment, confined space entry, working at heights, and the general working
environment is provided in the General EHS Guidelines. These guidelines also provide guidance on
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for workers.

97. Additional occupational health and safety issues in offshore oil and gas operations include the
following:

        • Fire and explosion prevention and control
        • Air quality
        • Hazardous materials
        • Personnel transfer and vessels
        • Well blowouts
        • Ship collision
        • Dropped objects and material handling issues
        • Emergency preparedness and response

1.2.1     Fire and Explosion Prevention and Control

98. Guidance on fire precautions and the prevention and control of fire and explosions is provided in the
General EHS Guidelines.

99. The most effective ways to prevent fires and explosions in offshore facilities is to prevent the release
of flammable material and gas, to implement early detection procedures, and to ensure the interruption of
leaks. Potential ignition sources should be kept to a minimum and adequate separation distances
between potential ignition sources and flammable materials should be in place. Any venting or flaring
shall be remote from potential ignition sources; a gas dispersion analysis from vent should document the


                                                      20
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




adequacy of vent position. Offshore facilities should be classified into various hazard areas, based on
international standards, 33 and in accordance with the likelihood of release of flammable gases and liquids.

100. Appropriate fire and explosion prevention and control measures for offshore facilities should include
the following:

      • Provide passive fire protection throughout the facility to prevent the spread of fire in the event of
        an incident. Fire protection measures should be designed on the basis of consideration of the
        fire hazard. 34 The fire protection measures should
             o provide passive fire protection on load-bearing structures and fire-rated walls and build
               fire-rated partitions between rooms;
             o take into account explosion loads in the design of load-bearing structures or install blast-
               rated walls;
             o design items and structures to protect against explosion and evaluate the need for blast
               walls based on an assessment of likely explosion characteristics; and
             o consider blast panel or explosion venting, and fire and explosion protection should
               specifically consider wellheads, safe areas, and living areas.
      • Ensure the protection of accommodation areas by distance or by fire walls. The ventilation air
        intakes shall be designed to prevent smoke and flammable or hazardous gases from entering
        accommodation areas.
      • Locate fire systems (for example, firewater pumps or control room) in a safe area of the facility,
        protected from fire by distance or by fire walls. If the system or item is located within a fire area,
        it should be passive fire-protected or fail-safe in nature.
      • Avoid explosive atmospheres in confined spaces by making spaces inert or by including
        adequate ventilation.
      • In unmanned facilities, signal the occurrence of gas leaks, fire, or explosion to the remote control
        center to ensure that appropriate action is taken.
      • Conduct a fire impact assessment to determine the type and extent of fire detection and
        protection required for an offshore facility. A combination of automatic and manual fire alarm
        systems are typically provided on offshore facilities. Active fire protection systems should be
        installed on offshore facilities and should be strategically located to enable rapid and effective
        response. A combination of active fire suppression mechanisms can be used, depending on the
        type of fire and the fire impact assessment: for example, fixed foam system, fixed fire water
        system, CO2 extinguishing system, water mist system, gaseous extinguishing system, fixed dry
        chemical system, fixed wet chemical system, fire water monitors, live hose reels, and portable
        fire extinguishing equipment). For new offshore oil and gas developments, halon-based fire
        systems should be avoided. Firewater pumps should be available and designed to deliver water
        at an appropriate rate. Regular checks and maintenance of firefighting equipment are essential.
      • Provide fire safety training and response as part of workforce health and safety induction and
        training, with advanced fire safety training provided to a designated firefighting team.


33 Such as American Petroleum Institute (API) (1997c, 1997d) Recommended Practices 500 and 505; International
Electrotechnical Commission; or British Standards.
34 API (2013b).



                                                     21
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




1.2.2   Air Quality

101. Guidance for the maintenance of air quality in the workplace, along with required air quality levels, is
provided in the General EHS Guidelines.

102. Due to the risk of gas releases caused by leaks or emergency events, adequate ventilation in closed
or partially closed spaces is required on offshore oil and gas facilities. Air intakes should be installed to
ventilate facility safe areas and areas that need to be operable during emergency situations. If necessary,
the means to detect gas in the intakes and alarm or automatic shut-down systems should be installed. 35

103. The facilities should be equipped with a reliable system for gas detection that allows the source of
release to be isolated and the inventory of gas that can be released to be reduced. Blowdown of pressure
equipment should be initiated to reduce system pressure and consequently reduce the release flow rate.
Gas detection devices should also be used to authorize entry and operations into enclosed spaces.

104. Wherever hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas may accumulate, monitors should be installed and set to
activate warning signals whenever detected concentrations of H2S exceed 7 milligrams per cubic meter
(mg/m3). Personnel should also be provided with personal H2S detectors and response training in the
event of a leak. A self-contained breathing apparatus should be provided and the apparatus designed and
conveniently located to enable personnel to safely interrupt tasks and reach a temporary refuge or safe
haven.

1.2.3   Hazardous Materials

105. The design of the offshore facilities should reduce the exposure of personnel to chemical
substances, fuels, and products containing hazardous substances. Use of substances and products
classified as highly toxic, carcinogenic, allergenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, or strongly corrosive should be
identified and the products replaced by less hazardous alternatives, wherever possible. For each
chemical used, a Material Safety Data Sheet should be readily available on the facility. A general
hierarchical approach to the prevention of impacts from chemical hazards is provided in the General EHS
Guidelines.

106. A procedure for the control and management of radioactive sources used offshore should be
prepared, along with a designated shielded container for storage when the source is not in use. The
container should be locked in a secure store that is used exclusively for this purpose.

107. In locations where NORM may precipitate as scale or sludge in process piping and production
vessels, facilities and/or process equipment that have been taken out of service for maintenance,
replacement, or decommissioning should be monitored for NORM. NORM can have adverse health
effects through external irradiation or internal exposure (if NORM is taken into the body via inhalation,
ingestion, or absorption). Where NORM is detected, the expected annual doses and the probability and
magnitude of potential exposures should be assessed and a workforce monitoring and management
program, appropriate to the magnitude and nature of the risks, should be developed and implemented


35Typically, alarm levels for flammable gas are set no higher than approximately 25 percent of the Lower Explosive
Limit of the substance. It is common practice to use several detectors and select higher set points for automatic
shutdown and dampener closure.

                                                       22
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




(e.g., source control, exposure monitoring, worker education and safe operating practices, including
appropriate PPE). Procedures should determine the classification of the area where NORM is present
and the level of supervision and control required.

108. The operator should determine whether to leave the NORM in-situ, or to remove it for disposal, as
described in Section 1.1 of this Guideline.

1.2.4     Personnel Transfer and Vessels

109. Personnel transfer to and from offshore facilities typically occurs by helicopter or boat. Safety
procedures for helicopter and vessel transport of personnel are required. Passengers should
systematically receive a safety briefing and safety equipment as part of helicopter or vessel transport.

110. Equipment used for personnel transportation should be certified and the transportation crew qualified
according to applicable national and international regulations. In the event of helicopter transport, the
helicopter should be certified according to International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) rules. In the
event of marine transport, the vessel should be class approved.

111. Helicopter decks (helidecks) onboard offshore facilities should follow the requirements of the ICAO.
Facilities and equipment for station keeping of vessels during the transfer of personnel should consider
adverse sea conditions to protect the boat and the facility structure from heavy impacts.

112. If personnel are transferred from a boat to an offshore facility by crane, only cranes, cables, and
baskets certified for personnel transfer should be used.

113. Support vessels should have the relevant permits and certifications to comply with IMO
requirements. A Vessel Safety Management System should be implemented.

1.2.5     Well Blowouts

114. A blowout (i.e., loss of well control) can be caused by the uncontrolled flow of reservoir fluids into the
wellbore and may result in an uncontrolled release of formation fluids and gases into the environment.
Blowout can occur during drilling and work-over phases (where it is of particular concern) or during
production phases.

115. Blowout prevention measures should focus on maintaining wellbore hydrostatic pressure by
effectively estimating formation fluid pressures and the strength of subsurface formations. This can be
achieved with techniques such as proper prewell planning and technical reviews (i.e., audits of the well
control equipment and personnel competency, independent review of well design and control
procedures), drilling fluid logging, and using sufficient hydrostatic head of weighted drilling fluid or
completion fluid to balance the pressures in the wellbore. Well-integrity testing (e.g., negative pressure
test, cement bond log) should be performed, with the type of test and frequency defined by the operator,
based on the actual operation characteristics and as informed by a risk-based process to confirm that the
proposed testing approach is adequate to ensure well integrity and control. 36



36   See IOGP (2011a).

                                                      23
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




116. A BOP system should be installed that can be closed rapidly in the event of an uncontrolled influx of
formation fluids and that allows the well to be circulated to safety by venting the gas at surface and
routing oil so that it may be contained. The BOP system should be tested at installation and at regular
intervals (at least every 14 days) via partial or complete shutdown and based on availability
considerations related to the specific application. The BOP system should be pressure tested at
installation, after the disconnection or repair of any pressure containment seal in the BOP system, and at
regular intervals, as operations allow. Surface BOP stacks should be tested to their rated working
pressure during an initial pressure test, and then to the maximum anticipated surface pressure during
subsequent tests. Subsea BOP stacks should initially be tested to the rated working pressure of the ram
preventers or the wellhead system, whichever is lower, and then during subsequent tests to the maximum
anticipated wellhead pressure for the current well program. Facility personnel should conduct well-control
drills at regular intervals, and key personnel should attend well control courses periodically; well control
training and drills should be documented. BOP testing should be conducted by an independent specialist,
particularly for critical wells (e.g., deep water, high pressure, or high temperature wells). Facility personnel
should conduct well-control drills at regular intervals, and key personnel should attend well control
courses periodically; well control training and drills should be documented.

117. The BOP system design, maintenance, and repair should be in general compliance with international
standards. It is recommended that, at a minimum, subsea BOP systems consist of one annular preventer,
two blind-shear ram preventers, and two pipe ram preventers, and that they be equipped with choke and
kill lines and failsafe choke and kill close valves. The BOP preventers should be able to close the BOP for
the maximum drill pipe string foreseen for the drilling operations. BOP systems shall operate (failsafe) in
the event of a loss of control signal from the surface. At a minimum, subsea BOP systems should allow
closure of one set of pipe rams and all blind shearing type rams by Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV)
intervention, should automatic systems fail. 37

118. Contingency plans should be prepared for well operations and should include identification of
provisions for well capping in the event of uncontrolled blowout (providing indication of the tools,
equipment, and intervention time required) and identification of spill recovery measures. 38

119. A dedicated blowout risk analysis and emergency plan should be prepared, detailing the measures
in place to prevent a blowout, the provisions for well control in a blowout scenario (including capping tools
and oil spill recovery means), and indicating the time necessary for the intervention. The risk analysis
should include a failure mode and effect analysis as well as a reliability analysis of the technical systems
in place to control a blowout, as well as reliability analysis of the systems. The risk analysis should include
an assessment of conditions under which gas hydrates are formed, 39 the impact of hydrate formation on
well safety and control during the containment of a kick and on well control equipment operations, and the
relevant mitigations. Blowout risk analysis is mandatory in the case of deep water wells, where


37 See API (2012), Standard 53, section 6 (Surface BOP) and section 7 (Subsea BOP), for testing frequencies,
pressures and documentation expectations. API Standard 53 also includes guidelines for testing auxiliary well-control
equipment, including choke/kill lines, annular diverter, choke manifold, etc. for both surface and subsea wells. BOP
requirements and safety considerations on well safety are provided in American Bureau of Shipping (ABS) (2012);
API (2012) Standard 53; IOGP (2011a); NORSOK (2004); and US BSEE (2013b).
38 See IOGP (2011b, 2011c).

39 Methane gas hydrate formation is a potential drilling hazard for drilling operations in shallow waters in cold

environments and in water depths greater than 500 meters.

                                                         24
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




emergency intervention is more difficult and intervention times higher than is typical, and for high-
pressure, high-temperature wells.

1.2.6   Ship Collision

120. To avoid collisions with third-party and support vessels, offshore facilities should be equipped with
navigational aids that meet national and international requirements. Navigational aids include radar and
lights on facility structures and, where appropriate, on support vessels. A 500-meter radius facility safety
zone, at a minimum, should be implemented around offshore facilities. The facility should monitor and
communicate with vessels approaching the facility to reduce the risk of vessel collision.

121. The relevant maritime, port, or shipping authority should be notified of all permanent offshore
facilities, as well as safety zones and routine shipping routes to be used by project-related vessels.
Permanent facility locations should be marked on nautical charts. Maritime authorities should be notified
of the schedule and location of activities when there will be a significant increase in vessel movement,
such as during facility installation, rig movements, and seismic surveys.

122. A subsea pipeline corridor safety zone (typically 1,000 meters wide) should be established to define
anchoring exclusion zones and provide protection for fishing gear. In shallower waters with high shipping
activity, consideration should be given to burying the pipeline below the seabed.

1.2.7   Dropped Objects and Material Handling Issues

123. A dedicated dropped objects analysis should be prepared, assessing the risk of loads falling from
handling devices and impacting critical areas of the facility or subsea pipelines in the vicinity of the facility.
This analysis will identify the need for measures to prevent damage to critical items or structures and to
risers and sealines. A material handling study, to identify handling devices and procedures to avoid
impacts and stresses and injuries to personnel, should be developed.

1.2.8   Emergency Preparedness and Response

124. Guidance relating to emergency preparedness and response, including emergency resources, is
provided in the General EHS Guidelines. Offshore facilities should establish and maintain a high level of
emergency preparedness to ensure that the response to incidents is effective and without delay. Potential
worst-case accidents should be identified by risk assessment and appropriate preparedness
requirements designed. An emergency response team should be established for the offshore facilities;
such a team should be trained to respond to emergencies, rescue injured persons, and perform
emergency actions. The team should coordinate actions with other agencies and organizations that may
be involved in emergency response.

125. Personnel should be provided with adequate and sufficient emergency response equipment,
including medical emergency equipment and evacuation devices. These devices shall be appropriately
located for the evacuation of the facility. Lifeboats should be available in sufficient numbers for the entire
workforce. These lifeboats should be enclosed, fire-resistant crafts with trained lifeboat operators. Ice-
capable vehicles should be in place for the evacuation from facilities in frozen waters. Sufficient
lifejackets, lifebuoys, and survival suits should also be provided.



                                                       25
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                             June 5, 2015




126. Helicopters should not be considered as the primary means of evacuation.

127. Exercises in emergency preparedness should be practiced at a frequency commensurate with the
risk associated with a project or facility. At a minimum, the following practice schedule should be
implemented:

       •   Drills without equipment deployment as a minimum on quarterly basis
       •   Evacuation drills and training for egress from the platform under different weather conditions
           and at varying times of day
       •   Annual mock drills with equipment deployment
       •   Regular training, updated as needed and based on continuous evaluation

128. An emergency response plan should be prepared, based on the identification of potential emergency
scenarios, which contains the following measures, at a minimum:

       •   A description of the response organization (structure, roles, responsibilities, and decision
           makers)
       •   Description of response procedures (details of response equipment and location, procedures,
           training requirements, duties, etc.)
       •   Descriptions and procedures for alarm and communications systems
       •   Precautionary measures for securing a well or wells
       •   Relief well arrangements, including a description of equipment, consumables, and support
           systems to be utilized
       •   Description of on-site first-aid supplies and available backup medical support
       •   Description of other emergency facilities, such as emergency fueling sites
       •   Description of survival equipment and gear, alternate accommodation facilities, and
           emergency power sources
       •   Procedures for person overboard
       •   Evacuation procedures
       •   Emergency Medical Evacuation (MEDEVAC) procedures for injured or ill personnel
       •   Policies defining measures for limiting or stopping events, and conditions for the termination of
           actions

1.3     Community Health and Safety

129. Impacts to community health and safety from typical offshore oil and gas facility operations relate
primarily to potential interaction with other sea users, primarily shipping companies and fishermen.
Impacts may include accidents, loss of containment, and blowouts. A comprehensive assessment
addressing potential hazards to local communities and to the environment is required. Based on the
findings of the assessment, adequate measures to avoid or control the hazards should be taken and
should be factored into emergency planning.




                                                    26
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




130. Activities such as offshore drilling and construction, pipeline installation, seismic operations, and
decommissioning may result in temporary impacts to other users of the sea. Permanent installations and
structures, including production and drilling facilities and subsea pipelines, have a potential long-term
impact, at least until the end of the life of a field. Notification of the location of offshore facilities (including
subsea hazards) and the timing of offshore activities should be provided to local and regional maritime
authorities, including fishery groups. The position of fixed facilities and safety exclusion zones should be
marked on nautical charts. Clear instructions regarding access limitations to exclusion zones should be
communicated to other sea users. Subsea pipeline routes should be regularly monitored for the presence
of pipeline spans and identified spans should be repaired in a timely manner.

131. In areas where significant impacts to fishermen are anticipated, a fisheries liaison officer should be
appointed to provide a direct link with the fishing community. Arrangements for the management of
potential community or amenity impacts resulting from shoreline impacts caused by oil, chemical, or fuel
spills shall be included in the spill response plans. These should be effectively communicated to the
fishing community.

1.3.1   Security

132. Access to offshore facilities by unauthorized parties should be avoided by means of gates located in
the stairs from the boat landings to the deck level. Means for detecting intrusion (for example, closed-
circuit television) may be considered, allowing the control room to verify the conditions of the facility.
Additional active and passive security measures should be defined on the basis of a site-specific risk
assessment.

133. A facility standby vessel should be considered for offshore facilities (in case of multiplatform
developments, platforms do not have to have their own dedicated standby vessels). These vessels
should support security operations, monitor third-party vessels entering the exclusion zone, manage
supply vessel approach to the facility, and support operations during emergency situations.

2. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MONITORING
2.1      Environment

2.1.1   Emissions and Effluent Guidelines

134. Table 1 presents effluent guidelines for offshore oil and gas development. Guideline values for
process effluents in this sector are indicative of good international industry practice, as reflected in the
relevant standards of countries with recognized regulatory frameworks. The guidelines are assumed to be
achievable under normal operating conditions in appropriately designed and operated facilities through
the application of pollution prevention and control techniques discussed in the preceding sections of this
document.

135. The effluent guidelines are applicable primarily to discharges in offshore locations. Discharge water
quality to near-shore waters should be established on a case-specific basis, taking into account the
environmental sensitivities and assimilative capacity of receiving waters.




                                                         27
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




                  TABLE 1. EFFLUENT LEVELS FROM OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT

      PARAMETER                                                   GUIDELINE

                           1) NADF: Reinject or ship-to-shore, no discharge to sea
                           2) Drilled cuttings: Reinject or ship-to-shore, no discharge to sea except:
                             • Facilities located beyond 3 miles (4.8 km) from shore;
                             • For new facilities:a Organic Phase Drilling Fluidb concentration lower than 1% by
                               weight on dry cuttings;
                             • For existing facilitiesc: Use of Group III non-aqueous base fluids and treatment in
Drilling Fluids and
                               cutting dryers. Maximum residual Non Aqueous Phase Drilling Fluidd (NAF) 6.9%
Cuttings – NADF
                               (C16 -C18 internal olefins) or 9.4% (C12-C14 ester or C8 esters) on wet cuttings;
                             • Hg: max 1 mg/kg dry weight in stock barite
                             • Cd: max 3 mg/kg dry weight in stock barite
                             • Discharge via a caisson (at least 15 m below surface is recommended whenever
                               applicable; in any case, a good dispersion of the solids on the seabed should be
                               demonstrated)

                           1) WBDF: Reinject or ship-to-shore, no discharge to sea except:
                             • In compliance with 96 hr. LC-50 of Suspended Particulate Phase (SPP)-3% vol.
                               toxicity test first for drilling fluids or alternatively testing based on standard
                               toxicity assessment speciese (preferably site-specific species)
                           2) WBDF cuttings: Reinject or ship-to-shore, no discharge to sea except:
                             • Facilities located beyond 3 miles (4.8 km) from shore;
Drilling Fluids and
                             • Hg: 1 mg/kg dry weight in stock barite
Cuttings – WBDF
                             • Cd: 3 mg/kg dry weight in stock barite
                             • Maximum chloride concentration must be less than four times the ambient
                               concentration of fresh or brackish receiving water
                             • Discharge via a caisson (at least 15 m below sea surface is recommended
                               whenever applicable; in any case, a good dispersion of the solids on the seabed
                               should be demonstrated)

                           Reinject. Discharge to sea is allowed if oil and grease content does not exceed 42
Produced Water
                           mg/l daily maximum; 29 mg/L monthly average

                           Reinject or reuse. Discharge to sea is allowed if oil and grease content does not
                           exceed 42 mg/L daily maximum; 29 mg/L monthly average. An environmental risk
Flow-Back Water
                           assessment to determine the maximum site-specific allowable concentrations should
                           be conducted for all other chemicals

                           Ship-to-shore or reinject. No discharge to sea except:
                            • Oil and grease content does not exceed 42 mg/L daily maximum; 29 mg/L
                               monthly average
Completion and Well
                            • Neutralize to attain a pH of 5 or more
Work-Over Fluids
                            • In compliance with 96 hr. LC-50 of SPP-3% vol. toxicity test first for drilling fluidse
                               or alternatively testing based on standard toxicity assessment species
                               (preferably site-specific species)

                           Ship-to-shore or reinject: No discharge to sea except when oil concentration lower
Produced Sand
                           than 1% by weight on dry sand

                             • Send to shore for treatment and disposal.
                             • Discharge offshore following environmental risk analysis, careful selection of
Hydrotest Water
                               chemicalsg
                             • Reduce use of chemicals.



                                                       28
                                       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                       OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                       June 5, 2015




                       TABLE 1. EFFLUENT LEVELS FROM OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT

          PARAMETER                                                             GUIDELINE

                                     The effluent should result in a temperature increase of no more than 3°C at edge of
Cooling Water                        the zone where initial mixing and dilution take place. Where the zone is not defined,
                                     use 100 m from point of discharge.
Desalination Brine                   Mix with other discharge waste streams, if feasible.

Sewage                               Compliance with MARPOL 73/78h

Food Waste                           Compliance with MARPOL 73/78h
Storage Displacement
                                     Compliance with MARPOL 73/78h
Water

Bilgewater                           Compliance with MARPOL 73/78h
Deck Drainage
(nonhazardous and                    Compliance with MARPOL 73/78h
hazardous drains)
a
    New facilities include offshore drilling rigs which have been newly designed or structurally modified for the project.
b
    As defined by OSPAR (2000) Decision 2000/3.
c
 Applicable to existing offshore drilling rigs deployed for development well drilling programs. Applicable to exploratory well drilling
programs. Technically and financially feasible techniques, including installation of thermo-mechanical cutting cleaning systems,
to meet the guidelines for new facilities should be considered for implementation, in relation to the number of wells (including
producers and injectors) included in development drilling programs, and/or to potential impacts on critical habitats.
d
    As defined in US EPA (2013a).
e
  96-hr LC-50: Concentration in parts per million or percent of the SPP from sample that is lethal to 50 percent of the test
organism exposed to that concentration for a continuous period of 96 hours. See also: http://www.epa.gov/nrmrl/std/qsar/TEST-
user-guide-v41.pdf.
f
    Consistent with US EPA (2013a); OSPAR (2011); IOGP (2005).
g
 In accordance with OSPAR (2010a) “Recommendation 2010/4 on a Harmonised Pre-screening Scheme for Offshore
Chemicals” or other applicable process
h
  In nearshore waters, carefully select discharge location based on environmental sensitivities and assimilative capacity of
receiving waters.




                                                                    29
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




136. Combustion source emissions guidelines associated with steam- and power-generation activities
from sources with a capacity equal to or lower than 50 MWth are addressed in the General EHS
Guidelines, with larger power source emissions addressed in the Thermal Power EHS Guidelines.
Guidance on ambient considerations based on the total load of emissions is provided in the General EHS
Guidelines.

137. All ships, platforms and drilling rigs should be compliant with the Regulations for the Prevention of
Air Pollution from Ships set forth in MARPOL Annex VI, 40 where applicable. The provisions of Annex VI
are not applicable to emissions directly arising from the exploration, exploitation and associated offshore
oil and gas processing.

2.1.2   Environmental Monitoring

138. Environmental monitoring programs for this sector should be implemented as required to address all
activities that have been identified to have potentially significant impacts on the environment during
normal operations and upset conditions. Environmental monitoring activities should be based on direct or
indirect indicators of emissions, effluents, and resource use applicable to the particular project.

139. Monitoring frequency should be sufficient to provide representative data for the parameter being
monitored. Monitoring should be conducted by trained individuals following monitoring and record-
keeping procedures and using properly calibrated and maintained equipment. Monitoring data should be
analyzed and reviewed at regular intervals and compared with the operating standards, so that any
necessary corrective actions can be taken. Additional guidance on applicable sampling and analytical
methods for emissions and effluents is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.

2.2     Occupational Health and Safety

140. Key performance Indicators should be adopted to monitor operations and anticipate potential health
and safety issues. Both lagging indicators (measuring retrospectively the performances of facilities) and
leading indicators (indicating situations that could result in future health and safety issues) should be
defined for a facility; these indicators should consider both technical systems and operational and
management issues.

2.2.1   Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines

141. Occupational health and safety performance should be evaluated against internationally published
exposure guidelines. Examples include the Threshold Limit Value (TLV®) occupational exposure
guidelines and Biological Exposure Indices (BEI®), published by American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH); 41 Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards, published by the United States
National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH); 42 Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs),



40 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (known universally as MARPOL), revised annex

VI     adopted     in   October      2008,    which      entered    into   force    on     July  1,    2010.    See
http://www.imo.org/OurWork/Environment/PollutionPrevention/.
41 http://www.acgih.org/TLV/ and http://www.acgih.org/store/.

42 http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/.



                                                        30
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                                June 5, 2015




published by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States (OSHA); 43 Health
Leading Performance Indicators, published by IPIECA and IOGP); 44 Indicative Occupational Exposure
Limit Values, published by European Union member states; 45 or other similar sources. Particular attention
should be given to the occupational exposure guidelines for hydrogen sulfide (H2S).

142. Guidance on occupational exposure to ionizing radiation and its monitoring when NORM is present
is provided in the General EHS Guidelines and other internationally recognized sources. 46

2.2.2    Accident and Fatality Rates

143. Projects should try to reduce the number of accidents among project workers (whether directly
employed or subcontracted) to a rate of zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work time,
different levels of disability, or fatalities. Facility rates may be benchmarked against the performance of
facilities in this sector in developed countries through consultation with published sources (e.g., U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics and UK Health and Safety Executive). 47

2.2.3    Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring

144. The working environment should be monitored for occupational hazards relevant to the specific
project. Monitoring should be designed and implemented by accredited professionals as part of an
occupational health and safety monitoring program. 48 Facilities should also maintain a record of
occupational accidents and diseases, as well as dangerous occurrences and accidents. Additional
guidance on occupational health and safety monitoring programs is provided in the General EHS
Guidelines.




43 http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9992.
44 http://www.ogp.org.uk/publications/health-committee/health-performance-indicators-data/health-performance-
indicators-2012-data/.
45 http://europe.osha.eu.int/good_practice/risks/ds/oel/.

46 ICRP (2007).
47 http://www.bls.gov/iif/ and http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm.

48 Accredited professionals may include Certified Industrial Hygienists, Registered Occupational Hygienists, Certified

Safety Professionals, or their equivalents.

                                                         31
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




3. REFERENCES
Alberta Energy Resources Conservation Board (ERCB). 2011. “Upstream Petroleum Industry Flaring,
    Venting and Incineration.” Directive 060. Calgary.

American Bureau of Shipping (ABS). 2012. “2012 Guide for the Classification of Drilling Systems.”
   Houston, TX.

American Petroleum Institute (API). 1997a. “Environmental Guidance Document: Waste Management in
   Exploration and Production Operations.” API E5, 2nd ed. Washington, DC.

———. 1997b. “Management and Disposal Alternatives for Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material
  (NORM) Wastes in Oil Production and Gas Plant Equipment.” Publ. 7103. Washington, DC.

———. 1997c. “Recommended Practice for Classification of Locations for Electrical Installations at
  Petroleum Facilities Classified as Class I, Division I and Division 2.” API RP 500 (R2002).
  Washington, DC.

———. 1997d. “Recommended Practice for Classification of Locations for Electrical Installations at
  Petroleum Facilities Classified as Class I, Zone 0, and Zone 2.” API RP 505 (R2013). Washington,
  DC.

———. 2012. “API Standard 53: Blowout Prevention Systems for Drilling Wells”, 4th ed. Washington, DC.

———. 2013a.”Offshore Hydraulic Fracturing Briefing Paper.” Washington, DC.

———. 2013b. “Fireproofing Practices in Petroleum           and   Petrochemical   Processing   Plants:
  Recommended Practice 2218.” Washington, DC.

Asociatión Regional De Empresas de Petróleo y Gas Natural en Latinoamérica y el Caribe (Regional
   Association of Oil, Gas and Biofuels Sector Companies in Latin America and the Caribbean, ARPEL).
   1999a. “Control of Contamination from Offshore Exploration and Production Operations.”
   Environmental Guideline No. 26. Montevideo. http://www.arpel.org.

———. 1999b. “International Review of Health Risks for Oil and Gas Industry Workers: Current Status
  and Future Prospects.” Occupational Health and Safety Report No. 5. Montevideo.
  http://www.arpel.org.

———. 2005a. “Gas Flaring, Venting, Leaks and Losses at Exploration & Production Facilities.”
  Environmental Guideline #12-2005. Montevideo. http://www.arpel.org.

———. 2005b. “Statistics on Incidents in the Oil and Gas Industry in Latin America and the Caribbean:
  2004 Statistics for ARPEL Member Companies.” Montevideo. http://www.arpel.org.

Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association Limited (APPEA). 2002. “Guidelines for
   Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials.” Canberra, Australia.

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP). 2000. “Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material
   (NORM). Guide.” Report 2000-0036. Calgary.



                                                 32
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




———. 2001. “Offshore Produced Water Waste Management.” Report 2001-030. Calgary.

Canadian NORM Waste Management Technical Committee. 2005. “Technical Report on the
   Management of Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material (NORM) in Waste: Final Draft.” Ottawa.

Canada Nova Scotia Offshore Petroleum Board (CNSOPB). 2010. “Offshore Waste Treatment
   Guidelines.” Nova Scotia.

Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC). 2013. “Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material
   (NORM).” Ottawa.

Committee on Potential Impacts of Ambient Noise in the Ocean on Marine Mammals, National Research
   Council. 2003. Ocean Noise and Marine Mammals.” National Research Council of the National
   Academies. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Decreto Legislativo (Legislative Decree) No. 152, “Norme in Materia Ambientale,” Rome, 2006.

Del Villano, Kommendal, et al. 2009. “A Study on Kinetic Hydrate Inhibitor Performance and Seawater
    Biodegradability.” Energy and Fuels 23.

Ekins, Paul, Robin Vanner, and James Firebrace. 2005. “Management of Produced Water on Offshore Oil
    Installations. A Comparative Analysis using Flow Analysis.” Policy Studies Institute, UK Department
    of Trade and Industry, London.

Exploration and Production Forum (E&P Forum). 1993. “Exploration and Production (E&P) Waste
   Management Guidelines.” Report No. 2.58/196. London.

Exploration and Production Forum and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 1997.
   “Environmental Management in Oil and Gas Exploration and Production. An Overview of Issues and
   Management Approaches.” UNEP IE/PAC Technical Report 37, E&P Forum Report 2.72/254. London
   and Paris..Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2004. “Review of Scientific Information on Impacts of
   Seismic Sound on Fish, Invertebrates, Marine Turtles and Marine Mammals.” Habitat Status Report
   2004/002. Ottawa.

Grant, Alistair. 2003. “Environmental Impacts of Decommissioning of Oil and Gas Installations in the
   North Sea.” University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK. http://www.uea.ac.uk/~e130/cuttings.htm.

Health Canada, Canadian NORM Working Group of the Federal Provincial Territorial Radiation Protection
   Committee (FPTRPC). 2000. “Canadian Guidelines for the Management of Naturally Occurring
   Radioactive Materials (NORM),” 1st ed., October 2000, Canadian Ministry of Health, Minister of
   Public Works and Government Services Canada. Ottawa.

Helsinki Commission (HELCOM). 1997. Recommendation 18/2: “Offshore Activities.” Helsinki.

Hildebrand, J. A. 2004. “Impacts of Anthropogenic Sound on Cetaceans.” IWC SC/E/13. Scripps
    Institution of Oceanography, University of California–San Diego,
    http://www.anp.gov.br/brnd/round9/round9/guias_R9sismica_R9/Bibliografia/Hildebrand%202004%20
    -%20Impacts%20of%20Anthropogenic%20Sound%20on%20Cetaceans.pdf.

———. 2005. “Impacts of Anthropogenic Sound.” In Marine Mammal Research: Conservation beyond
  Crisis, edited by J. E. Reynolds et al., 101–124. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

                                                  33
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




International Association of Geophysical Contractors (IAGC). 2001. Environmental Manual for Worldwide
    Geophysical Operations. Houston, TX.

———. 2011. “Recommended Mitigation Measures for Cetaceans during Geophysical Operations.”
  Houston, TX.

———. 2012. “MARPOL 73/78, Consolidated Edition 2012.” London.

International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP). 2002a. “Aromatics in Produced Water:
    Occurrence, Fate and Effects, and Treatment.” Report No. 324. London.

———. 2002b. “Oil and Gas Exploration and Production in Arctic Offshore Regions—Guidelines for
  Environmental Protection.” Report No. 2.84/329. London.

———. 2005. “Fate and Effects of Naturally Occurring Substances in Produced Waters on the Marine
  Environment.” Report No. 364. London.

———. 2006. “Guidelines for Managing Marine Risks Associated with FPSOs.” Report No. 377. London.

———. 2008a. “Guidelines for the Management of Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material (NORM) in
  the Oil and Gas Industry.” Report No. 412. London.

———. 2008b. “Guidelines for Waste Management with Special Focus on Areas with Limited
  Infrastructure.” Report No. 413. Rev I.I (updated March 2009). London.

———. 2011a. “Deepwater Wells: Global Industry Response Group Recommendations.” Report No. 463.
  May 2011. London.

———. 2011b. “Capping and Containment. Global Industry Response Group Recommendations.” Report
  No. 464. London.

———. 2011c. “Oil Spill Response. Global Industry Response Group Recommendations.” Report No.
  465. London.

———. 2012a. “Environmental Performance Indicators, 2011 Data.” Report No. 2011e. London.

———. 2012b. “List of Standards and Guidelines for Drilling, Well Construction and Well Operations.”
  Report No. 485, version 1.1. London.

———. 2012c. “Offshore Environmental Monitoring for the Oil and Gas Industry.” Report No. 457, version
  1. London.

———. 2013a. “Guidelines for the Conduct of Offshore Drilling Hazard Site Surveys.” Report No. 373-18-
  1, version 1.1. London.

———. 2013b. “OGP Safety Performance Indicators – 2012 Data.” Report No. 2012s, IOGP Data Series.
  London.

———. 2013c “Good Practice Guidelines for the Development of Shale Oil and Gas.” Report No. 489.
  London.


                                                 34
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                             June 5, 2015




International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP) and International Association of Geophysical
    Contractors (IAGC). 2004. “Seismic Surveys and Marine Mammals. A Joint OGP/IAGC Position
    Paper.” Report No. 358. London and Houston, TX.

International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP) and International Petroleum Industry
    Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA). 2013. “Oil Spill Risk Assessment and Response
    Planning for Offshore Installations: Final Report.” IPIECA-OGP Oil Spill Response Joint Industry
    Project. London. http://oilspillresponseproject.org/.

International Association of Geophysical Contractors (IAGC) and International Association of Oil and Gas
    Producers (IOGP). 2011. “An Overview of Marine Seismic Operations “, Joint IOGP/IAGC Position
    Paper. Houston, TX, and London.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). 2012. “Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6. Regulation for
    the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material.” 2012 ed., Specific Safety Requirements. Vienna

———. 2013. “Management of NORM Residues.” IAEA–TECDOC series. ISSN 1011-4289, No. 1712.
  Vienna.

International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). 2007. “The 2007 Recommendations of the
    International Commission on Radiological Protection.” ICRP Publication 103, Ann. ICRP 37 (2-4).
    Ottawa. http://www.icrp.org/publication.asp?id=ICRP+Publication+103.

International Maritime Organization (IMO). 1990. “International        Convention    on   Oil   Pollution,
    Preparedness, Response and Cooperation.” London.

———. 1989. “Guidelines and Standards for the Removal of Offshore Installations and Structures on the
  Continental Shelf and in the Exclusive Economic Zone.” Resolution A.672 (16). London,

———. 2003. “Guidelines for Application of MARPOL Annex I Requirements to FPSOs and FSUs.”
  MEPC/Circ.406. London.

———. 2005-2006. IMO Resolutions MEPC, 139(53), 2005, as amended by MEPC, 142(54), 2006.
  London.

International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA). 2008. Guide to
    Tiered Preparedness and Response. Vol. 8 of Oil Spill Preparedness and Response. London.
    http://www.ipieca.org/.

International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA), International Maritime
    Organization (IMO), and International Association of Oil and Gas Producers (IOGP). 2012. Sensitivity
    Mapping for Oil Spill Response. London, UK: IPIECA. http://www.ipieca.org/.

Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC). 2010. “JNCC Guidelines for Minimizing the Risk of Injury
    and Disturbance to Marine Mammals from Seismic Surveys.” Joint Nature Conservation Committee,
    Aberdeen, UK.

Joint Industry Oil Spill Preparedness and Response Task Force (JIFT). 2012. “Second Progress Report
    on Industry Recommendations to Improve Oil Spill Preparedness and Response.” JIFT.



                                                  35
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




McCauley, R. D., J. Fewtrell, A. J. Duncan, C. Jenner, M-N. Jenner, J. D. Penrose, R. I. T. Prince, A.
   Adhitya, J. Murdoch, and K. McCabe. 2000. “Marine Seismic Surveys. A Study of Environmental
   Implications.” APPEA Journal 20: 692–708.

McGinnis, Michael V., Linda Fernandez, and Caroline Pomeroy. 2001. “The Politics, Economics, and
   Ecology of Decommissioning Offshore Oil and Gas Structures.” OCS Study MMS 2001-006. Coastal
   Research Center, Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, California.
   Cooperative Agreement Number 14-35-0001-30761.

Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. As adjusted and amended by the
   Second Meeting of the Parties (London, 27–29 June 1990), and by the Fourth Meeting of the Parties
   (Copenhagen, 23–25 November 1992), and further adjusted by the Seventh Meeting of the Parties
   (Vienna, 5–7 December 1995), and further adjusted and amended by the Ninth Meeting of the Parties
   (Montreal, 15–17 September 1997), and by the Eleventh Meeting of the Parties (Beijing, 29
   November–3 December 1999), and further adjusted by the Nineteenth Meeting of the Parties
   (Montreal, 17–21 September 2007). http://ozone.unep.org/new_site/en/montreal_protocol.php.

Mosbech, A., R. Dietz, and J. Nymand. 2000. “Preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment of Regional
   Offshore Seismic Surveys in Greenland: Arktisk Miljø - Arctic Environment.” Research Notes from
   NERI No. 132, 2nd ed., National Environmental Research Institute, Denmark.

National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and National Research Council of the National Academies
    (NRCNA). 2011. Macondo Well–Deepwater Horizon Blowout: Lessons for Improving Offshore Drilling
    Safety. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2011.

National Research Council (NRC). 2005. Oil Spill Dispersants: Efficacy and Effects. Washington, DC:
    National Academies Press.

———. 2014. Responding to Oil Spills in the U.S. Arctic Marine Environment. Washington, DC: National
  Academies Press. NORSOK Standards. 2004. “Well Integrity in Drilling and Well Operations.” D-010,
  rev. 3. Oslo: Standards Norway.

———. 2005. “Environmental Care.” S-003, rev. 3, Standards Norway, NORSOK.

Norwegian Oil and Gas Association (NOGA). 2013. “Recommended Guidelines for Waste Management in
   the Offshore Industry.” No. 093, rev. 02. Sandnes, Norway.

Oil and Gas UK. Updated November 2009. “About the Industry,”
     http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk/knowledgecentre/atmospheric_emissions.cfm.

“Oslo-Paris Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic.”
   http://www.ospar.org. Last updated in 2007.

OSPAR Commission (OSPAR). 1998. “Decision 98/3 on the Disposal of Disused Offshore Installation.”
   London.

———. 2000. “Decision 2000/3 on the Use of Organic-Phase Drilling Fluids (OPF) and the Discharge of
  OPF-Contaminated Cuttings.” London.

———. 2001. The Environmental Aspects of On- and Off-Site Injection of Drill Cuttings and Produced
  Water.” Best Available Technique (BAT) and Best Environmental Practice (BEP) Series. London.

                                                 36
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




———. 2002. “Guidelines for the Consideration of the Best Environmental Option for the Management of
  OPF-Contaminated Cuttings Residue.” Reference number 2002-8. London.

———. 2004. “Guidelines for Monitoring the Environmental Impact of Offshore Oil and Gas Activities.”
  Reference number 2004-11. London.

———. 2010a. “Recommendation 2010/4 on a Harmonised Pre-Screening Scheme for Offshore
  Chemicals.” OSPAR 10/23/1, annex 10. London.

———. 2010b. “Recommendation 2010/18 on the Prevention of Significant Acute Oil Pollution from
  Offshore Activities.” London.

———. 2011. “Recommendation 2011/8 Amending OSPAR Recommendation 2001/1 for the
  Management of Produced Water from Offshore Installations as Amended.” London.

Patin, Stanislav. 1999. Environmental Impact of the Offshore Oil and Gas Industry. East Northport, NY:
    EcoMonitor Publishing.

Peterson, David. 2004. “Background Briefing Paper for a Workshop on Seismic Survey Operations:
    Impacts on Fish, Fisheries, Fishers and Aquaculture.” Prepared for the British Columbia Seafood
    Alliance, Vancouver.

Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment (PAME). 2009. “Arctic Offshore Oil and Gas Guidelines.”
    Produced by PAME Working Group, Iceland. www.pame.is.

Russell, R. W. 2005. “Interactions between Migrating Birds and Offshore Oil and Gas Platforms in the
   Northern Gulf of Mexico: Final Report.” OCS Study MMS 2005-009, US Dept. of the Interior, Minerals
   Management Service, Gulf of Mexico OCS Region, New Orleans, LA.

Transportation Research Board of the National Academies (TRBNA). 2012. “Evaluating the Effectiveness
    of Offshore Safety and Environmental Management Systems.” Special Report 309, TRBNA,
    Washington

U.S. Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (US BSEE). 2009. “Notice to Lessees and
    Operators (NTL) No. 2009-G35; Sub-Seabed Disposal and Offshore Storage of Solid Wastes.”
    Washington, DC.

———. 2013a. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 30: Mineral Resources. Part 250: Oil and Gas
  and Sulfur Operations in the Outer Continental Shelf. Subpart C: Pollution Prevention and Control.”
  Washington, DC.

———. 2013b. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 30: Mineral Resources. Part 250: Oil and Gas
  and Sulfur Operations in the Outer Continental Shelf. Subpart D: Oil and Gas Drilling Operations.”
  Washington, DC.

———. 2013c. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 30: Mineral Resources. Part 250: Oil and Gas
  and Sulfur Operations in the Outer Continental Shelf. Subpart K: Oil and Gas Production
  Requirements.” Washington, DC.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 2000. “Sector Notebook Project: Profile of the Oil and
    Gas Extraction Industry.” EPA/310-R-99-006, EPA Office of Compliance, EPA, Washington, DC.

                                                 37
                            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                            OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                            June 5, 2015




———. 2011. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 49: Part 173. Subpart H [Reserved] Subpart I—
  Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials, 173. 427: Transport Requirements for Low Specific Activity (LSA)
  Class 7 (Radioactive) Materials and Surface Contaminated Object (SCO).” 10–1–11 ed., EPA,
  Washington, DC.

———. 2012a. “Fact Sheet: Proposed National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”)
  General Permit No. CAG280000 for Offshore Oil and Gas Exploration, Development and Production
  Operations off Southern California.” EPA, Washington, DC.

———. 2012b. “User’s Guide for T.E.S.T. (version 4.1) (Toxicity Estimation Software Tool)” A Program to
  Estimate Toxicity from Molecular Structure.” Washington, DC.

———. 2013a. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).Title 40: Protection of Environment. Part 435. Oil and
  Gas Extraction Point Source Category; Subpart A—Offshore Subcategory.” Washington, DC.

———. 2013b. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).Title 40: Protection of Environment Part 60.
  Standards of Performance for New Stationary Sources. Subpart GG—Standards of Performance for
  Stationary Gas Turbines.” Washington, DC.

———. 2013c. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 40: Protection of Environment. Part 63. National
  Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Categories. Subpart Y—National
  Emission Standards for Marine Tank Vessel Loading Operations.” Washington, DC.

———. 2013d. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 40: Protection of Environment. Part 63.
  National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Categories. Subpart HH—
  National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants from Oil and Natural Gas Production
  Facilities.” Washington, DC.

———. 2013e. “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Title 40: Protection of Environment. Part 98.
  Mandatory Greenhouse Gas Reporting Subpart W—Petroleum and Natural Gas Systems.”
  Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2004. A Voluntary Standard for Global Gas Flaring and Venting Reduction. Global Gas
   Flaring    Reduction:   Public-Private   Partnership.  Report    No.    4.   Washington,      DC.
   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2004/05/4946640/voluntary-standard-global-gas-flaring-
   venting-reduction.




                                                 38
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




ANNEX A. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRY ACTIVITIES
145. The primary products of the offshore oil and gas industry are crude oil, natural gas liquids, and
natural gas. Crude oil consists of a mixture of hydrocarbons having varying molecular weights and
properties. Natural gas can be produced from oil wells, or wells can be drilled with natural gas as the
primary objective. Methane is the predominant component of natural gas, but ethane, propane, and
butane can also be significant components. The heavier components, including propane and butane,
exist as liquids when cooled and compressed, and these are often separated and processed as natural
gas liquids.

A.1     Exploration Activities

Seismic Surveys

146. Seismic surveys are conducted to pinpoint potential hydrocarbon reserves in geological formations
deep below the seafloor. Seismic technology uses the reflection of sound waves to identify subsurface
formations. In modern marine seismic surveys, as many as 16 “streamers” (cables containing the
hydrophones used to detect the sound reflected from the subsurface) are towed behind the seismic
vessel, at a depth of 5 to 10 meters. Each cable can be as long as 8 to 10 kilometers. In addition to the
hydrophone array, the vessel tows seismic source arrays comprising a number of airguns, which
discharge sound bursts of 200–250 decibels downward. The sound bursts, repeated on average every 6
to 10 seconds, are reflected off deep geological formations and recorded by the hydrophone array.

Exploration Drilling

147. Exploratory drilling activities offshore follow the analysis of seismic data to verify and quantify the
amount and extent of oil and gas resources from potentially productive geological formations. If oil or gas
is encountered, then additional development drilling may be undertaken.

148. There are various types of offshore drilling rigs, including the following:

       •    Jack-up rigs: Suitable for shallower water up to around 100 m and transported to location,
            either under their own propulsion or towed by tugs. Once there, electric or hydraulic jacks
            lower three or four legs to the seafloor to support the drilling platform above water.
       •    Semisubmersible rigs: Suitable for deep waters and transported to location, either under their
            own propulsion or towed by tugs. The hull is partially submerged and the rig held in place by a
            series of anchors; it may have dynamic positioning assistance.
       •    Submersible rigs: Limited to shallow waters and towed onto location. Consisting of two hulls:
            an upper hull, or platform, and lower hull that is filled with water and submerged to the
            seafloor.
       •    Drilling barges as floating platforms: Suitable for shallow waters, estuarine areas, lakes,
            marshes, swamps, and rivers. Not suitable for open or deep water. Towed onto location.
       •    Drillships: Designed for drilling in deep water locations. Drilling takes place from a drilling
            platform and derrick positioned in the middle of the deck, from which drill stems are lowered
            through a hole in the hull (moonhole). Drillships are usually kept “on station” by means of
            dynamic positioning technology.

                                                      39
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                               June 5, 2015




149. Once on location, a series of well sections of decreasing diameter are drilled from the rig. A drill bit,
attached to the drill string suspended from the rig’s derrick, is rotated in the well. Drill collars are attached
to add weight and drilling fluids are circulated through the drill string and pumped through the drill bit. The
fluid has a number of functions. It imparts hydraulic force that assists the drill bit cutting action, and it
cools the bit, removes rock cuttings from the wellbore, and protects the well against formation pressures.
When each well section has been drilled, steel casing is run into the hole and cemented into place to
prevent well collapse, fluid slips, and anomalous pressures in the annulus. If hydrocarbons are
discovered in quantities that allow them to be economically produced, a wellhead and a “Christmas tree”
are installed to allow for future production. Otherwise, the well is plugged (with cement) and abandoned.
When the targeted hydrocarbon-bearing formation is reached, the well may be completed and tested by
running a production liner and equipment to flow the hydrocarbons to the surface in an effort to establish
reservoir properties in a test separator.

A.2     Field Development

150. Field development may occur after exploration (and additional appraisal well drilling) has located and
confirmed economically recoverable reserves of hydrocarbons. In many cases, this will involve the
installation of an offshore drilling and production platform that is self-sufficient in terms of energy and
water needs for the workforce and for drilling wells and processing hydrocarbons ready for export.

151. There are many types of offshore platforms, including the following:

        • Fixed platforms: Used in water depths of up to around 500 m and consisting of steel or
          concrete legs (jacket), secured directly to the seabed by steel piles that support a steel deck.
          Drilling equipment, production facilities, and accommodation are typically housed on the deck.
        • Compliant towers: Used in water depths ranging from around 500 m up to 1,000 m and
          consisting of a narrow, flexible tower on a piled foundation supporting a conventional deck.
        • Tension leg platforms: Used in water depths of up to about 2,000 m and consisting of a
          floating facility moored to the seabed and fixed in place by anchors. Minitension leg platforms
          (Seastars) are used in water depths of between 200 m and 1,000 m.
        • Jack-up platforms: Used in shallower water up to around 100 m and transported to location,
          where the legs are lowered by hydraulic jacks into position to support the deck.
        • Spar platforms: Used in water depths of between 500 m and 1,700 m and consisting of a
          cylindrical hull supporting a floating platform.
        • Floating production systems: Ships equipped with processing facilities and moored on location
          with a series of anchors or by global positioning system devices. Sometimes based on a
          converted oil tanker, the main types of floating production systems are Floating, Production,
          Storage, and Offloading (FPSO) systems; Floating, Storage, and Offloading (FSO) systems;
          and Floating Storage Units.

152. Production platforms will provide facilities for the separation of formation fluids into oil, gas, and
water. Depending on the project, the platform may be used only for production, as drilling can be
conducted from a separate drilling rig brought alongside. Some platforms are used only to bring the
hydrocarbons to surface and directly export them for processing, while some gas platforms may be
unmanned during routine production operations. Typically, multiple wells are drilled from the platform

                                                       40
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




location using directional drilling techniques. In some cases, where field extremities not reachable by
directional drilling from the fixed location or where small reservoirs exist, subsea production units are
installed on the seabed following drilling and the produced hydrocarbons are tied into a nearby platform
facility by a system of risers.

153. Following development drilling and well completion in readiness for the flow of formation fluids, a
“Christmas tree,” which allows the control of flow to the surface, is placed onto the wellhead. The oil
and/or gas are produced by separation of the formation fluid mixture into oil and gas and water, or gas
and condensates at the platform. Oil is exported from the platform by pumping it into a subsea pipeline to
shore, to a floating storage unit offshore, or directly to a tanker. Typically, gas is exported through a
pipeline.

154. Most fields produce in a predictable pattern, called a decline curve, in which production increases
relatively rapidly to a peak and then follows a long, slow decline. Water or gas injection is often used to
maintain reservoir pressure and enhance production. In other cases, Enhanced Oil Recovery
techniques—such as the injection of steam, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, or surfactants—may be used to
enhance recovery.

155. Operators may periodically perform work-overs to clean out the wellbore, allowing oil or gas to move
easily to the surface. Other measures to increase production include fracturing and treating the bottom of
the wellbore with acid to create better pathways allowing oil and gas to move to the surface.

A.3        Hydraulic Fracturing

156. Hydraulic fracturing of hydrocarbon-containing subsurface strata is a technique for realizing and
maximizing commercial gas and oil production from low permeability reservoirs. This technique is
applicable to onshore and offshore locations. Though recently becoming controversial, fracking has been
used on a smaller scale for many years to improve the flow from conventional oil and gas wells. Today,
hydraulic fracturing is largely applied onshore, with some applicability in offshore fields. Differences exist
between the technical arrangements adopted offshore with respect to onshore; however, it typically
involves injecting, through the wellhead, some thousands of cubic meters of water mixed with sand and
fractional amounts of chemical additives; different fluids can also be used, such as hydrocarbons or
gases (N2, CO2) and foams. The injection pressure is a function of the well depth and the rock
characteristics. The average composition of the injected mixture is 90 to 95 percent water, 4.5 to 9.5
percent sand, and 0.5 percent chemical additives. Additives comprise inorganic or organic acids, gelling
agents, friction reducers, and surfactants. Biocides, scale inhibitors, corrosion inhibitors, and cross-linking
agents may also present in low concentrations. In case of high permeability formations, as it may happen
in some offshore reservoirs, the fracturing fluid will usually be more viscous and have a higher sand
concentration than similar fluids used onshore. Multistage hydraulic fracturing is now a commonly utilized
approach. In some cases, when the target hydrocarbon-producing geological unit comprises loose sand,
a specific technique is applied, referred as “frack pack,” combining fracking with gravel (sand) packing. In
this case, more sand is pumped into the well in order to create a layer of proppant, which reduces or
eliminates the production of sand from the well. 49



49   See also API (2013a).


                                                      41
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT
                              June 5, 2015




A.4     Coalbed Methane

157. Coalbed methane (CBM) is more frequently developed onshore. Limited cases present offshore may
include hydraulic fracturing (see above) to improve production performance. CBM wells are characterized
by high water production, which requires proper treatment systems (a low concentration of oil and grease,
but a possible presence of heavy metals and hydrophilic compounds).

A.5     Storage and Offloading

158. The liquid hydrocarbon phase of produced fluids from a well or group of wells can either be pumped
to shore for processing using flowlines, or treated by offshore production facilities (e.g., treatment
platforms, FPSOs) to create a product suitable for transportation by tanker carriers.

159. The oil produced and treated offshore is temporarily stored in offshore storage facilities before being
transferred to the export tankers. Storage can occur in underwater cylinders, anchored to the structure of
gravity platforms, or, more frequently, oil is stored in a permanently (or semipermanently) moored vessel
of substantial capacity (150,000–250,000 tons of displacement). From there, the stabilized oil is
transferred to the export tanker carriers at regular intervals, according to the field production profile and
storage capacity of the facility.

160. Offloading operations (i.e., the transfer from the offshore storage system to the export tankers) may
include oil spill risks that should be assessed and minimized. Risks for floating production storage and
offloading vessels can be related to the simultaneous operations of oil treatment and product storage.
The marine conditions present additional risks; for instance, in typhoon areas, potential collisions between
the FSO/FPSO and the export carriers. Preventing ruptures in the large-diameter export tanker loading
hoses also warrants a high degree of attention.

A.6     Decommissioning and Abandonment

161. The decommissioning of offshore facilities occurs when the reservoir is depleted or the production of
hydrocarbons from that reservoir becomes unprofitable. Parts of the offshore facility, such as platforms,
are treated to remove contaminants and are themselves usually removed, while other production
components are rendered safe and left in place.

162. Wells are plugged and abandoned to prevent fluid migration within the wellbore, which could
contaminate the surface environment. The downhole equipment is removed and the perforated parts of
the wellbore are cleaned of sediment, scale, and other debris. The wellbore is then plugged to prevent the
inflow of fluids. Fluids with an appropriate density are placed between the plugs to maintain adequate
pressure. During this process, the plugs are tested to verify their correct placement and integrity. Finally,
the casing is cut off below the surface and capped.




                                                     42
