                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                 February 12, 2015




    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR
        VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
INTRODUCTION
1. The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) Guidelines are technical reference documents with
general and industry-specific examples of Good International Industry Practice (GIIP). 1 When one or
more members of the World Bank Group are involved in a project, these EHS Guidelines are applied as
required by their respective policies and standards. These industry sector EHS Guidelines are designed
to be used together with the General EHS Guidelines document, which provides guidance to users on
common EHS issues potentially applicable to all industry sectors. For complex projects, use of multiple
industry-sector guidelines may be necessary. A complete list of industry-sector guidelines can be found at
www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.

2. The EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and measures that are generally considered to
be achievable in new facilities by existing technology at reasonable costs. Application of the EHS
Guidelines to existing facilities may involve the establishment of site-specific targets, with an appropriate
timetable for achieving them.

3. The applicability of the EHS Guidelines should be tailored to the hazards and risks established for
each project on the basis of the results of an environmental assessment in which site-specific variables,
such as host country context, assimilative capacity of the environment, and other project factors, are
taken into account. The applicability of specific technical recommendations should be based on the
professional opinion of qualified and experienced persons.

4. When host country regulations differ from the levels and measures presented in the EHS Guidelines,
projects are expected to achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or measures than
those provided in these EHS Guidelines are appropriate, in view of specific project circumstances, a full
and detailed justification for any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental
assessment. This justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is
protective of human health and the environment.

APPLICABILITY
5. The EHS Guidelines for Vegetable Oil Production and Processing are applicable to facilities that
extract and process oils and fats from a variety of seeds, grains, and nuts; these include canola, castor,
cottonseed, mustard, olive, palm, palm-kernel, peanut (groundnut), rapeseed, safflower, sesame,
soybean, and sunflower. Additionally covered are crude oil production and refining processes, from the
preparation of raw materials to the bottling and packaging of final products for human or animal

1 Defined as the exercise of professional skill, diligence, prudence, and foresight that would be reasonably expected
from skilled and experienced professionals engaged in the same type of undertaking, under the same or similar
circumstances globally. The circumstances that skilled and experienced professionals may find when evaluating the
range of pollution prevention and control techniques available to a project may include, but are not limited to, varying
levels of environmental degradation and environmental assimilative capacity, as well as varying levels of financial and
technical feasibility.

                                                           1
                                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                             VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                             February 12, 2015




consumption. These EHS Guidelines do not however apply to the production of biofuels. Annex A
contains a full description of industry activities for this sector. The production of oilseeds, beans, and oil
palm fresh fruit bunches is covered by the EHS Guidelines for Annual Crop Production and the EHS
Guidelines for Perennial Crop Production.

This document is organized in the following manner:

      1. Industry-Specific Impacts and Management ............................................................................. 2
         1.1 Environment............................................................................................................................. 2
         1.2 Occupational Health and Safety .............................................................................................. 8
         1.3 Community Health and Safety ............................................................................................... 12
      2. Performance Indicators Monitoring ......................................................................................... 13
         2.1 Environment........................................................................................................................... 13
         2.2 Occupational Health and Safety ............................................................................................ 14
      3. References ................................................................................................................................. 17
      Annex A.General Description of Industry Activities .................................................................... 20



1. INDUSTRY-SPECIFIC IMPACTS AND MANAGEMENT
6. The following section provides a summary of EHS issues associated with vegetable oil production
and processing that arise during the operations phase, along with recommendations for their
management. Recommendations for the management of EHS issues common to most large industrial
facilities during the construction and decommissioning phases are provided in the General EHS
Guidelines.

1.1       Environment

7. Environmental issues associated with the operational phase of vegetable oil production and
processing primarily include the following:

        • Solid waste and by-products
        • Water consumption and management
        • Energy consumption and management
        • Atmospheric emissions
        • Greenhouse gas emissions
        • Hazardous materials

1.1.1     Solid Waste and By-Products

8. Vegetable oil processing activities generate significant quantities of organic solid waste, residues
and by-products, such as empty fruit bunches (EFBs) and waste palm kernels from palm oil processing or
olive oil cake and pulp from olive processing. The amount of waste generated depends on the quality of
the raw materials and on process efficiency. Wastes, residues, and by-products may be used for
producing commercially viable by-products or for energy generation. Other solid wastes from the
vegetable oil manufacturing process include soap stock and spent acids from chemical refining of crude

                                                                                  2
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                              February 12, 2015




oil; spent bleaching earth containing gums, metals, and pigments; deodorizer distillate from the steam
distillation of refined edible oils; mucilage from degumming; and spent catalysts and filtering aid from the
hardening process.

9. Recommended techniques for minimizing the volume of solid waste and by-products for disposal
include the following:

      • Reduce product losses through better production/storage control (e.g., monitor and adjust air
        humidity to prevent product losses caused by the formation of molds on edible materials).
      • Collect residues from the raw material preparation phase for conditioning (drying) and
        reprocessing (grinding) to yield by-products (e.g., animal feed).
      • Return waste and residues to fields to assist in soil nutrient management; for example, EFBs
        from oil palm plantations with tree trimmings are a valuable soil amendment and/or can be
        composted with vegetable oil wastewater effluent.
      • Use waste and residues for energy generation in the project plant’s boiler(s). Note, however, that
        relatively high atmospheric emissions (such as particulate emissions (PM)) are possible when
        burning crop residues, and potential fire risks (e.g., from combustible dust) may arise from
        handling, storing, and processing crop residues; as such, expert advice on fuel characteristics
        and boiler design should be solicited when planning to use biofuels in this manner.
      • Investigate the following options for the responsible disposal of spent bleaching earth:
             o Use as fertilizer, if not contaminated with heavy metals such as nickel, pesticide residues,
               or other contaminants.
             o Recover non-food-grade oils from spent bleaching earth that could be used in other
               applications (feedstock for conversion to biodiesel or in bio-lubricants).
             o Avoid direct recycling on agricultural land. Add spent earth to other organic waste and
               compost to avoid contact with air and risk of spontaneous combustion of spent bleaching
               earth.
             o If contaminated, manage according to the waste management guidance presented in the
               General EHS Guidelines.
             o Consider use as a feedstock for brick, block, and cement manufacturing.
      • Investigate the following options for the use of distillates (e.g., free fatty acids and volatile
        organic compounds (VOCs)), depending on the level of contaminants (pesticides and/or
        residues):
             o Use free fatty acid as animal feed if uncontaminated.
             o Apply as a feedstock for chemical industry processes (e.g., antioxidants).
             o Use as fuel for energy production.
      • The nickel catalyst from hydrogenation should be either:
             o recycled and recovered for reuse as a nickel catalyst or as nickel metal, salt, or other
               application, or
             o stored and disposed of according to the hazardous waste management guidance
               presented in the General EHS Guidelines.



                                                     3
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                 February 12, 2015




        • Manage filtering aid mixed with nickel in accordance with the recommendations for nickel
          catalyst.
        • Use uncontaminated sludge and effluent from on-site wastewater treatment as fertilizer in
          agricultural applications or as a supplemental boiler fuel. Recommendations for the management
          of EHS issues common to sludge and effluent are provided in the General EHS Guidelines and
          in the Water and Sanitation EHS Guidelines. Dispose of contaminated sludge from
          wastewater treatment at a sanitary landfill or by incineration. Incineration should only be
          conducted in permitted facilities operating under internationally recognized standards for
          pollution prevention and control. 2

1.1.2     Water Consumption and Management

10. Vegetable oil facilities require significant amounts of water for crude oil production (cooling water),
chemical neutralization processes, and subsequent washing and deodorization. General
recommendations to reduce water consumption, especially where it may be a limited natural resource,
are provided in the General EHS Guidelines. Sector-specific recommendations to reduce water
consumption, optimize water use efficiency, and reduce subsequent wastewater volumes include the
following:

        • When economically viable, consider the use of physical refining instead of chemical refining to
          reduce water consumption.
        • Replace water-based conveyor systems by mechanical systems (augers or conveyors).
        • Apply Cleaning-in-Place (CIP) procedures to help reduce chemical, water, and energy
          consumption in cleaning operations.
        • Recover and reuse condensate from heating processes.
        • Upgrade equipment water sprays (e.g., to include jets or nozzles).
        • Use dry cleanup techniques before rinsing floors.
        • Manually clean vessels before rinsing to remove solids for recovery or disposal.
        • Use high-pressure, low-volume washing systems, and auto shut-off valves.
        • Vegetable oil processing wastewater generated during oil washing and neutralization may have
          a high content of organic material and, subsequently, a high biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
          and chemical oxygen demand (COD). Wastewater may also have a high content of suspended
          solids, organic nitrogen, and oil and fat, and may contain pesticide residues from the treatment
          of the raw materials. Recommended measures to reduce contaminant loading include the
          following: install spill collection trays to collect solids at appropriate places in the production line;
          use emulsion breaking techniques, (e.g., dissolved air flotation (DAF)), to segregate high BOD
          and COD oils from wastewater.
        • Use grids to cover drains in the production area to prevent solid wastes and concentrated liquids
          from entering the wastewater stream.




2 Examples of key environmental issues associated with incineration facilities are available in the IFC’s EHS

Guidelines for Waste Management Facilities.

                                                         4
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                February 12, 2015




        • Select disinfection chemicals to match the cleaning operation being applied on the process
          equipment to the type of problem. Caustics (e.g., lye) are typically used for polymerized fat, and
          acids are used for lime deposit acids.
        • Apply cleaning chemicals using the correct dose and application method.
        • Properly treat and discharge cleaning solutions (e.g., through a soap-splitting process) to
          separate oil and fatty acids from the water phase and then pass through a fat trap.
        • When appropriate and feasible, reduce phosphoric acid in degumming operations through the
          use of improved neutralization processes or alternative methods, such as enzymatic degumming
          (this reduces the phosphorus load in the wastewater and also brings about a slight reduction in
          sludge quantities).

Process Wastewater Treatment

11. Techniques for treating industrial process wastewater in this sector include: grease traps, skimmers,
or oil water separators for the removal of floatable solids; flow and load equalization; sedimentation for
suspended solids reduction using clarifiers; biological treatment—typically anaerobic, followed by aerobic
treatment—for the reduction of soluble organic matter (BOD); biological nutrient removal for reduction in
nitrogen and phosphorus; chlorination of effluent when disinfection is required; and dewatering and
disposal of residuals. In some instances, composting or land application of wastewater treatment
residuals of acceptable quality may be possible. Additional engineering controls may be required to
contain and neutralize nuisance odors.

12. The management of industrial wastewater and examples of treatment approaches are discussed in
the General EHS Guidelines. By employing these technologies and good practice techniques for
wastewater management, including a regular program of maintenance, facilities should meet the
Guideline Values for wastewater discharge as indicated in the relevant table of Section 2 of this industry
sector document.

Other Wastewater Streams

13. Guidance on the management of non-contaminated wastewater from utility operations, non-
contaminated stormwater, and sanitary sewage is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.
Contaminated streams should be routed to the treatment system for industrial process wastewater.

1.1.3     Energy Consumption and Management

14. Vegetable oil processing facilities use energy to heat water and produce steam both for process
applications (especially for soap splitting and deodorization) and cleaning processes. Other common
energy consumption systems include refrigeration and compressed air. In addition to the energy
conservation recommendations provided in the General EHS Guidelines, sector-specific
recommendations include the following:

        • Improve uniformity of feed to stabilize and reduce energy requirements.
        • Increase efficiency of air removal in sterilization vessels to improve heat transfer.




                                                        5
                                    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                    VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                    February 12, 2015




         • Identify and implement opportunities for process heat exchange; e.g., optimized oil-oil heat
           exchangers in continuous deodorization.
         • Reduce stripping steam consumption by improving process efficiency; e.g., improve stripping
           tray design. Where possible, consider technologies such as dry ice condensing systems that
           may lower energy consumption.
         • Consider co-generation (combined heat and power (CHP)) to improve energy efficiency.
         • Consider more advanced approaches—such as the use of enzymes—for processes such as
           degumming and oil recovery.
         • Where feasible, use anaerobic digestion for wastewater treatment and capture methane for heat
           and / or power production.

1.1.4      Atmospheric Emissions

Process Emissions

15. Particulate matter (dust) and VOCs are the principal emissions from vegetable oil production and
processing. Dust results from the processing, including cleaning, screening, and crushing, of raw
materials, whereas VOC emissions are caused by the use of oil-extraction solvents, normally hexane. 3
Several sources within vegetable oil processing plants generate solvent emissions, including the solvent-
recovery unit, the meal dryer and cooler, leaks in piping and vents, and product storage. Additional
emissions will result from the refining process if a fractionation method is used. Small quantities of solvent
may be present in the crude vegetable oil if the oil has been extracted by a solvent and will volatilize
during the oil refining process, particularly during deodorization. Odor emissions are produced by multiple
sources (e.g., cookers, soap splitting, and vacuum generation).

16. Recommended management techniques to prevent and control VOCs include the following:

         • Process improvements, for example:
                 o Optimize recovery of solvents by distilling the oil from the extractor.
                 o Back-vent to the solvent delivery tanks during bulk storage tank filling.
                 o Improve exhaust air collection systems.
                 o Implement leak prevention systems.
         • Adoption of abatement technologies:
                 o Recover solvent vapors where feasible, primarily through the use of countercurrent flow
                   desolventizer–toaster in vegetable oil extraction.
                 o Use a condenser, a reboiler, and a gravity separator to treat condensates with high
                   solvent content, to reduce both solvent emissions and the risk of explosions in the sewer.
                 o Treat hexane-laden air from the condenser/reboiler process with a mineral oil scrubber.
                 o Consider cryogenic condensation in the solvent fractionation process. Best practice
                   approaches use a closed loop process in which 99.9 percent of the solvent input is
                   reused.


3   Hexane is classified as a hazardous air pollutant in some jurisdictions.

                                                              6
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                               February 12, 2015




        • Additional recommendations for the prevention and control of VOC emissions are presented in
          the General EHS Guidelines.

17. The recommended management techniques to prevent and control dust and odors include the
following:

        • Ensure proper maintenance of cleaning, screening, and crushing equipment—including in any
          ventilation and air handling systems—to reduce emissions of fugitive dust, and avoid the use of
          compressed air or steam for cleaning.
        • Install cyclones and/or fabric filters or electrostatic precipitators on selected vents—including
          meal dryers, coolers, and grinders—to remove odor emissions.
        • Reduce odor emissions (e.g., from soap splitting, cookers in the extraction process, vacuum
          systems, and pressurized systems) with a caustic, alkaline, or ozone scrubber system, or
          incinerate the gas in a boiler plant or in separate incinerator systems.

Combustion Products

18. Vegetable oil processing plants are large energy consumers, making use of auxiliary boilers for the
generation of steam energy. Emissions related to the operation of these steam energy sources typically
consist of combustion by-products, such as NOx, SOx, PM, VOCs, and greenhouse gases (CO2).
Recommended management strategies include adoption of a combined strategy, which involves a
reduction in energy demand, use of cleaner fuels, and the application of emissions controls, where
required. Recommendations on energy efficiency are addressed in the General EHS Guidelines.

19. Guidance for the management of small combustion source emissions with a capacity of up to 50
megawatt thermal (MWth), including exhaust emission guidelines, is provided in the General EHS
Guidelines. Guidance applicable to combustion sources with a capacity greater than 50 MWth is
presented in the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power.

1.1.5     Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GHG)

20. Vegetable oil processing produces GHG emissions through the use of fossil energy. Projects should
manage energy use in accordance with the General EHS Guidelines.

21. The high nutrient loading of wastewater can be a source of methane (CH4) when treated or disposed
of anaerobically. It can also be a source of nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions associated with the degradation
of nitrogen components in the wastewater (e.g., urea, nitrate, and protein). Recommended measures to
prevent and control non-fossil-fuel-related GHG emissions include:

        • Avoid open anaerobic conditions for wastewater treatment by ensuring a regular program of
          operational maintenance in the wastewater treatment system.
        • Consider biological methods of wastewater treatment, such as anaerobic digestion and methane
          capture; use of waste effluent for irrigation; co-composting of by-products, where appropriate
          (e.g., oil palm empty fruit bunches with palm oil mill effluent nutrient waste or olive mill waste
          residue with wastewater); and detoxification by nitrogen fixation.



                                                      7
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                February 12, 2015




1.1.6     Hazardous Materials

22. Vegetable oil processing involves the transport, storage, and use of bulk quantities of acids, alkalis,
solvents, and hydrogen during extraction and refining. Their transport, storage, and handling provide
opportunities for spills or other types of releases with potentially negative impacts on soil and water
resources. Their flammability and other potentially hazardous characteristics also present a risk of fire and
explosions. Hazardous materials should be managed according to the guidance presented in the General
EHS Guidelines.

1.2       Occupational Health and Safety

23. Occupational health and safety impacts during the construction and decommissioning of vegetable
oil processing plants are common to those of most large industrial facilities and their prevention and
control are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines. Occupational health and safety issues during the
operational phase include:

        • Chemical hazards
        • Physical hazards
               o Confined space entry
               o Electrical hazards
               o Risk of fire and explosion
               o Noise

1.2.1     Chemical Hazards

24. Operators in vegetable oil facilities may be exposed to hazardous substances via, inhalation of
hexane or other solvents used for extraction; inhalation of toxic chemicals (e.g., sodium methylate can
cause burns on the skin and lung tissue if inhaled); eye or skin exposure to acids or bases; inhalation of
dust from the transportation of raw materials (e.g., seeds and beans to the crushing plant); inhalation of
dust from meal treatment and shipment; inhalation of dust from bleaching earth, filter aid, and nickel
catalyst; and inhalation of aflatoxins present in raw materials. The General EHS Guidelines provide
guidance on the management of chemical hazards in the workplace.

25. Additional industry-related recommendations include the following:

        • In oil extraction areas, ensure that there is adequate air circulation to reduce the concentration of
          solvents.
        • Provide ventilation, especially at workstations devoted to raw-material handling, milling, handling
          of bleaching earth, and use of solvents.
        • Maintain air concentrations of VOCs below 10 percent of lower explosive limits. For hexane, the
          lower explosive limit is 1.1 percent volume per volume (v/v) and the upper explosive limit is
          7.5 percent v/v.
        • Ensure proper distillation of oil after extraction for effective solvent removal.
        • Prevent leaks and spills of oils in the extraction plant.


                                                        8
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                February 12, 2015




        • Control the flash-point temperature of the incoming extracted oils and use temperature control
          for all facilities receiving solvent-extracted oils.
        • When feasible, use hot water, rather than solvents, to facilitate cleaning.

1.2.2     Physical Hazards

26. Physical hazards in vegetable oil production and processing facilities are similar to those present in
other industry sectors and include the potential for falls caused by slippery floors and stairs; injuries
caused by unprotected machinery or moving parts; hazards associated with potential collisions with
internal transport, such as trucks; and accidental contact with conveyor systems, such as those used in
crushing plants and in the removal of spent earth. The General EHS Guidelines provide guidance on the
prevention and control of physical hazards.

Confined Space Entry

27. Grain silos present a significant risk of death from asphyxia. Extremely toxic nitrogen oxides and
CO2 begin to accumulate in the head space of the silo within hours of its filling. Tank cars may also
represent asphyxia risks if, for example, a tanker is flushed with nitrogen prior to loading.
Recommendations for the management of occupational health and safety (OHS) risks associated with
confined spaces are provided in the General EHS Guidelines.

Electrical Hazards

28. Electrical systems are a source of danger for workers that can lead to injuries or fatalities. The
General EHS Guidelines provide guidance on hazard prevention and control of electrical systems.
Sector-specific recommendations applicable to silo safety are identified below.

Risk of Fire and Explosion

29. Risks of fire and explosion occur at different stages of vegetable oil production and processing and
can lead to loss of property, as well as possible injury or fatalities among project workers. General fire
safety management should be handled according to the General EHS Guidelines. Sector-specific risks
are related to the combustibility of vegetable oil and the high volumes of combustible dust present both in
grain and oil-seeds handling and in storage facilities. The control and removal of this dust and the control
or removal of potential ignition sources are key to eliminating the explosion hazard. The storage of grains
and seeds represents a combustion risk, owing to the potential for self-heating and ignition. Silo safety for
these products, as well as for oil storage, is critical. Vegetable oil facilities also present the risk of
explosions resulting from the volatilization of solvent dissolved in the oil (e.g., hexane), along with the risk
of fire from spent bleaching earth with a high iodine-value oil, high ambient temperature, and high
circulation-draft of air.




                                                       9
                                ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                February 12, 2015




Combustible Dust and Silo Safety

30. The following measures are recommended as a means of preventing and controlling fires and
explosions from combustible dust: 4

      • Use recognized international standards in design and operation. 5
      • Classify areas according to respective hazard classes following practices and requirements
        found in recognized international standards 6 and deploy intrinsically safe electrical circuits and
        anti-explosion electrical devices (including lighting).
      • Develop and implement a comprehensive maintenance program to avoid dust build-up.
        Compressed air should not be used for cleaning dust due to the risk of raising the dust level in
        the atmosphere; all maintenance equipment, especially welding sets and other electrically driven
        tools, should be regularly inspected and approved for use.
      • Avoid heat sources from friction by adopting appropriate practices or technologies.
      • Control static electricity. For example, elevator belts should be constructed of anti-static material
        or have anti-static properties; during pneumatic transfer of combustible substance, ensure
        electrical bonding and grounding of tanker vehicles to prevent static electricity.
      • Provide proper grounding and lightning protection for silos following internationally recognized
        standards.
      • Control access to areas with a high risk of explosion, e.g., limit access to qualified personnel
        only.
      • Ensure the tipping area is completely enclosed and that the design and maintenance of the grid
        in the tipping area prevent stones and metal from entering.
      • Separate heating systems and surfaces from dust.
      • Deploy dust suppression/control systems in silo elevators and conveyor belts to avoid dust
        accumulation in grain transferring areas; e.g., in tipping areas, a dust control system should be
        used, ideally installed below the grid and above the receiving hopper.
      • Ensure that emergency plans and procedures are developed and understood by staff. Install
        suitable detection equipment in silos, such as temperature sensor cables and gas detectors.
        Spark/heat detectors should be connected to an extinguishing system installed in transport
        systems (belt conveyors, dust extraction systems, etc.) to reduce the risk of ignition.



4 Persson (2013); Krause (2009); France, MEDDAT (2008).
5 E.g., EN 1127-1 Explosive Atmospheres - Explosion Prevention and Protection; EN 13463-1 Non-Electrical
Equipment for Potentially Explosive Atmospheres; NFPA 61: Standard for the Prevention of Fires and Dust
Explosions in Agricultural and Food Processing Facilities, 2013 Edition; NFPA 654 Standard for the Prevention of Fire
and Dust Explosions from the Manufacturing, Processing, and Handling of Combustible Particulate Solids; OSHA 29
CFR 1910.272 Grain Handling Facilities Standard.
https://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9874; Directive 94/9/EC
on Equipment and Protective Systems Intended for Use in Potentially Explosive Atmospheres (ATEX)
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/mechanical/documents/legislation/atex/; Arrêté du 29/03/04 relatif à la
prévention des risques présentés par les silos de céréales, de grains, de produits alimentaires ou de tout autre
produit organique dégageant des poussières inflammables, http://www.ineris.fr/aida/consultation_document/5163.
6 US National Electrical Code.



                                                         10
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                              February 12, 2015




      • Establish a suitable extinguishing operation (e.g., water, foam, inert gas, powder) based on the
        silo construction and bulk material stored. The silo should be prepared with connections or
        openings suitable for the planned method and silo construction; e.g., pipe systems and
        connections should be located at the top of the silo wall if the roof is not considered sufficiently
        strong to withstand an explosion.
      • Consider a separate emergency discharge system (i.e., a separate conveyor at the silo outlet) to
        a safe place outside the silo to reduce risk of fire spreading inside the plant and ensure
        firefighting equipment is present. If ordinary transport systems are to be used for emergency
        discharge, consider chain and screw conveyors to avoid generating heat from friction.
      • Consider a fixed gas fire extinguishing system, adapted to the diameter and construction of the
        silo, to enable a quick and appropriate response to fire.
      • Ensure vessels or tanks have sufficient emergency venting capacity to relieve excessive internal
        pressure in the event of fire; if the silo is contained within a plant, evacuate gases outside

Processing Risks

31. Other fire and explosion risks in vegetable oil processing include flammable atmospheres produced
from hexane leakage, 7 air entrained in the deodorizer at high temperatures, and the potential for auto-
ignition of spent bleaching earth. Where further modification of the processed oil takes place, risks such
as explosions from hydrogen leaks (in the hydrogenation stage) or the production of flammable
substances may be present. The following measures are recommended to prevent and control these
risks: 8

      • Ensure regular and proper maintenance of equipment to avoid leaks.
      • Establish procedures for startup, shutdown, and maintenance, and train personnel to identify air
        leaks and react to the outbreak of fires.
      • Connect a nitrogen supply line to the deodorizer so that the oxygen level can be decreased in
        the event of fire.
      • The deodorizer should be protected from overpressure by a bursting disc and a pressure relief
        valve combination.
      • Store catalyst drums in enclosed, dry areas with grounded electrical connections. Transport
        bags from the drum to the dosing system within a container to avoid contact with moisture. Use
        the complete contents of bags; do not leave contents unused, as this could also cause contact
        with moisture.

Noise

32. Operators in vegetable oil plants are also exposed to noise from internal transport, conveyors,
boilers, pumps, fans, and various steam and air leaks. The General EHS Guidelines provide guidance
on the prevention and control of exposure to noise.

7 E.g., Fediol (2006); Directive 94/9/EC on Equipment and Protective Systems Intended for Use in Potentially
Explosive Atmospheres (ATEX) http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/mechanical/documents/legislation/atex/;
NFPA-36 Solvent Extraction Plants.
8 Hamm, W., R. J. Hamilton, and G. Calliauw (Eds) 2013.



                                                    11
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                 February 12, 2015




1.3      Community Health and Safety

33. Community health and safety impacts during the operation phase of vegetable oil processing are
common to most industry sectors—including those related to traffic safety during transport of raw
materials and finished products—and are discussed in the General EHS Guidelines. Industry-specific
issues that could affect the community or the public at large may include the potential presence of
pathogens and contaminants in processed oil (e.g., pesticide residues).

1.3.1    Food Safety Impacts and Management

34. Food safety is an industry-specific risk relevant to vegetable oil processing. For example, a product
recall caused by contaminated or adulterated products found in commerce that is attributable to a specific
company can damage a viable business. If a company can trace its products back to specific lot numbers,
then a recall is a matter of removing all non-conforming products associated with the specific lot numbers.

35. With a food safety management system in place, the company can protect itself against product
adulteration, contamination, and the impacts of product recalls. Vegetable oil processing should therefore
be performed according to internationally recognized food safety standards consistent with the principles
of Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP), 9 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)/World
Health Organization (WHO) Codex Alimentarius, and ISO 22000. Recommended product safety
principles include the following:

        • Fully institutionalize HACCP prerequisites, including: sanitation, good management practices,
          implementation of integrated pest and vector management programs, and maximization control
          through mechanical means (e.g., traps and mesh on doors and windows), chemical control,
          allergen control, and the establishment of a customer complaints mechanism.
        • Consider enhanced monitoring schemes for dioxin and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls
          (PCBs). 10
        • All personnel should receive training to ensure they are aware of potential microbiological
          contamination and growth during processing, material handling, storage and maintenance
          (e.g., salmonella contamination).
        • Food grade-quality fresh bleaching earth should be used for processing food and feed-grade
          products to avoid risks to public health from food and feed contamination. 11




9 ISO 2005.
10 Fediol 2006.
11 Available at: http://www.acgih.org/TLV/ and http://www.acgih.org/store/



                                                          12
                                       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                       VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                       February 12, 2015




2. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MONITORING
2.1       Environment

2.1.1     Emissions and Effluent Guidelines

36. Tables 1 and 2 present emissions and effluent guidelines for this sector. Guideline values for
process emissions and effluents in this sector are indicative of good international industry practice as
reflected in relevant standards of countries with recognized regulatory frameworks. Effluent guidelines are
applicable to direct discharges of treated effluents to surface waters for general use. Site-specific
discharge levels may be established based on the availability and conditions in use of publicly operated
sewage collection and treatment systems or, if discharged directly to surface waters, based on the
receiving water use classification, as described in the General EHS Guidelines.



        TABLE 1. EFFLUENT GUIDELINES FOR                                  TABLE 2. AIR EMISSIONS GUIDELINES FOR
           VEGETABLE OIL PROCESSING                                            VEGETABLE OIL PROCESSING
                                              GUIDELINE           POLLUTANTS        UNITS               GUIDELINE VALUE
      POLLUTANTS                UNITS          VALUE
                                                                                                          10 (dry dust)
                                                                  Dusta            mg/Nm3
pH                                pH              6–9                                                     40 (wet dust)

BOD5                             mg/l             50              Hexaneb          mg/Nm3                      100

COD                              mg/l             250                                                    Animal fat: 1.5
                                                                                                            Castor: 3
Total nitrogen                   mg/l             10
                                                                                                          Rape seed: 1
Total phosphorus                 mg/l              2                                                   Sunflower seed:1
Oil and grease                   mg/l             10                                             Soya beans (normal crush):
                                                                                  kg solvent
                                                                                                            0.8
Total suspended                                                   VOCsc             loss/t
                                 mg/l             50                              feedstock     Soya beans (white flakes):1.2
solids
Temperature increase              °C              <3b                                               Other seeds and other
                                                                                                      vegetable matter:
Total coliform                 MPNa /
                                                  400
bacteria                       100 ml                                                             1.5 (fractionation excluding
                                                                                                          degumming)
Active Ingredients /           To be determined on a
                                                                                                         4 (degumming)
Antibiotics                     case-specific basis
                                                                  Notes:
Notes:                                                            a
a
                                                                    Dust level of 10 mg/Nm3 for dry dust can be achieved by
  MPN = Most Probable Number.                                     applying cyclones and bag filters on selected vents, e.g. from
b
  At the edge of a scientifically established mixing zone         meal dryers, coolers, and grinders. A dust level of 40 mg/Nm3
that takes into account ambient water quality, receiving          for wet dust can be achieved by applying cyclones and/or
water use, potential receptors, and assimilative capacity.        multicyclones.
                                                                  b
                                                                   Applies to the solvent plant and can be achieved by
                                                                  application of cyclones.
                                                                  c
                                                                    Refers to total solvent loss, European Solvent Directive 1999
                                                                  (Council Directive 1999/13/EC of 11 March 1999. on the
                                                                  limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the
                                                                  use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations).



                                                             13
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                              February 12, 2015




37. These guidelines are achievable under normal operating conditions in appropriately designed,
operated, and maintained facilities through the application of the pollution prevention and control
techniques discussed in the preceding sections of this document. These levels should be achieved,
without dilution, at least 95 percent of the time during which the plant or unit is operating, to be calculated
as a proportion of annual operating hours. Deviation from these levels in consideration of specific, local
project conditions should be justified in the environmental assessment.

38. Emissions guidelines are applicable to process emissions. Combustion source emissions guidelines
associated with systems designed to deliver electrical or mechanical power, steam, heat, or any
combination of these, regardless of the fuel type, with a total, rated heat input capacity of between three
Megawatt thermal (MWth) and 50 MWth are addressed in the General EHS Guidelines, with larger
power source emissions covered by the EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power. Guidance on ambient
considerations based on the total load of emissions is provided in the General EHS Guidelines.

2.1.2   Resource Use and Waste

39. Table 3 presents information on resource use and waste generation in the vegetable oil processing
sector that can be considered as indicators of this sector’s efficiency and may be used to track
performance changes over time. Industry benchmark values are provided for comparative purposes only;
individual projects should target continual improvement in these areas. Note that the volume of
wastewater produced depends highly on the raw material processed and its quality, as well as the
processing technology applied.

2.2     Occupational Health and Safety

2.2.1   Occupational Health and Safety Guidelines

40. Occupational health and safety performance should be evaluated against internationally published
exposure guidelines, examples of which include the Threshold Limit Value (TLV®) occupational exposure
guidelines and Biological Exposure Indices (BEIs®), published by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH); 12 the Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards, published by the
United States National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH); 13 Permissible Exposure
Limits (PELs), published by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States
(OSHA); 14 Indicative Occupational Exposure Limit Values, published by European Union member
states; 15 or other similar sources.

2.2.2   Accident and Fatality Rate

41. Projects should try to reduce the number of accidents among project workers (whether directly
employed or subcontracted) to a rate of zero, especially accidents that could result in lost work time,
different levels of disability, or even fatalities. Facility rates may be benchmarked against the performance


12 Available at: http://www.acgih.org/TLV/ and http://www.acgih.org/store/
13 Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/
14 Available at: http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=STANDARDS&p_id=9992

15 Available at: http://europe.osha.eu.int/good_practice/risks/ds/oel/



                                                      14
                                           ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                           VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                           February 12, 2015




of facilities in this sector in developed countries through consultation with published sources (e.g., U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.K. Health and Safety Executive). 16



                                           TABLE 3. RESOURCE AND ENERGY CONSUMPTION
                 INPUTS PER UNIT OF PRODUCT                         UNIT                            BENCHMARK

        Water Usea
        Crude oil production – wastewater                   m3/t raw material                        0.2–0.5
        Crude oil production – cooling water                m3/t   raw material                       2–14
        Chemical neutralization                               m3/t   product                          1–1.5
        Deodorization                                         m3/t   product                          10–30
        Hardening                                             m3/t   product                          2.2–7

        Chemical consumptiona
        Caustic soda                                          kg/t crude oil                          1–6*
        Phosphoric acid                                       kg/t crude oil                         0.1–2.0
        Citric acid                                           kg/t crude oil                         0.1–1.0
        Sulfuric acid                                             kg/t soap                          100–250

                                                                   STEAMb             ELECTRICITY              TOTAL ENERGY
                              ENERGY USE                      (MJ/T FINAL         (MJ/T FINAL PRODUCT           (MJ/T FINAL
                                                               PRODUCT)                                          PRODUCT)

        Neutralization                                             112–280              22–44                    145–330
        Soap     splittingc                                       560–2800    c
                                                                                        11–36   c
                                                                                                                620–2850c
        Deodorizationd
                Batch                                             420–1120e             60–150                  510–1350
                Semi-continuous
                Continuous

        Source: EC 2006.
        a
            Range depends on the free fatty acid content.
        b
            Calculated using 2.8 x kg steam/t = MJ/t (EC 2006).
        c
            MJ/t soap.
        d
         Batch and semi-continuous deodorization can achieve the lowest steam consumption figures in the ranges quoted
        and at the low end of the range for total energy use.
        e
         Substantially lower steam consumption figures are possible with the use of dry condensing technology, which can
        achieve as low as around 70MJ steam/t final product for dry condensing units in continuous and semi-continuous
        deodorization (Hamm et al. 2013).




16   Available at: http://www.bls.gov/iif/ and http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/index.htm

                                                                     15
                                 ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                                 VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                                 February 12, 2015




2.2.3    Occupational Health and Safety Monitoring

42. The working environment and workers’ health should be monitored for occupational hazards and
diseases relevant to the specific project. Monitoring should be designed and implemented by accredited
professionals, 17 as well as applicable prevention or protection measures, as part of an occupational
health and safety monitoring and prevention program. Facilities should also maintain a record of
occupational accidents, diseases, and dangerous occurrences and other accidents. The General EHS
Guidelines provide additional guidance on occupational health and safety monitoring programs.




17Accredited professionals may include certified industrial hygienists, registered occupational hygienists, or certified
safety professionals or their equivalent.

                                                          16
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                             February 12, 2015




3. REFERENCES
AEA Energy & Environment. 2008. “Guidance on VOC Substitution and Reduction for Activities Covered
   by the VOC Solvents Emissions Directive (Directive 1999/13/EC).” Guidance 19: Vegetable Oil and
   Animal Fat Extraction and Vegetable Oil Refining Activities.
   http://www.fediol.eu/data/VOC_Guidance.pdf

American Oil Chemists’ Society. “An Important Source for Industrialists on Oil Processing Technologies.”
   http://www.aocs.org

BLS (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2012a. “Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries. Census of Fatal
   Occupational Injuries Charts, 1992–2011.” Revised data. BLS, Washington, DC.
   http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cfch0010.pdf

———. 2012b. “Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses. Table SNR05. Incidence Rate and Number
  of Nonfatal Occupational Injuries by Industry and Ownership, 2011.” BLS, Washington, DC.
  http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/osh/os/ostb2805.pdf

EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development). 2009. “Sub-sectoral Environmental and
   Social Guidelines: Vegetable Oil Processing.” EBRD, London
   http://www.ebrd.com/downloads/about/sustainability/veg_oil.pdf

European Parliament and Council of the European Union. 1994. “Directive 94/9/EC of the European
   Parliament and of the Council of 23 March 1994 on the Approximation of the Laws of the Member
   States Concerning Equipment and Protective Systems Intended for Use in Potentially Explosive
   Atmospheres.” EU, Brussels.
   http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/mechanical/files/atex/direct/text94-9_en.pdf

———. 1999. “Council Directive 1999/13/EC on the Limitation of Emissions of Volatile Organic
  Compounds Due to the Use of Organic Solvents in Certain Activities and Installations.” EU, Brussels.
  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:1999:085:0001:0022:EN:PDF

———. 2010. “Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November
  2010 on Industrial Emissions (Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control).” EU, Brussels.
  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:334:0017:0119:EN:PDF

EC (European Commission). 2006. “Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control, Reference Document on
   Best Available Techniques in the Food, Drink, and Milk Industries.” August 2006. EC.
   http://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference/

EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 1995. “9.11.1 Vegetable Oil Processing.” In AP 42
   Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, Volume 1: Stationary Point and Area Sources.
   Washington, DC: EPA. http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch09/final/c9s11-1.pdf

———. 1998. Vegetable Oil Production: Industry Profile. Washington, DC: EPA, Air Quality Standards
  and Strategies Division. http://www.epa.gov/ttn/ecas/regdata/IPs/Vegetable%20Oil_IP.pdf

———. 2001. “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Solvent Extraction for
  Vegetable Oil Production.” Federal Register April 12, 2001. Washington, DC: EPA.
  http://www.epa.gov/ttnatw01/vegoil/vegoilpg.html


                                                   17
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                             February 12, 2015




———. 2004. “Rule and Implementation Information for Vegetable Oil Production; Solvent Extraction.”
  EPA, Washington, DC.
  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/vegoil/vegoilpg.html

FAO and WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization and World Health Organization). Codex Alimentarius
   Commission. 2010. Codex Alimentarius. Geneva: FAO.
   http://www.codexalimentarius.net

FEDIOL (EU Vegetable Oil and Proteinmeal Industry). 2006. “FEDIOL Guide to Good Practice on Safe
   Operation of Hexane Extraction Units to Limit the Likelihood of Explosions Caused by Flammable
   Vapors.” Ref. 06SAF293.
   http://www.fediol.eu/web/codes%20of%20practice/1011306087/list1187970091/f1.html

———. 2009. “FEDIOL Code of Practice For the Control of Salmonella in Oilseed Crushing Plants.”
  http://www.fediol.eu/web/codes%20of%20practice/1011306087/list1187970091/f1.html

———. 2011. “FEDIOL Code of Practice on the Purchase Conditions of Fresh Bleaching Earth for Oil
  Refining.” http://www.fediol.eu/web/codes%20of%20practice/1011306087/list1187970091/f1.html

———. 2012. “FEDIOL Code of Practice on the Safety of Vegetable Fat and Oil Products in Feed with
  Regard to Dioxin and Dioxin-like PCBs.”
  http://www.fediol.eu/web/codes%20of%20practice/1011306087/list1187970091/f1.html

France, MEDDAT (Ministere de l’Ecologie, de l’Energie, du Developpement Durable et de
    l’Aménagement du Territoire). 2004. “ Arrêté du 29/03/04 relatif à la prévention des risques présentés
    par les silos de céréales, de grains, de produits alimentaires ou de tout autre produit organique
    dégageant des poussières inflammables.”
    http://www.ineris.fr/aida/consultation_document/5163

France, MEDDAT (Ministere de l’Ecologie, de l’Energie, du Developpement Durable et de
    l’Aménagement du Territoire). 2008. “Guide de l’état de l’art sur les silos.”
    http://www.ineris.fr/aida/liste_documents/1/30266/0

Hamm, W., R. J. Hamilton, G. Calliauw (Eds). 2013. Edible Oil Processing. Second Edition. Wiley-
   Blackwell.

HSE (Health and Safety Executive). 2012. “Health and Safety Executive Statistics (general).” HSE,
   Merseyside, U.K.
   http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/publications/general.htm

India EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1996. “Liquid Effluent Standards — Category: 67. Edible
    Oil and Vanaspati Industry.” EPA Notification GSR 176(E), April 2, 1996. Central Pollution Control
    Board (CPCB), Ministry of Environment and Forest.
    http://www.cpcb.nic.in/Industry_Specific_Standards.php

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2006. “2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
   Greenhouse Gas Inventories,” Prepared by the National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme.
   H.S. Eggleston, L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, and K. Tanabe (eds). Published: IGES, Japan.
   http://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/vol5.html




                                                   18
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                             February 12, 2015




Irish EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1996. “BATNEEC Guidance Note, Class 7.1, Manufacture
     of Vegetable and Animal Oils and Fats (Draft 3).” Ireland: EPA.
     http://www.epa.ie/pubs/advice/bat/Animal%20&%20veg%20oils%20and%20fats.pdf

ILO. 2001. Convention 184: “Convention Concerning Safety and Health in Agriculture.”
    www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/relm/ilc/ilc89/pdf/c184.pdf

ISO (International Organization for Standardization). 2005. ISO 20000:2005. “Food Safety Management
   Systems. Requirements for Any Organization in the Food Chain.” ISO.
   http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=35466

Kheang, L. S., C. Y. May, and M. A. Ngan. 2007. “Residual Oil From Spent Bleaching Earth (SBE) for
   Biodiesel and BioLubricant Applications.” Malaysian Palm Oil Board Information Series. MPOB TT
   No. 367. Available at: http://palmoilis.mpob.gov.my/publications/TOT/TT-367.pdf

Krause, U. 2009. Fires in Silos: Hazards, Prevention and Fire Fighting. Wiley-VCH.

Mexico. 1997. Norma Oficial Mexicana NOM-001-ECOL-1996, “Que Establece los Limites Maximos
   Permisibles de Contaminantes en las Descargas Residuales en Aguas y Bienes Nacionales.”
   Publicada en Diario Oficial de la Federación de Fecha 6 de Enero de 1997. [Mexican official norm -
   001- ECOL- 1996].
   http://www.hgm.salud.gob.mx/descargas/pdf/noticias/programa_mercurio/marco/norma_001.pdf%20

MOEA (Minnesota Office of Environmental Assistance). Vegetable Oil Processing Including SICs:
  Soybean Oil Mills, 2075 Vegetable Oil Mills, Except Corn, Cottonseed, and Soybean 2076.
  Shortening, Table Oils, Margarine, And Other Edible Fats And Oils, 2079. In Pollution Prevention
  Technologies: A Review of Pollution Prevention Technologies to Reduce TRI Generation and
  Emissions in the State of Minnesota, Kerr, Greiner, Anderson & April, Inc., 15-17. MOEA, St. Paul.
  http://infohouse.p2ric.org/ref/22/21616.pdf

Persson, H. 2013. Silo Fires. Fire Extinguishing and Preventative and Preparatory Measures. Swedish
    Civil Contingencies Agency.
    www.msb.se/RibData/Filer/pdf/27144.pdf

Shahidi, F. and A. W. Bailey. 2005. Bailey’s Industrial Oil and Fat Products: Edible Oil and Fat Products,
   6th ed., vols. 4 and 5. New York: Wiley Interscience.

Thailand MOSTE (Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment).1996. “Industrial Effluent
   Standards.” Notification No. 3, B.E.2539 (1996). MOSTE.
   http://www.pcd.go.th/info_serv/en_reg_std_water04.html#s1

Water Environment Federation. 2005. “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,”
   21st ed. American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water
   Environment Federation. www.standardmethods.org




                                                   19
                             ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                             VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                             February 12, 2015




ANNEX A. GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRY ACTIVITIES
43. The vegetable oil processing industry extracts and processes oils and fats from vegetable sources.
Vegetable oils and fats are principally used for human consumption, but they are also used in animal
feed, for medicinal purposes, and for certain technical applications. In developing countries, the
production of crude palm oil (CPO) is typically carried out in CPO mills associated with the plantations.
CPO is then transported to refineries all around the world. A significant part of the CPO, however, is
processed locally and exported as Refined, Bleached, and Deodorized (RBD) quality oil.

44. Figure 1 presents a simplified flow diagram of vegetable oil production. The main steps in vegetable
oil processing are extraction, refinement, other modification, and deodorization.



                               FIGURE 1. PRODUCTION OF VEGETABLE OIL

                                           Oilseeds/fruits



                                       Oilseed/fruit preparation



                                            Oil extraction
                                        (physical or chemical)



                                 Refinement (including degumming,
                                       dewaxing, bleaching)



                                         Semi-refined product




                              Hydrogenation             Interesterification




                                            Deodorization



                                        Fully refined product




                                                   20
                               ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                               VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                               February 12, 2015




A.1        Extraction

45. Oil is extracted from beans, grains, seeds, nuts, and fruits. The raw materials are received and
weighed at the facility, cleaned to remove stalks, stones, and other matter, then weighed and stored
before initial processing. The type of storage depends on the raw material, (e.g. soybeans are stored in
grain elevators). The critical factor in determining the storage life of seed material is its moisture content;
the higher the moisture and the hotter the climate, the shorter the secure storage time. The raw materials
are prepared using a variety of processes, including husking or hulling, flaking, cleaning, drying, crushing,
conditioning, and pressing. Environmental, health, and safety issues from the raw material preparation
phase include particulate emissions (e.g., from cleaning and drying), and solid waste (e.g., empty fruit
bunches EFB) resulting from threshing operations, as well as sticks, stems, pods, sand, and dirt.

46. Oil extraction can be performed mechanically (e.g., by boiling fruits and pressing seeds and nuts) or
in combination with a chemical extraction process using solvents (usually hexane). Most large-scale
commercial facilities use chemical extraction (with hexane), owing to a better process efficiency in
producing the meal and oil. During solvent extraction, hexane is used to wash the processed raw
materials, typically in a countercurrent extractor. The extraction is normally followed by skimming (boiled
oils) or filtration (pressed fats), and separation of the crude oil from the solvent-oil mixture (miscella).
Hexane is removed from the oil through distillation, and from the flakes through steam vapor in a
desolventizer, and recovered for reuse after condensation and separation from water. The recovery
processes for flakes that are intended for animal consumption typically use conventional distillation to
remove hexane in a desolventizer-toaster. The desolventized flakes are then ground for use as meal
(e.g., soybean meal). The process for flakes that are intended for human consumption uses specialty or
“flash” distillation, in which superheated hexane is used in a vacuum, followed by steam stripping. Flash
distillation removes more residual hexane from the flakes, but it uses more energy and generates more
emissions than the conventional process. 18

Examples:

Palm Oil Extraction 19

47. Palm fruit is processed to produce crude palm fruit oil and crude palm kernel oil. The fruit grows in
clusters on a central, branched stalk rather similar to grapes and consists of oily pulp surrounded by a
tough outer skin containing seeds (or kernels) in the pulp. Palm fruit oil is extracted from the pulp and
palm kernel oil is extracted from the seed. During harvest, the bunches are loaded into trucks or railway
cars and taken to the extraction facility. The sterilizing cars are rolled into cylindrical sterilizing chambers
and steam is sparged into the chamber. The heat sterilizes the fruit to prevent bacterial or enzymatic
activity from attacking the oil. The length of time in the sterilization chamber depends on the size and
maturity of the fruit.

48. After sterilization, the fruits are removed from the stems in threshing equipment and then washed
before being transported to a twin-screw press that squeezes out the palm fruit oil. The extracted palm
fruit oil is clarified in a continuous decanter or settling tank to remove water and solid matter. The cake
from the screw press consists of moist pulp solids, kernels (or seeds), and the outer skin of the fruit. The

18   MOEA.
19   Shahidi & Bailey 2005.

                                                      21
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                              February 12, 2015




kernels are separated from the fiber and cellular debris and conditioned by lowering their moisture level,
so that the meat shrinks loose from the shell. The kernels are then cracked and the meats are separated
from the shells, either by mixing them into an aqueous slurry of clay or salt so that the kernels float and
the shells sink or by mixing them with water and passing the mixture through a liquid cyclone (the heavier
shells pass out of the bottom and the lighter meat floats to the top). The meats are then dried and sent for
storage before being pressed in screw presses to produce palm kernel oil.

Olive Oil Extraction 20

49. Olives are ground into a paste through milling, which is followed by mashing, possibly with the
addition of salt. The pulp is then pressed and the press oil is clarified by sedimentation or centrifugation.
Traditional open-cage presses are now being replaced by continuous screw expellers. The mashed pulp
can also be separated in a horizontal decanter, in which case the crude oil is re-centrifuged after the
addition of wash-water. Alternatively, machines can be used to remove the kernels from the pulp and the
residue is then separated using self-discharging centrifuges. Cold pressing, which yields virgin grades, is
generally followed by a warm pressing at approximately 40 ºC.

50. A two-phase centrifuge generates a paste-like waste, whereas the traditional and the three-phase
systems produce a liquid phase, i.e. olive mill wastewater, or alpechin and a press cake known as
pomace. This latter product may be further treated as husk or pomace oil. The remaining solid husk is
dried to 3 to 6 percent humidity and used as fuel. Olive kernel oil is obtained by pressing and solvent
extraction of cleaned kernels. In some countries, warm-pressed olive oil with a high acidity is refined by
neutralization, bleaching, and deodorization, and flavored by blending with cold-pressed oil. The press
cake contains 8 to 15 percent of a relatively dark oil that can be extracted with hexane and is used for
technical purposes. After refining, it is also fit for edible consumption.

A.2       Refinement

51. The crude oil is refined to remove undesired impurities, such as gums, free fatty acids (FFA), traces
of metals, coloring components, and volatile components. During refining, the FFA are removed to the
level of less than 0.1 percent in the refined oil, either by chemical or physical refining. Physical refining
generally has a lower environmental impact than chemical refining. Conversely, chemical refining results
in a better product quality in terms of lower FFA levels, longer shelf life, and a more reliable process. 21

52. Crude oil contains free fatty acids and gums that must be removed before the oils can be used in
foods. Before refining occurs, degumming may be applied to the crude oil. Degumming is an essential
step of the physical refining process because the oil entering the final deodorization has to have a low
content of phosphatide. Degumming is also used in conjunction with chemical refining. Degumming
methods can either be acidic or enzymatic. In acidic degumming, phosphoric acid is added to remove
phosphatides, phospholipids, and lecithins. Degummed oil has a phosphorus content of less than 30
parts per million (ppm). Citric acid may be used instead of phosphoric acid, which brings a range of
advantages, including reduced phosphorus load in the wastewater and a slight reduction in the amount of
sludge. Enzymatic degumming uses enzymatic hydrolysis of the phosphatides. Environmental benefits



20   EC 2006.
21   Ibid.

                                                     22
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                              February 12, 2015




from this approach include reduced consumption of phosphoric and sulfuric acid, as well as caustic soda,
water, and energy.

Chemical Refining

53. Conventional chemical refining involves degumming (for the removal of phospholipids),
neutralization (for the removal of FFA), bleaching (for decolorization) and deodorization. Hydratable
phospholipids can be removed by water degumming. The mixture is then centrifuged for separation.
Nonhydratable phospholipids are removed during so-called acid degumming before water is added and
separation takes place in a centrifuge. This is usually the first stage of physical refining and can be
considered the equivalent process to alkali neutralization in chemical refining. Enzymatic degumming
uses enzymes to degrade the phospholipids. The first step is acid conditioning/pH adjustment of the
crude or water-degummed oil before the enzyme is added. A short reaction time and higher dosage is
generally preferred over long reaction time with lower enzyme dosage.

54. During degumming, caustic soda is added to the oil, which has been preheated to between 75°C
and 110°C to saponify the FFA. This process gives rise to two main outputs, namely semirefined oil and
soap stock. The soap stock is removed by precipitation, followed by sedimentation or centrifugation, and
may be further processed into acid oils by splitting. The soap stock is heated to between 70°C and 100°C
and reacts with sulfuric acid to reform the fatty acids. The resulting by-products can be sold to the paints
and cosmetics sector, as well as to the animal feed industry. The neutralized oil is bleached to remove
coloring matter and other minor constituents prior to deodorization. Spent bleaching earth is the main
solid waste arising from this stage.

Physical Refining

55. Physical refining is a more simple process in which the crude oil is degummed and bleached, and
then steam-stripped to remove FFA, odor, and VOCs all in one step. A physical pretreatment can be used
to achieve a low phospholipid content by degumming and using bleaching earth. Following this, FFA can
be stripped from the physically pretreated oil using steam in a vacuum at temperatures of around 250°C
and refined by the oil flowing over a series of trays countercurrent to the flow of the stripping steam.
Previous neutralization stages are not necessary because the neutralization and deodorization are
combined. A scrubber is then used to condense the greater part of the fat from the vapors as a water-free
product. 22

A.3       Other Modification

Hydrogenation

56. Most installations carry out hydrogenation to produce fats with superior retention qualities and higher
melting points. Before entering the reactor and mixing with hydrogen, the fresh oil is deaerated and dried
in a buffer tank kept under reduced pressure. Hydrogenation is usually carried out by dispersing hydrogen
gas in the oil in the presence of a finely divided catalyst (usually nickel), supported on diatomaceous
earth. Other catalysts (palladium, rhodium, platinum) are being explored in light of their potential to
reduce the formation of trans-fatty acids during hydrogenation. The resultant hydrogenated fats are

22   EC 2006.

                                                    23
                              ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, AND SAFETY GUIDELINES
                              VEGETABLE OIL PRODUCTION AND PROCESSING
                              February 12, 2015




filtered to remove the hydrogenation catalyst, subjected to a light earth bleach, and deodorized before
they can be used for edible purposes. After hardening, the oil is mixed with an aqueous solution to
produce an emulsion. The emulsified mixture is then pasteurized, cooled, and crystallized to obtain the
final product. 23

Interesterification

57. Interesterification involves the separation of triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol, followed by
recombination. The reaction is carried out using phosphoric or citric acid with a catalyst, typically sodium
methoxide. Interesterification modifies the functional properties of the treated oil and may be carried out
after neutralization or deodorization.

A.4       Deodorization

58. During deodorization, the bleached oil is steam-distilled at low pressure to remove volatile impurities,
including undesirable odors, flavors, and pigments. Volatile components are removed from the feedstock
using steam in a process that may last from 15 minutes to five hours. The vapors from the deodorizer
contain air, water vapor, fatty acids, and other variables. Before entering the vessel, the vapors pass
through a scrubber and a scrubbing liquid is sprayed into the vapor stream. Fatty acids and volatiles
partly condense on the scrubbing droplets or alternatively on the packing material. The deodorization
process produces the fully refined, edible oils and fats. 24

A.5       Resource Consumption

59. Vegetable oil processing facilities use energy to heat water and produce steam for process
applications (especially for soap splitting and deodorization) and for cleaning processes. Energy
consumption will vary according to the oil type (e.g., the energy needed for cold-pressing unconditioned
olive oil is twice as great as the energy needed for pressing heat-conditioned oilseeds) and the process
technology. Recent developments in the deodorization process that use dry (ammonia) condensing units
have reduced energy consumption significantly.

60. Water is mainly used for neutralization and deodorization, and both processes produce wastewater
with a high organic load. Typically, used chemicals include alkalis such as caustic soda and sodium
carbonate; acids, including phosphoric acid, citric acid, and sulfuric acid; Ni-catalysts; and methylates.
Solvents such as acetone, ethanol, and methanol are sometimes used instead of, or to supplement,
hexane in the extraction process. Hexane can cause health problems in relatively low concentrations and
other dangerous chemicals, including strong acids and bases, present significant health and safety
hazards.

61. In parallel with the primary production of vegetable oil, some by-products—such as oils for animal
feed or pharmaceutical products—are often produced by further processing of residues. This processing
can reduce volumes of solid waste, including fractions like spent bleaching earth that can be reused for
energy production through direct incineration or biogas production, either on-site or at another location.
Citric acid and phosphoric acid are used in degumming operations.

23   Ibid.
24   EC 2006.

                                                    24
