~-I           *E 4           U                 >4Vd ti1&1NUÉP1 D ñaiAi
KEEP TRACK AND STAY IN THE BLACK
How manufacturerscan improve profitability, make belter business
decisions, and reduce waste
Did you kncow that the real cost of waste can be up to 100 times
higher than you think?
Many ma nufadurers underestirate theirvaste costsby focusirg an disposal a penses and recyding reenue,
missing the high cost of ra w rnaterials that don't end up i n the final product. In fact, by tracking the cost
of raw materials, erergy and other esDu rces throughout the producilon process, significant cast reductions
can be identified and waste decreased. Tracking also provides actionable information about production pmrses
enpowering cornpanies ta make mora efectie business decisions.
IFC aKanined trwee rnaruacturers In d~feret cuntiles to däDE!r thetrue Eist otwaSt In their operatiDns, 1:wgtlryir
strateles Tor altting cUtS, reducing  te  d Increasing efilency. The results D-rthe smy ard an Šlcoach mor achleving
rprmnen ts flw
Waste costs can be understated
THE REAL COST OF WASTEby as much as 100 tirnes
SMany rnanufactu rers underestirnate the real
cost of the waste they g enerate
By ftcusing on waste disposal fees and rnisleading recyclirg revenue
at the end of the rnanufacturing ress. producers can overlock Costs
for rnanaging waste like labor, energy and most irportan*, the expen-
sive cot of wasted material purchased at the beginning of production.
PROFIT POT ENTIAL RE        EAL ED                                                       '"ce'«
Fl Id entifyi ng and reducing th e true cost of waste
can set the stag efor new profits
The bestway to identify and reduce the cost of wste istlo earine  Material Costs as a Percentage
the amount of material usel to make your product. Since material         of Production Costs
costs are often the largest share af all production ex penses, using
less material can lead to significant savings. Iln fact, this isa sounder  Aluninu n
strategy for reducing overall costs than focusing on Laborapenses    production      15%
which are usually a srmaller partion of costs.
Meat
For the three carnpaies InNed    A mrni Increase In natel ellEy    proces
kl this tu,r al Costs accunted  can yleid bk savings. SpeKllciai'y a ,5%
Tar 70- 90% DTther prauctan      mate1    i lElency InEriee can yleid  -n
expenses. Thus, reduckgmatral  a yearly sMngs of 51,36C.DDO       producer    g
r   uctas welias Inwaste sagreat  (real-wirkd w!amplrcarnpany
way to decrease =ii cas1 - a much  In thisstudy wfth 555,1000     Gerrn
pnoduction       26
nirelctlopknthanautiglaIlDr  in anrual prDducicn rats.            L1
expditures.                                                        Industly    v   i
In partnershipith
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/a8b517004393cefbb921b9869243d457/Waste_Study_Thumb.JPG?MOD=AJPERES[ 11/28/2016 11:34:04 AM]


