 PORTRAITS OF
POVERTY
AND
    INEQUALITY
           IN ALBANIA
Portraits of Poverty and
Inequality in Albania
Based on Census 2011 and Living Standards Measurement Survey 2012




                              2016
Table of Contents
Abbreviations	vi
Preface	vii
Team and Acknowledgements	ix
1 Introduction	1
2. Constructing the poverty maps for Albania	5
   2.1 Methodology	5
   2.2 Data	6
       The 2011 census	6
       The 2012 Living Standard Measurement Study	7
   2.3 Model	7
       The consumption models	7
       Selecting the model variables	8
       The stability and accuracy of the consumption models	9
       Standard errors and the level of aggregation	10
3 Results	12
   3.1 General analysis of the results of the mapping exercise	13
       Prefectures	13
       Municipalities and communes	13
4 Using poverty maps in policy making	16
   4.1 The poverty maps for policy in Albania	16
       Poverty maps of the new local administrative units	18
       Overlaying poverty maps with other data of policy interest	21
       Spotlight 1. Poverty maps and policy making around the world	23
5. Conclusions	26
References	30
   Results of the 2012 Poverty Maps	33
   Results of the 2012 Poverty Maps - New Municipalities	42
   Annex C: Explanation of the Variables and Relevant Data Tables	  44
Additional Annexes
   Main Annex - A closer look: results by prefecture	48
       Berat Prefecture	48
       Dibër Prefecture	51
       Durrës Prefecture	54
       Elbasan Prefecture	57
       Fier Prefecture	60
       Gjirokastër Prefecture	63
       Korçë Prefecture	66
       Kukës Prefecture	69
       Lezhë Prefecture	72
       Shkodër Prefecture	75
       Tirana Prefecture	78
       Minimunicipalities of Tirana	81
       Vlorë Prefecture	                                            84
   Annex A: Updates to the First Albania Poverty Maps, 2001–2010	   87
   Annex B: The ELL Methodology: Innovations and Criticisms	        88
   Annex D: Differences and Similarities: 2002 and 2012 Maps	       90
Abbreviations

 ELL      Elbers-Lanjouw-Lanjouw (poverty mapping method)
 INSTAT   Albanian Institute of Statistics
 LSMS     Living Standards Measurement Survey
 PSU      Primary Selection Unit




vi                                           Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                Preface
                  The Albanian Institute of Statistics (INSTAT) and the World Bank have
                developed the following report on poverty mapping in Albania. Small area poverty
                maps portray subnational geographical areas, such as municipalities, counties,
                and districts, and highlight the small areas most likely to exhibit the highest risk
                of poverty in a country. The poverty maps displayed in this report are designed to
                help policymakers, development partners and other stakeholders identify the parts
                of Albania with pockets of poverty, to inform targeted efforts to achieve the goals of
                reducing poverty and inequality.

                  The report describes the technical aspects of the process of creating — based on
                Census 2011 and Living Standards Measurement Survey 2012 data — accurate,
                detailed geographical presentations of poverty in the country and summarizes
                the nature of the insights about poverty and shared prosperity that are revealed by
                the maps. It displays sample maps to aid the reader in understanding the value of
                the approach by highlighting that the more finely grained poverty maps produced
                through the project expand the evidence supplied through more traditional and
                less-detailed geographical representations of poverty.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                     vii
                Team and Acknowledgements

                  This report has been produced jointly by the Albanian Institute of Statistics
                and the World Bank, under the guidance of María E. Dávalos (Senior Economist,
                World Bank) and Ledia Thomo (Director of Household Surveys, Albanian Institute
                of Statistics), with main contributions from Gianni Betti, Laura Neri, Thomas Pave
                Sohnesen, Robert Zimmerman and the Albanian Institute of Statistics technical
                team, particularly Teranda Jahja, Ruzhdie Bici, Blerta Muja, Alma Kondi and Mirela
                Deva. The team is greatful for comments received from Alexandru Cojocaru and
                Willian Seitz from the World Bank.

                  Supervision of this work has been provided by Mirela Muca (Director General,
                Albanian Institute of Statistics), Gjergji Filipi (former Director General, Albanian
                Institute of Statistics), Carolina Sanchez-Paramo (Practice Manager, Poverty and
                Equity Global Practive, World Bank) and Tahseen Sayed (Country Manager for
                Albania, World Bank).




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                    ix
CHAPTER 1
                Introduction

                  As long as poverty and social exclusion exist, social progress may only advance
                haltingly because some population groups are unable to participate fully in the
                economic and social life of a country. Accurately identifying the poor and where
                they are located may thus help in delivering antipoverty relief and basic services
                and guiding programs aimed at reducing poverty and enhancing the equitable
                sharing of prosperity. Moreover, funding and targeting basic services and programs
                to reduce poverty and social exclusion within a country depend on the availability
                of detailed knowledge of the disparities in well-being across households.

                  Traditional methods of identifying the distribution of poverty across regions,
                provinces, and smaller administrative divisions rely on household survey data.
                However, household surveys are limited in their ability to localize the poor at low
                levels of geographical disaggregation and thus circumscribe the information upon
                which policy makers may rely.

                   Poverty is most often measured using data on consumption from a sample survey,
                such as the Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS), in which household per
                capita expenditures (or per adult equivalent expenditures) are compared with a fixed
                poverty line. Given the complexity and cost of undertaking this or a similar exercise,
                it is only feasible to collect this information from a sample of households in a survey.
                However, data describing the distribution of income across households at a high level
                of geographical aggregation often mask critical information from policy makers.
                For instance, there may be large numbers of the poor concentrated in small discrete
                areas in regions that show low overall poverty rates. However, poverty measures based
                on surveys have sampling errors, and these rise rapidly if we calculate such measures for
                smaller areas. This precludes analysis of poverty in such areas in this way.

                  This study is based on 2011 Census and 2012 LSM and this shortcoming exists for
                the LSMS in Albania, as well as household surveys across most countries, despite
                efforts to improve the 2012 round of the study to provide poverty data that are
                representative of the 12 prefectures in the country.

                  Poverty mapping has emerged as a possible way around this problem. Poverty
                maps allow a focus in greater detail on the spatial distribution of poverty at the local
                level. As a result, reasonably precise poverty estimates can be obtained through
                this technique. The government of Albania has embraced the approach. Indeed,
                Albania has been a pioneer in applying the poverty mapping methodology.

                  In 2001, the World Bank, in collaboration with the U.K. Department for
                International Development, began assisting the government in a project to
                establish a permanent poverty monitoring mechanism. The objective was to create
                a reliable, sustainable system for the timely production of statistical information
                to guide decision making and policy making. It was expected the method would


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                          1
 Map 1: Poverty Maps and Poverty Rates (Headcount Ratio), Albania, 2002
 a. Communes, municipalities




                                                                    Source: INSTAT 2004.




be particularly useful in the design, implementation, and evaluation of economic,
social, and environmental development and financing programs so that these
could efficiently target the areas of the country with the greatest need.

  As of late 2000, Albania did not yet have a reliable, nationally representative
survey to assess the living conditions of the population. In 2001, however, the
Albanian Institute of Statistics (INSTAT), with donor support, carried out the
country’s first census since the end of the communist era. The following year,
INSTAT implemented a nationally representative multidimensional household
survey. That same year, the World Bank began to prepare a poverty assessment,
and the government completed the preparation of a Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper.

    The convergence of these events and the related data collection efforts supplied


2                                                       Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                the ideal opportunity to construct the first small area estimates of poverty and
                inequality in Albania, as well as poverty maps (see annex A, available online).
                The maps clearly show how an analysis of poverty might improve because of
                the detail at a more finely disaggregated level (map 1). Using the 2005 and 2008
                LSMS, new rounds of the maps were calculated still based on the 2001 census.

                  The aim of the creation of the poverty maps was to estimate poverty and
                inequality for each of the prefectures, districts, and municipalities or communes,
                and for each minimunicipality of Tirana. This was the goal because (1) the poor
                in Albania are concentrated in rural and mountainous areas, but also in areas that
                are more well off; (2) the government was seeking to decentralize the delivery
                of services to local governments, which might develop independent strategies
                and interventions; and (3) the targeting of government antipoverty programs
                needed to be improved (World Bank 2015). All these aims show useful possible
                applications of the maps.

                  Following the mapping exercise, individuals involved in the preparation of
                the maps and potential users of the maps were interviewed. The interviews
                revealed three ways in which the poverty maps were applied in decision making
                and policy making: (1) as a benchmark against existing resource allocation
                criteria, for example, whether the allocation of social-assistance block grants
                according to previously established criteria correlate with an appropriate
                allocation based on current poverty rates; (2) as a tool in targeting public
                spending; and (3) for the provision of data to monitor the progress toward
                achieving the Millennium Development Goals (World Bank 2015). Several
                nongovernmental organizations also relied on the poverty maps in supplying
                advisory services to local governments and donor agencies and in designing
                joint intervention strategies. The poverty maps were likewise used to improve
                the prioritization of investments in secondary roads.

                  This report presents results for the new poverty maps that have been created
                in Albania using data of the 2012 LSMS and the 2011 Population and Housing
                census and incorporating improvements to the poverty mapping technique.
                This opens up a new opportunity to, with the most recent data available on
                welfare in Albania, better understand the distribution of poverty and inequality
                across the country, identify pockets of poverty and inform policymaking.

                  The report consists of five sections, including this introduction. The next
                section describes the process for constructing a poverty map. The following
                section outlines the main results of the new poverty mapping in Albania. With
                the aim of stressing the impact that poverty maps can have on policy making,
                the subsequent section highlights the applications of poverty mapping in policy
                making in Albania and elsewhere. The final section has the conclusions. There
                are also included five annexes, some available only online as indicated. Annexes
                provide more detail on the full results, selected technical aspects of the creation
                of poverty maps in Albania, and more precise information on the variables
                included in the models of consumption used in the construction of the maps.

Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                   3
CHAPTER 2
4    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                Constructing the poverty maps for Albania

                  A poverty map is a geographical profile in map form that shows the distribution
                of poverty within a country. It is used by policy makers to plan targeted public
                investments in education, health care, sanitation, water, transport, and so on
                to reduce poverty and social exclusion and thereby promote shared prosperity.
                Relevant institutions engaged in social issues and the development of social policies
                often use such maps so that investments designed to lower poverty rates can reach a
                maximum of the poor in a country or in smaller areas within a country.

                  A poverty map is therefore most useful if it can be constructed at a detailed level
                of geographical disaggregation, such as states or provinces, counties or districts, and
                municipalities/communes, while also highlighting the small areas most likely to
                exhibit the highest risk of poverty and social exclusion and supply a comprehensive
                picture of the spatial distribution of poverty and social exclusion.

                  However, achieving this outcome requires large datasets, which are typically provided
                only in nationwide household surveys and population and housing censuses. Yet, a
                household survey cannot both cover a large household sample and provide detailed
                information on household welfare, such as precise data on household expenditure or
                income. Typically, these surveys rely on sampling but are able to collect a wide range
                of rich data, from household expenditure to nonmonetary indicators, for example,
                assets, access to basic services, the physical quality of the home, and so on. Meanwhile,
                censuses do not generally collect detailed information on income or expenditures
                because the cost of gathering such data across an entire country is exorbitant. In
                both household surveys and censuses, there is a trade-off between survey size and
                data detail because achieving either goal is costly in terms of money and manpower.




                2.1 Methodology
                  Elbers, Lanjouw, and Lanjouw (2002, 2003) have developed a method to create
                poverty maps by merging a household survey and a census to take advantage of the
                strengths of the two sources of data while minimizing the weaknesses. The strength
                of the household survey is the extensive detail on household characteristics that can
                be obtained because the samples are relatively limited. In the case of poverty, the
                basis might be, for example, information on household consumption. The strength
                of the census is the universal or near universal coverage of households. The method
                has become widely popular among development practitioners around the world.

                  The method proposed by Elbers, Lanjouw, and Lanjouw (ELL) has three stages.
                In stage 0, a set of variables common to both the survey and the census are identified
                and evaluated in terms of the extent to which their distribution across the two data


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                         5
sources is similar.

  In stage 1, a model of log per capita consumption expenditure is estimated in the
survey data based on the identified variables. The model includes household-level
variables that have a similar distribution in both the survey and the census. The
model also includes the location-specific averages of variables found in the census
and, potentially, other external variables available across small local levels across
an entire country, such as variables pinpointed spatially through a geographic
information system.

  In stage 2, poverty estimates and the associated standard errors are computed. A
simulated value of consumption for each census household is calculated, along with the
predicted log expenditure and random draws from the estimated distributions of the
disturbance terms. The ELL method offers a way to calculate poverty estimates and
the standard errors properly, while accounting for potential sources of bias.1




2.2 Data
   Beginning with the exercise in 2002–04, poverty mapping in Albania has been
based on the ELL method. The poverty maps produced then have now been updated
using two primary data sources, the most recent (2012) LSMS and the most recent
(2011) population and housing census. The updating has relied on several new
methodological developments, including suggestions of Elbers and van der
Weide (2014). (See annex B, available online for innovations in and criticisms of
the ELL methodology.) The comparability of the two rounds of poverty maps is not
straightforward (considerations in Annex D) and has not been conducted in this report.


The 2011 census
  The last population and housing census, that of October 1, 2011, recorded 2.8
million residents in Albania. The census included a set of variables that can be
compared with the variables of the LSMS 2012. Compared with the previous (2001)
census, the 2011 census found notable changes. Thus, between 2001 and 2011, the
population fell by 269,000 (8.8 percent); the average age of the population increased
from 30.6 years to 35.3 years; the number of under-15-year-olds sharply declined,
from 898,000 to only 579,000; and the number of people 65 years of age or older
rose from 231,000 to 318,000.

  Between the 2001 and the 2011 census, 228,952 individuals changed their
prefectures of usual residence. These migrants accounted for 8 percent of the
resident population in 2011. During the decade, there were 280,863 migrants
between towns or villages. This internal migration led to large-scale urbanization
   1. There are two sources of error involved in the estimation process: (a) errors in the estimated regression
coefficients and (b) errors in the disturbance terms. Both types affect poverty estimates and the accuracy of the
estimates.


6                                                                            Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                in some areas and substantial depopulation in others. Because of the economic and
                logistic difficulties facing migrants seeking to settle in cities such as Durrës and
                Tirana, the surrounding areas received a wide majority of the internal migrants.
                Nearly half relocated to Tirana Prefecture.


                The 2012 Living Standard Measurement Study
                  INSTAT conducted the LSMS in 2002, 2005, 2008, and 2012 to study various
                socioeconomic characteristics of the population, including consumption
                and poverty. The objectives of these surveys were similar. However, while the
                geographical domains in the 2002, 2005, and 2008 LSMS were defined as the
                urban and rural strata in four regions (central, coastal, mountain, and Tirana), the
                domains in the 2012 LSMS, which was carried out in September and October 2012,
                were expanded to produce representative results by urban and rural strata in the 12
                prefectures of the country. This required a considerable increase in the sample size.

                  The data of the 2011 census provided the sample frame for the 2012 LSMS. This
                was considered a stratified, two-stage cluster sampling design. During the first
                stage, the sampling units were 834 primary selection units (PSUs) selected among
                the census enumeration areas, while, in the second stage, the sampling units were
                the households in each selected PSU. The selection of the households within each
                chosen PSU followed the procedure applied in the 2002, 2005, and 2008 LSMS.
                In this procedure, an initial sample of 12 households is selected according to the
                systematic sample. Using systematic sampling, 8 of these are then selected as the
                base sample, while the remaining 4 are substitutes that were available for use in
                case households in the base sample could not be contacted or were nonresponsive.

                  The instruments for the collection of information in the 2012 LSMS were (1) a
                household questionnaire, (2) a diary recording household food consumption, and (3) a
                price questionnaire. The final 2012 sample consisted of 6,671 completed questionnaires.




                2.3 Model
                  The poverty mapping methodology requires, in stage 1, the estimation of a model
                of consumption based on the household survey. This model serves as the basis for
                estimating the consumption of each household in the census during stage 2 of the
                process. This subsection details how the model was constructed for the new round
                of poverty maps in Albania.


                The consumption models
                  The Albanian poverty map is based on four regional consumption models (central,
                coastal, mountain, and Tirana). Why four regional models instead of one national
                model? The short answer is that these four domains were defined for sampling in


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                       7
the LSMS because they were internally homogenous, thereby optimizing the sample
size. This homogeneity makes these domains ideal for modeling consumption.

  There are advantages and disadvantages to splitting the LSMS sample into four
models. The division helps in more effectively capturing local circumstances, but
also decreases the number of observations in the four domains or regions, thereby
limiting the number of variables that can be included accurately in each model. The
implicit assumption is that the parameter estimates on the regression are the same
across households in each domain.

  Meanwhile, a national model assumes that the relationship between household
expenditure and household characteristics is uniform throughout the country.
This may be a much less tenable assumption. Using separate models that are
more internally homogenous allows the relationship between expenditure and the
explanatory variables to vary by region, and it reduces the standard error of poverty
prediction because of an error in modeling.

  Nonetheless, if the domains chosen for the models are too small, they may
become prone to overfitting, and the predictions could become overly influenced
by idiosyncrasies in the LSMS sample.

  Hence, there needs to be a balance between heterogeneity across the country
and a smaller, but still adequate sample size. In Albania, the four domains seem
to achieve this because the models replicate poverty as measured by the LSMS,
without showing relatively large variations in the cluster effect, and they are based
on relatively parsimonious models with high R squared values (see annex C, tables
C.2 and C.3).


Selecting the model variables
  As laid out in the methodology subsection above, a number of steps are required
to create a poverty map. This subsection describes the work and the checks on the
data in terms of the alignment of the explanatory variables in the 2011 census and
the 2012 LSMS. The definition of poverty is the same in the poverty maps and in
the LSMS survey, and the national poverty line of 4,891 ALL (in constant 2002 new
leks) has been applied to all results (INSTAT 2013).

  In the poverty maps, only variables that show similar distributions in the LSMS
and the census are eligible as explanatory variables in the regression models. The
estimation of the Albanian poverty maps represents a nearly perfect setting for this
procedure because the census includes many variables that are highly correlated
with consumption, including the following:

    •	   Demographic characteristics: sex, age, marital status, household size, number
         of children, number of adults, and number of the elderly in the household

    •	   Education: educational attainment of the household head and the highest

8                                                         Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                        educational attainment achieved by any household member

                   •	   Occupation: employment status, occupation, and sector of employment.

                   •	   Housing characteristics: type of housing unit, age of the building, the presence
                        of an elevator, the presence of a toilet, the source of water, the number of
                        rooms, the size of the dwelling, dwelling ownership, and occupancy status.

                   •	   Durable goods and productive assets: possession of a furnace, refrigerator,
                        freezer, television, television decoder, washing machine, dishwasher,
                        microwave, fixed telephone, mobile telephone, computer, Internet access,
                        solar panels, air conditioner, automobile, and agricultural land and livestock.

                  Furthermore, the 2012 LSMS and the 2011 census were conducted at
                approximately the same time (within a single year), thereby limiting the possible
                shifts in the variables because of changes over time. The full list of questions
                from each data source—the LSMS and the census—demonstrates the degree of
                comparability.

                  Some variations in the questionnaires used for the LSMS and the census may
                produce variations in the distribution of the variables. A difference in questionnaire
                design in terms of length and complexity may also drive variations in reported
                values even if the questions are similar (Kilic and Sohnesen 2015). (The 2012 LSMS
                questionnaire was longer and more complex than the 2011 census questionnaire.)
                Other characteristics of a survey or census, such as the training of enumerators, the
                characteristics of field implementation, and so on, may also have an impact on the
                data collected.

                  Variables were considered for inclusion in the final models for the mapping
                exercise only if their distribution, domain by domain, was found to be similar in
                the survey and the census. (Annex C, table C.1 shows the survey and census mean
                for the variables included in the models.)


                The stability and accuracy of the consumption models
                   A good predictive model needs to balance several objectives. It should reveal a
                high correlation between consumption and household characteristics. This can be
                gauged through the adjusted R squared of the consumption regression. However,
                maximizing the R squared can easily generate weaknesses. One potential weakness
                is overreliance on the specific survey sample. To avoid this and other weaknesses,
                the mapping models have been designed not to be too specific to the selected LSMS
                sample. This has been accomplished by testing different models and comparing
                final predictions and by excluding variables with skewed distributions, that is,
                variations relying on relatively few observations. Furthermore, the variables found
                to have the greatest importance in random forest predictions are considered the



Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                        9
first set of explanatory variables.2

  The predictions of poverty derived from the models are compared with the results
on poverty produced by the LSMS at a level at which the LSMS is representative. Table 1
reports the levels of poverty revealed by the LSMS, the 95 percent confidence interval (the
range within which we can say with great certainty that the true poverty headcount—
the poverty rate—lies), and the poverty rate predicted using census data. The poverty
rate predicted using the census is within the 95 percent confidence interval of the LSMS
survey in the central, coastal, and Tirana regions or domains. In the mountain domain,
the census estimate is notably higher than the LSMS result. Nonetheless, the ranking
of the mountain region—less well off—is consistent with the lower mean and median
per capita consumption revealed through the LSMS in the mountain region relative to
the other regions. A similar ranking, with the mountain areas showing lower means, is
also revealed in the consumption data of the 2014 Household Budget Survey and in
the gross domestic product per capita series.3


Table 1: Poverty Rates Measured in the LSMS and Estimated in the Census, by Domain,
2011–12 (percent)

 Domain                       LSMS                     LSMS 95 percent confidence interval                      Census estimate

 Central                       12.6                          10.1                         15.0                       13.1

 Coastal                        17.7                         14.7                         20.8                       15.5

 Mountain                       15.1                         10.9                         19.4                       20.6

 Tirana                         12.1                          6.7                         17.5                       11.7

 National                       14.3                         12.5                         16.1                       14.3




Standard errors and the level of aggregation
  Since June 2015, because of territorial reform, the country has been divided into
12 counties (prefecture, the first-level local administrative units), 61 municipalities
(municipality, the second-level local administrative units), 72 cities and 2,980
villages/towns (villages, towns, the third-level local administrative units).

  Spatially, at the time of the data collected used for the mapping exercises of 2002 and
2012, Albania was divided into 12 prefectures (first-level local administrative units),
373 municipalities (second-level local administrative units), and cities, villages(together,


   2. Random forest is a prediction algorithm that selects variables and predicts consumption. The method is
known to produce more robust predictions. In our application, the method relies on 500 different models, and the
variables that are consistently included are considered more robust predictors. See Sohnesen, Stender, and Hill
(2016) for an evaluation of the method for poverty prediction.
   3. A region or domain can easily show low mean per capita consumption and a low poverty rate if the levels of
inequality are low. In other words, the sampled inhabitants in the region show low, but similar consumption levels
even if this does not put many of them below the poverty line. This seems to be the case In the LSMS. The result
is driven especially by Dibër Prefecture, which has a poverty rate that is lower than expected, which is explained
by low inequality (annex C, figures C.1 and C.2). The poverty maps, in which the predictions are based on census
data, do not replicate these low levels of poverty and inequality in Dibër Prefecture and estimate higher poverty
rates in the mountain region or domain relative to the LSMS observations.


10                                                                          Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                the third-level local administrative units). The municipalities were of two types, either
                urban or rural. The rural municipalities were also known as communes. Because the
                2001 census and the 2011 census were both carried out based around the older system,
                including the 36 districts that were a second-level local administrative unit before
                2000, the core results of the poverty mapping exercises for 2002 and 2012 reflect this
                system. Nevertheless, to produce results that are more relevant for policymaking
                today, mapping results for the 61 reformed second-level municipalities have also
                been derived by aggregating the old 373 municipalities. 4

                  In general, poverty can be estimated for each of the spatial levels in the 2011
                census. However, the census estimates are associated with uncertainties. These
                are captured in standard errors. As highlighted by Tarozzi and Deaton (2008), the
                estimated standard errors are only correct if there is a minimal amount of spatial
                correlation above the cluster level. In all four (regional or domain) consumption
                models, the variation at the cluster level is minimal (see annex C, table C.2).

                  Nonetheless, because poverty estimates become more specific in smaller local
                areas, the standard errors increase as the population of the estimate area decreases.
                This is illustrated in figure 1, where the standard errors in the poverty estimates are
                shown to decline as the number of households in the area increases. The average
                standard errors in the poverty estimates for municipalities and communes are 0.04.
                In comparison, the LSMS domain (regional) standard errors are in the 0.01 to
                0.03 range. As expected, the municipal poverty estimates are thus associated with
                greater standard errors relative to the domain estimates based on the LSMS data,
                particularly in those areas with fewer than 3,000 inhabitants (log 8 in figure 1).
                Among the old municipalities, 130 have fewer than 3,000 inhabitants each, while
                only one of the new municipalities and none of the old districts have fewer than
                3,000 inhabitants. Substantial standard errors are therefore associated with the
                poverty estimates for a number of communes and municipalities.


                 Figure 1: Standard Errors, Municipality and Commune Estimates
                                              0.2
                   SE of poverty headcount




                                             0.15

                                              0.1

                                             0.05

                                               0
                                                    5   6   7    8           9          10          11          12         13          14
                                                                     log of population in location

                  Note: The figure is based on calculations of standard errors in the poverty rates for communes and
                  municipalities. The figure shows results for both old and new municipalities.



                   4. The aggregation may not correspond precisely to the current administrative divisions because the old second-level
                districts are now defunct, and the former rural municipalities or communes have been abolished and are now counted
                as third-level units, that is, neighborhoods (lagje) or villages (fshat), within the new municipalities. These new results may
                nonetheless be more relevant for policy making today because they more closely mirror the administrative units on which
                policy making and poverty initiatives will become focused henceforward. Subsection 4.2 provides some of these new results.


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                                                              11
CHAPTER 3
12   Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                Results

                   This section summarizes the main results of the poverty mapping exercise in Albania.
                It presents the main maps produced on the poverty rate (headcount), the number of the
                poor individuals, the average monthly per capita consumption, and the Gini coefficient
                (inequality). The maps on poverty in the prefectures, along with descriptive material on
                the results are presented in the Main Annex (available online).




                3.1 General analysis of the results of the mapping
                exercise

                Prefectures
                  The poverty rate (headcount) in Albania was estimated at 14.3 percent in 2012,
                the same to the national poverty rate estimated through the LSMS 2012. The highest
                poverty rate was in Kukës Prefecture (around 22.0 percent), and the lowest rate was
                in Gjirokastër Prefecture (around 8.0 percent).

                  There were 398,131 poor individuals in the country. The number was higher
                in the central region (153,968 poor individuals), and the lowest number was in
                the mountain region (53,337 poor individuals). Tirana Prefecture had the highest
                number of poor people (94,101), Gjirokastër Prefecture had the lowest number
                (5,988).

                  Average per capita monthly consumption in the country in 2012 was 8,477 ALL.
                Prefectures with the highest level of consumption were Gjirokastër (10,190 ALL),
                Korçë (9,260 ALL), and Berat (8,785 ALL), while the prefectures with the lowest
                level of consumption were Kukës (7,126 ALL), Dibër (7,551 ALL) and Elbasan
                (8,192 ALL).


                Municipalities and communes
                  Poverty rates varied across communes, from 2.6 percent in the commune of
                Zagori in Gjirokastër Prefecture to 38.5 percent in the commune of Kalis in Kukës
                Prefecture (map 2). The highest poverty rates were in the communes and districts
                in the northeast of the country, where the darker red color is more expansive in
                map 2. In the south and southeast of the country, poverty rates were substantially
                lower. The poverty rates were higher in the communes and districts of the mountain
                region (20.6 percent), and the lowest rates were in the Tirana region (11.7 percent).

                 The prefectures of Durrës, Kukës, and Tirana showed large differences in the
                poverty rates across municipalities and communes. In the prefecture of Durrës,


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                       13
                         Map 2: Poverty Maps, Communes and Districts, Albania, 2012

                         a. Poverty rates (headcount), communes	                                                                                                 b. Poverty rates (headcount), districts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Poverty Head Count:
                                                                                                                                                     Poverty Head Count                                                                                                by Districts

                                                                                                                                                                      MALËSI E MADHE                        TROPOJË




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HAS

                                                                                                                                                                                  SHKODËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           PUKË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KUKËS


                                                                                                                                                                                  Poverty Head Count:
                                                          Poverty Head Count                                                                                                      LEZHË

                                                                                                                                                                                             by Districts
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MIRDITË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DIBËR


                                                                                                                                                                                    KURBIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MAT

                                                                     MALËSI E MADHE                        TROPOJË                                                                        KRUJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                       DURRËS

                                                                                                                                     HAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  TIRANË
                                                                                 SHKODËR
                                                                                                          PUKË

                                                                                                                                        KUKËS                                                                                     LIBRAZHD
                                                                                                                                                                          KAVAJË

                                                                                                                                                                                           PEQIN             ELBASAN

                                                                                 LEZHË
                                                                                                   MIRDITË
                                                                                                                                                                                 LUSHNJE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POGRADEC
                                                                                                                                DIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KUÇOVË                 GRAMSH
                                                                                   KURBIN
                                                                                                            MAT
                                                                                                                                                                          FIER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BERAT
                                                                                         KRUJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KORÇË
                                                                                                                                BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DEVOLL
                                                                      DURRËS                                                                                                       MALLAKASTËR                           SKRAPAR

                                                                                                 TIRANË



                                                                                                                                                                           VLORË                  TEPELENË                                                              Head Count ratio (%)
                                                                         KAVAJË
                                                                                                                                 LIBRAZHD            Head Count ratio (%).                                                                       KOLONJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PËRMET

                                                                                          PEQIN                                                                          < 8.0                                                                                                              < 8.0
                                                                                                            ELBASAN
                                                                                                                                                                    8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                LUSHNJE                                                                            12.1 - 16.0                                     GJIROKASTËR
                                                                                                                                          POGRADEC
                                                                                                                                                                   16.1 - 20.0                                                                                                         12.0 - 16.0
                                                                                                 KUÇOVË                 GRAMSH
                                                                                                                                                                   20.1 - 24.0                               DELVINË                                                                   18.0 - 20.0
                                                                         FIER                                                                                      24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                    BERAT                                                                                                                                                                                  > 20.0
                                                                                                                                                KORÇË                   > 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                     DEVOLL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SARANDË                                                             Prefecture Boundary
                                                                                  MALLAKASTËR                          SKRAPAR                                   Prefecture Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                 Commune/Municipality Boundary                                                                                          District Boundary



              Source:                                   Head Count ratio
                                                                     VLORË(%).                   TEPELENË                                                                                    Head Count ratio (%)
                                                                                                                                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                               KOLONJË
              Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                            PËRMET       Source:   have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municip
              Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012           <   8.0                                                                      andnot
                                                                                                                                         Populationmay     reflect Census
                                                                                                                                                        Housing             2011
                                                                                                                                                                   exactly the territory of the local units.           < 8.0                                            have been designed for statistical purpose
                                                                   8.0 - 12.0                                                            Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                 may not reflect exactly the territory of the lo
                                                                       12.1 - 16.0                                                                                                                                 8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                                                  GJIROKASTËR
                                                                       16.1 - 20.0                                                                                                                                12.0 - 16.0
                                                                       20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                            DELVINË                                                                                               18.0 - 20.0
                                                                       24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 20.0
                                                                           > 28.0

                                                                     Prefecture Boundary
                                                                                                                  SARANDË                                                                                          Prefecture Boundary

                                                                     Commune/Municipality Boundary                                                                                                                 District Boundary



                          Source: Population
                                     Source:
                                                  and   Housing
                                                   The boundaries        Census
                                                                    of communes    and2011
                                                                                         municipalities                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
                                                   have been designed for statistical purpose and
– LSMS 2012               Living Standard    Measurement
                                     Population and Housing
                                                   may       Census
                                                       not reflect  Survey
                                                                        2011
                                                                   exactly       – LSMS
                                                                           the territory          2012
                                                                                         of the local units.                                                           notboundaries
                                                                                                                                           statistical purpose and may The  reflect of  communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                      exactly      the territory of the local unit
                                                                                                                                                                       have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                           Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.



                          14                                                                                                                                     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                poverty rates ranged from 9.0 percent in the commune of Bubq to 21.0 percent
                in the municipality of Sukth. In the prefecture of Kukës, the lowest poverty rate
                was in Bajram Curri Municipality (10.0 percent), and the highest rate was in Kalis
                Commune (38.5 percent), which is also the poorest commune in the country. In
                the prefecture of Tirana, poverty rates varied from 9.2 percent in the municipality
                of Tirana to 25.2 percent in the municipality of Kamëz.

                  The prefectures with the largest gap between the lowest and highest poverty
                rates were Dibër, Elbasan, and Kukës. In the prefecture of Kukës, the lowest poverty
                rate was in Bajram Curri Municipality (10.0 percent), and the highest rate was in
                Kalis Commune (38.5 percent), the poorest commune in the country. The lowest
                poverty rate in Elbasan Prefecture was in Librazhd Municipality (8.7 percent), and
                the highest was in Orenjë Commune (30.4 percent). In Dibër Prefecture, the lowest
                poverty rate was in the municipality of Burrel (11.2 percent), and the highest rate
                was in Sllovë Commune (29.4 percent).

                  The prefectures of Berat, Fier, and Gjirokastër exhibited the narrowest gaps
                between the lowest and the highest poverty rates, less than 12 percentage points.
                In Gjirokastër Prefecture, the poverty rates ranged from 2.6 percent in Zagori
                Commune to 14.3 percent in the commune of Krahës. In Fier Prefecture, the lowest
                poverty rate occurred in the municipality of Fier (11.0 percent), and the highest
                rate was in Selitë Commune (22.1 percent).

                  Durrës, Elbasan, Kamëz, and Tirana were among the municipalities with the
                higher number of poor people, as well as larger shares of the country’s population so
                that, relative to the country average, the number of poor individuals was higher in
                these municipalities. The number of the poor was low in the communes of Odrie,
                Pogon and Zagori in Gjirokastër Prefecture.

                 The lowest monthly per capita consumption in 2012 was in the communes of
                Kalis (5,839 ALL), Ujmisht (5,983 ALL), and Surroj (6,124 ALL) in Kukës Prefecture.
                The highest values were in the communes of Zagori (13,216 ALL), Pogon (11,936
                ALL) and Odrie (11,839 ALL) in Gjirokastër Prefecture.

                  The level of inequality measured using the Gini coefficient ranged from 19.7
                percent in the commune of Kalis, which is also the poorest commune in the country,
                to 30.0 percent in the commune of Farkë. The communes of Grykë-Çajë, Kala e
                Dodës, and Ujmisht recorded the lowest Gini coefficients, around 20 percent. The
                commune of Dajt and the municipalities of Durrës, Lezhë, Sarandë, and Tirana had
                the highest Gini coefficients in the country, around 28 percent.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                    15
CHAPTER 4
16   Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                Using poverty maps in policy making

                  Understanding which areas have higher poverty rates can potentially allow the
                more accurate and efficient targeting of resources for poverty reduction. For this
                purpose, it is important to understand why these areas are relatively poorer and
                address the associated issues. The reasons are likely to vary from place to place
                and may include inadequate infrastructure, lack of economic activity, and an
                insufficiently skilled workforce.

                   The results on poverty shown in the poverty maps can be easily mapped and
                overlaid, for example, with spatial data on roads and topographical elevations,
                health and educational facilities, population density, and so on to help reveal
                links between poverty and welfare indicators. Likewise, the maps may force more
                thinking in subnational and national decision making and policy making on how
                best to balance the targeting of poor areas and poor people to combat poverty and
                social exclusion, but also improve standards of living and help guide the allocation
                of government expenditures in other areas of development.

                  Led by cutting-edge research and widespread empirical application of the
                poverty mapping methodology, more than 60 countries have, since the late 1990s,
                gained experience in the small area estimation of poverty illustrated by poverty
                maps. Spotlight 1 presents examples of applications in other countries to illustrate
                innovative ways to use the information provided by the maps in policy making.

                  The next paragraphs provide initial insights into using the poverty maps for
                policy making in Albania, but hopefully this is only the beginning as the findings
                of this report are actively employed in policy making in Albania.




                4.1 The poverty maps for policy in Albania
                  We illustrate how the results of the poverty mapping exercise in Albania can be
                useful for policy making in two ways. First, we present the poverty maps revised
                according to the new local administrative units established through the territorial
                reform launched in June 2015 to demonstrate that poverty maps can be adapted and
                made useful within an altered geographical area administrative structure. Second,
                we showcase how census or survey data on other areas of policy interest (education
                coverage, road infrastructure, public welfare expenditure, and so on) may be
                overlaid on the maps to help perform a triage among small geographical areas
                according to particular characteristics to target benefits, implement antipoverty
                programs, support appropriate infrastructure development, and so on.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                   17
Poverty maps of the new local administrative units

  The new territorial division of Albania divide the country into 61 municipalities.
The highest level of poverty is in the municipality Kamëz (about 24 percent),
followed by municipality of Has (23.3 percent) and the municipality of Kukës (23.2
percent). The lowest level of poverty is recorded in the municipalities of Pustec (5
percent), Libohovë (6.7 percent) and Gjirokastra (6.8 percent).

  Municipalities with the largest number of poor are municipalities of Kamëz
(24,695), Durres (27,773 ) and the municipality of Tirana (55,561). The lowest
number of poor recorded in municipalities of Pustec (158), Libohovë (246) and
Dropull (273).

  The lowest level of the average monthly per capita consumption were in
municipalities of Kukës (7,067 ALL), Has (7,192 ALL) and Dibër (7,232 ALL).
While the highest monthly per capita consumption were in the municipalities of
Libohovë (10,895 ALL), Pustec (11,213 ALL) and Gjirokastër (11,215 ALL).

 The municipalities with the lowest level of inequality (Gini coefficent) were
Bulqizë, Kukës and Dibra, lower than 8 percent, and the highest level in the
municipalities of Vlorë, Durrës and Sarandë, around 27 percent.




18                                                      Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                    Map 3: Poverty Rate and Inequality, New Municipalities, 2012                                                                                                                                           Number of poor
                       b. Number of the poor                                                                                    Poverty Head
                                                                                                                                   a. Poverty   Count
                                                                                                                                              rate (headcount)




                                                    Poverty Head Count


                                                                                                                                                            Number of poor individuals




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Persons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   < 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             600 - 150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1501 - 300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3001 - 500

                                                                                                                                Head Count ratio (%).                                                                                      5001 - 900


                                                                                                                                                 < 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9001 - 1300

                                                                                                                                             8.0 - 11.0                                                                                 13001 - 3000
                                                                                                                                            11.1 - 15.0

                                                                                                                                            15.1 - 20.0                                                                                         > 3000

                                                                                                                                                > 20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prefecture Boun
                                                                                                                                             Prefecture Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Municipality Bou
                                                                                                                                             Municipality Boundary      Persons
                                                    Head Count ratio (%).
                                                                                                                Source:                                                                     < 600
         Source:                                                                                                Population and Housing  Census of
                                                                                                                                The boundaries   2011municipalities have been                                                 The boundaries of munici
                                                                      < 8.0                                                                                                             600 - 1500
         Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                     Living Standard designed       Survey –purpose
                                                                                                                                         for statistical
                                                                                                                                Measurement              LSMS 2012and                                                         for statistical purpose and
         Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                     exactly the territory of the
                                                                  8.0 - 11.0                                                                                                       1501 - 3000

                                                                11.1 - 15.0                                                                                                        3001 - 5000

                                                                15.1 - 20.0                                                                                                        5001 - 9000

                                                                     > 20.0                                                                                                      9001 - 13000
                                                                 Prefecture Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                               13001 - 30000
                                                                 Municipality Boundary

                                                                                                                                                                                       > 30000
                                                    The boundaries of municipalities have been
                                                    designed for statistical purpose and
S 2012                                              may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                                                  Prefecture Boundary

                                                                                                                                                                               Municipality Boundary


                    Portraits  of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                            Source:                                                                                                                                                                              19
                                 Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                  The boundaries of municipalities have been designed
                                 Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                      for statistical purpose andmay not reflect
                                                                                                                                                                     exactly the territory of the local units.
                c. The average monthly per capita consumption	                                                        d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                     Per Capita Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Gini Coefficient




                                                                                                                                          Gini Coefficient
                                     Per Capita Consumption




                                                                                                                     Per capita consumption ( ALL/month )


                                                                                                                                           < 7600

                                                                                                                                    7600 - 8500                                                       Gini index (%)

                                                                                                                                    8501 - 9300                                                                                 < 10.0

                                                                                                                                  9301 - 10500                                                                             10.0 - 19.0

                                                                                                                                          > 10500                                                                          19.1 - 24.0

                                                                                                                                   Prefecture Boundary                                                                     24.1 - 26.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 > 26.0
                                                                                                                                  Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prefecture Boundary
                                                                                            Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                                                                                            with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                        Municipality Boundary

Source:
                                                                                                                   The boundaries of municipalitieshave been designed
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                          Source:                                                                                                   The boundaries of communes and municipali
                                       Per capita consumption ( ALL/month )                                        for statistical purpose
                                                                                                                                        Giniandmay      reflect exactly the
                                                                                                                                                    not(%)
                                                                                                                                                index
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                     territory2011
                                                                                            Population and Housing Census    of the local units.                                                      have been designed for statistical purpose an
                                                                                            Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                            may not reflect exactly the territory of the loca
                                                           < 7600                                                                                                   < 10.0

                                                     7600 - 8500                                                                                                10.0 - 19.0

                                                     8501 - 9300                                                                                                19.1 - 24.0

                                                   9301 - 10500                                                                                                 24.1 - 26.0

                                                                                                                                                                     > 26.0
                                                          > 10500
                                                                                                                                                        Prefecture Boundary
                                                    Prefecture Boundary
              Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
              with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                           Municipality Boundary
                                                    Municipality Boundary

              Source:                                                                                                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities
              Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                          have been designed for statistical purpose and
              Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                              may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                Source: Population    and Housing
                                The boundaries            Census 2011
                                                   of municipalitieshave  been designed              The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
                                Measurement
                Living Standard for statistical purposeSurvey
                                                        andmay not – LSMS       2012
                                                                      reflect exactly the           statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit
                                      territory of the local units.




                20                                                                                                       Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                                          Overlaying poverty maps with other data of policy interest

                                             The final maps presented in this section illustrate how data from other sources
                                          and on other topics of interest may be placed on top of the maps to enrich
                                          policymakers’ evidence base on policy relevant challenges to reduce poverty and
                                          inequality. Map 4, for instance, combines poverty headcount data with Census
                                          information on the percentage of households that receive social assistance in each
                                          geographical area. It shows that the percentage of households with social assistance
                                          as a source of income is higher in poorer areas. Map 5 combines information on
                                          poverty headcounts and number of people with low educational attainment5, while
                                          Map 6 shows that there is not a unique pattern across Albania in terms of poverty
                                          and sector of employment concentration of the population.

                                        Source of income of households:                                                                                                        Source of income of househ
                                        Social assistance                                                                                                                      Social assistance
                          Map 4: Poverty Rate and Percentage of
                          Households with Social Assistance, 2012




                                                    Households with social assistance in %                                                                                            Households with social assistanc

                                                                    < 7.0                                                                                                                                 < 7.0

                                                                7.0 - 12.0                                                                                                                            7.0 - 12.0

                                                               12.1 - 20.0                                                                                                                           12.1 - 20.0

                                                               20.1 - 35.0                                                                                                                           20.1 - 35.0


                                                                    > 35.0                                                                                                                               > 35.0


                                                    Poverty Headcount in %                                                                                                            Poverty Headcount in %
                                                                    < 8.0                                                                                                                                 < 8.0
                                                                 8.0 - 11.0                                                                                                                           8.0 - 11.0
                                                               11.1 - 15.0                                                                                                                           11.1 - 15.0
                                                               15.1 - 20.0                                                                                                                           15.1 - 20.0
                                                                    > 20.0                                                                                                                               > 20.0
                                                               Prefecture Boundary                                                                                                                  Prefecture Boundary

                                                               Municipality Boundary                                                                                                                Municipality Boundary




                                             5. For the
                                                  The      education
                                                      boundaries             map, have
                                                                    of municipalities results
                                                                                            been must
                                                                                                    Source:be interpreted with caution as the level of education is used as part of   The boundaries of municipalities have be
Census 2011                                       designed for statistical purpose and              Population and Housing Census 2011                                                designed for statistical purpose and
ment Survey - LSMS 2012                   the model
                                                 may generating         the
                                                       not reflect exactly thepoverty       head
                                                                              territory of the       counts,
                                                                                               localLiving      hence,
                                                                                                     units Standard       by construction these two levels would be correlated.
                                                                                                                    Measurement Survey - LSMS 2012                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the



                          Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                                                                         21
                                        Map 5: Poverty Rate and Number of                                                                  Map 6: Poverty Rate and
                                        People with Primary and Lower                                                                      Share of People Employed by
                                        Secondary Education, 2012                                                                  Educational attainment:
                                                                                                                                           Economic    Sector, 2012                                                                     Employment by econom
                                                                                                                                   Primary and lower secondary




                                                                                                                                                                      Employment by economic activities

                                                                        Educational attainment:
                                                                        Primary and lower secondary

                                                                                                                                   Employment by economic activities

                                                                                                                                                   Number of persons
                            Educational attainment:
                                                                                                                                                                    <= 10000
                            Primary and lower secondary                                                                                                        10001 - 20000


                                                                                                                                                               20001 - 35000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Employment in %
                                                                                                                                                               35001 - 70000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Industry

                                                                                                                                                                      > 70000                                                                                               Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Agriculture
                                                                                        Number of persons
                                                                                                                                                   Poverty Headcount in %                                                                                  Poverty Headcount in %
                                                                                                         <= 10000
                                                                                                                                                                        < 8.0                                                                                                  < 8.0
                                                                                                    10001 - 20000                                                                                                                                                          8.0 - 11.0
                                                                                                                                                                    8.0 - 11.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11.1 - 15.0
                                                                                                    20001 - 35000                                                  11.1 - 15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                                                   15.1 - 20.0                   Employment in %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              > 20.0
                                                                                                    35001 - 70000                                                      > 20.0                                                                                             Prefecture Bo

                                                                                                                                                                Prefecture Boundary                                                                                       Municipality B
                                          Number of persons                                                                                                                                                       Industry
                                                                                                                                                                Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                          > 70000                                                                                                 Services
                                                          <= 10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Agriculture
                                 Source:                                                                                             Source:     The boundaries of municipalities have been                                                               The boundaries of municipalit
                                 Population and Housing10001
                                                        Census  2011
                                                             - 20000                                                                 Population and  Housing
                                                                                                                                                 designed  forCensus    2011
                                                                                                                                                               statistical purpose and                                                                    designed for statistical purpos
                                                                                        Poverty Headcount in %                       Living Standard        Employment          in  % 2012               Poverty Headcount in %
                                 Living Standard Measurement Survey - LSMS 2012                                                                  mayMeasurement
                                                                                                                                                      not reflect    Survey
                                                                                                                                                                  exactly       LSMS
                                                                                                                                                                           the-territory of the local units                                               may not reflect exactly the ter
                                                                                                             < 8.0
                                                      20001 - 35000                                                                                                                                                  < 8.0
                                                                                                         8.0 - 11.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.0 - 11.0
                                                                                                                                                                            Industry
                                                                                                        11.1 - 15.0                                                                                             11.1 - 15.0
                                                     35001 - 70000                                                                                                          Services
                                                                                                        15.1 - 20.0                                                                                            15.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                                                         Agriculture
                                                                                                            > 20.0                                                                                                  > 20.0

                                                                                                     Prefecture Boundary                                   Poverty Headcount in %                               Prefecture Boundary
                                                           > 70000
                                                                                                     Municipality Boundary                                                       < 8.0                          Municipality Boundary

                                                                                                                                                                           8.0 - 11.0
                                         Poverty Population
                                        Source:  Headcount in and
                                                              % Housing Census 2011   The boundaries of municipalities have been
                                                                                                                             The boundaries of communes11.1 and   municipalities have been designed for
                                                                                                                                                               - 15.0
Housing Census 2011                                                       designed for statistical purpose and
Measurement Survey - LSMS 2012
                                                         < 8.0 Source: Survey – LSMS 2012
                                        Living Standard Measurement       may not reflect exactly the territory of the localstatistical
                                                                                                                            units       purpose and may not reflect
                                                                                                                                                          15.1 - 20.0 exactlyThe
                                                                                                                                                                              the territory
                                                                                                                                                                                 boundaries ofof the local
                                                                                                                                                                                              municipalities  unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                             have been
                                                                       Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                      designed for statistical purpose and
                                                          8.0 - 11.0   Living Standard Measurement Survey - LSMS 2012                                                            > 20.0        may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units
                                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture Boundary
                                                         11.1 - 15.0
                                        22                                                                                                                    Municipality and
                                                                                                                                               Portraits of Poverty              Inequality in Albania
                                                                                                                                                                           Boundary
                                                         15.1 - 20.0

                                                             > 20.0

                                    Source:           Prefecture Boundary                                                                                The boundaries of municipalities have been
    Spotlight 1.   Poverty maps and policy making around the world


   Morocco
   The Moroccan government requested the support of the World Bank in 2002 to learn how to use poverty
 mapping techniques and produce a detailed, disaggregated map of poverty throughout the country.6 At the
 time, the Bank was scheduled to undertake a poverty report on the country. This enabled the emergence
 of an active dialogue on how to improve targeting in social spending. When the first poverty map and other
 analyses were completed, key policy makers had already been sensitized to the significance of poverty maps.


   The need for finer geographical targeting of the poor was intensified because of two factors. First, because
 of the threat of terrorism, renewed attention was being focused on the vulnerability of the urban poor and the
 phenomenon of rural-urban migration. More information was needed on pockets of poverty and vulnerability.
 Second, because of a growing budget deficit, there was strong pressure to make public expenditures more
 effective. The desire to minimize benefit leakage to the nonpoor had gained strength.


   The poverty mapping program proceeded for almost a year on technical and policy levels. The technical
 focus permitted a transfer of the capacity to construct poverty maps to local experts, and the policy focus
 stimulated interest in the potential utility of the maps for policy purposes; if the maps were to have an impact
 on policy, they had to appeal to decision makers who would be able to apply them to realize the country’s
 policy goals.


   The World Bank published a poverty report two months after the government’s poverty map report (Morocco,
 Planning Commission 2004; World Bank 2004). Both publications provided analysis of the spatial aspects
 of poverty and inequality, but also other issues. Eventually, the government constructed a second, updated
 poverty map.


   That poverty varied greatly not only among provinces, but also within provinces was an eye-opener for policy
 makers and led to a reappraisal of targeting strategies. Whereas the major poor-area development project . . .
 had relied on province-level targeting, the new information on poor communes provided the government with
 fresh insights into the possible design of a more finely targeted program, the National Initiative for Human
 Development. (Litvack 2007, 216)


   The National Initiative for Human Development was launched in May 2005. The government announced
 that $1 billion would be allocated to the program, half of which would go to efforts to target extra resources
 to the poorest 360 rural communes and poorest 250 urban neighborhoods. The maps were to be used for
 targeting purposes.


   The maps also began to play an interesting role in promoting local governance. Several governors had been
 surprised by some of the poverty map data and had undertaken site visits to confirm the data. The poverty
 maps thus contributed to a much broader agenda of transparency and good governance.




  6. This brief case study on Morocco owes much to World Bank (2015).


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                                 23
     European Union, 2012–2014
     In 2012–14, the World Bank assisted in the creation
of poverty maps of Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland,
Romania, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia as part
of an ongoing European Commission effort to produce
poverty maps of all countries in the European Union.
The maps portray subnational geographical areas, such
as municipalities, counties, and districts, and highlight
the small areas most likely to exhibit the highest risk
of poverty in each of these member states. The new
maps complement other information on the correlates
of poverty that enhances regional policy and program
design. They have effectively guided decision making
and policy making at the subnational and national
levels in member states of the European Union and                         Map: Poverty Mapping in the European Union
have assisted the European Commission in allocating                            Source: Simler and van der Weide 2015.

national and regional development and financing program funds
efficiently to areas with the greatest need. As the national partners of the project, government authorities,
mainly experts at national statistical institutes and ministries, have benefited from substantial knowledge
and skill spillovers about poverty mapping through the project. The spillovers have gained prominence
through academic research by catalyzing greater communication and collaboration.


     Other examples
     The following is an alphabetical list of selected countries in which poverty mapping has been used to
achieve a representative policy end. The name of the country is followed by the year of the map and a brief
description of the policy applications.


     Bolivia, 2002–2003
     In Bolivia, the method was used to create consumption poverty maps at the level of municipalities (Arias
and Robles 2007). The purpose was to generate local indicators of monetary poverty and consumption
inequality for the measurement of municipal disparities. On-site interviews with potential map users in
2006 revealed that the maps were being used in planning. Thus, national and international institutions
were using the maps to plan strategies, activities, and programs. The latter included the Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation and the United Nations Development Programme. The maps were also being
used to target public productive and social investments and regional development resources, including a
community investment program funded by the Inter-American Development Bank.


     Bulgaria, 2003, 2005
     The first poverty and inequality maps on Bulgaria measured and illustrated mean per capita consumption
by municipality, the poverty headcount index, and the poverty depth index (Gotcheva 2007). Among the many
initiatives that relied on the maps were targeted antipoverty interventions for the poorest municipalities, and
the mainstreaming of antipoverty policies directed at the municipalities identified as the poorest into national
strategic documents aimed at the reduction of poverty, the promotion of employment, and the elimination of social
exclusion. A targeted training and employment program created well over 1,000 jobs in poor municipalities.


     Cambodia, 2002
     The primary objective of the poverty mapping exercise in Cambodia was, from the outset, to develop a

24                                                              Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
 tool for policy making and, especially, for the allocation of resources (Fujii 2007). Interviews conducted among
 potential users in 2006 revealed that, among the many applications, the maps were being used by the World
 Food Programme to create overlay maps on infrastructure, flood and draught vulnerability, and education to
 link poverty and these issues that highlighted small geographical areas with particular needs. The resulting
 nutrition maps and other sorts of maps, along with field observations, became a fundamental tool of the World
 Food Programme in the identification of areas for program intervention.


   Yunnan Province, China, 2002–2003
   Poverty mapping was undertaken in Yunnan Province—selected because of its ethnic diversity and relatively
 high poverty incidence—to test whether the methodology might produce reliable poverty incidence estimates
 down to the township level in rural areas and down to the district level in urban areas (Ahmad and Goh 2007a).
 The National Development and Reform Commission used the map to review the county-level allocation of
 project funding, as well as the incidence of poverty in all counties. The World Bank and the U.K. Department
 for International Development have used the poverty maps to help select beneficiary areas for a community
 development project. The data issues uncovered during the exercise were particularly valuable in improving
 data collection at the National Bureau of Statistics.


   Ecuador, 1990, 2001
   A central goal in constructing the 2001 poverty maps was to enable users to track changes in small area
 estimates of poverty since the creation of the maps in 1990 (Araujo 2007). In addition, Ecuador independently
 produced poverty maps on unmet basic needs and poverty maps on poverty, health, education, employment,
 and the environment. The maps were applied on a small scale to determine the appropriate location for projects
 in employment, microfinance, and small- and medium-enterprise development; urban reconstruction projects
 in historic neighborhoods; the construction of maps on food security and food vulnerability; geographical
 targeting and donor projects; targeting the allocation of educational inputs; determining the location of early
 childhood development interventions; internal planning and targeting investments at ministries; and targeting
 emergency social investments.


   Indonesia, 2002–2004
   The national poverty maps have been used in various applications by government agencies, donors, and
 nongovernmental organizations (Ahmad and Goh 2007b). These applications include facilitating budget
 estimates of unconditional cash transfers to the poor, the selection of program beneficiary areas, cross-
 checking and referencing government poverty data, the production of follow-up nutrition maps, identifying poor
 districts for local development planning, and guiding policy advice to the government in donor projects.


   Sri Lanka, 2005
   The poverty maps produced in Sri Lanka have not only enhanced public awareness of the significant
 regional inequalities in the country, but also encouraged policy makers to take appropriate steps to address
 the severe deprivation that still prevails in rural and remote areas (Vishwanath and Yoshida 2007). They are
 having an effect on policies, lending strategies, and research. In particular, the poverty maps are influencing
 road projects, helping revive the government’s initiative to improve targeting in benefit transfer programs, and
 identifying the poorest areas to raise benefits there.


   Vietnam, 1997, 1999, 2003, 2005
   Interviews were conducted in 2006 to determine impacts of the various poverty mapping exercises in Vietnam
 (Swinkels and Turk 2007). These impacts included improvements in understanding the nature of poverty in the
 country, better targeting of resources, and facilitating reviews of poverty measurement techniques.

Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                                 25
CHAPTER 5
26   Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
                Conclusions

                  This report presents results for the new poverty maps in Albania using 2012 LSMS
                and 2011 census data and incorporating improvements to the poverty mapping
                technique. A poverty map is a geographical profile that shows where poverty is
                concentrated in a country by providing information on lower geographic levels, in
                the case of Albania, in the municipalities and communes. The analysis of maps is
                done based on four main indicators: poverty rate, number of poor people, average
                monthly per capita consumption and inequality measured by the Gini coefficient.
                These four indicators are presented on country, region, 12 prefectures level and for
                each municipality / commune.

                  Poverty maps may be applied in policy making in three key ways: (1) as a
                benchmark against existing resource allocation criteria, for example, whether the
                allocation of social-assistance block grants according to previously established
                criteria correlate with an appropriate allocation based on current poverty rates; (2)
                as a tool in targeting public spending; and (3) for the provision of data to monitor the
                progress toward achieving particular government welfare goals. Nongovernmental
                organizations and international bilateral and multilateral institutions can also rely
                on poverty maps in supplying advisory services to local governments and donor
                agencies and in designing joint intervention strategies.




                Summary of main results
                  In Albania, 14.3 percent (2012) of population lived in poverty. The highest level
                of poverty was concentrated in the northeast of the country, while in the south and
                southeast this indicator is much lower. The level of poverty was highest in Mountain
                region (20.6 percent) and the lowest level was in Tirana region (11.7 percent).

                   The highest level of poverty was in the prefecture of Kukës (around 22 percent)
                and the lowest level was recorded in the prefecture of Gjirokastër (around 8 percent).
                Poverty level varied from 2.6 percent, in the commune of Zagori in the prefecture
                of Gjirokastër, to 38.5 percent in the commune of Kalis in the prefecture of Kukës.

                   Looking to the fluctuations of poverty level inside each prefecture it was noted
                that prefectures of Kukës, Tiranë and Durrës had big differences of poverty level
                between municipalities/communes.

                  According to 2012 data, the number of poor people in the country was 398.131
                individuals. The number of poor people was higher in the Central region (153.968
                poor individuals) and the lowest number was in the Mountain region (53.337 poor
                individuals). The prefecture with the highest number of poor people was Tirana


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                       27
(94.101 poor individuals) while the prefecture of Gjirokastër had the lowest number
of the poor people (5.988 poor individuals). The number of poor people was
generally concentrated on those municipalities/ communes where the population
density was higher. The highest number of poor people was in the prefecture of
Tirana, in the municipality of Tirana with 37.672 poor individuals and with a level
of poverty 9.2 percent, followed by municipalities of Kamëz and Durrës with more
than 15.000 poor individuals. The number of poor people was lower in communes
Zagori, Pogon and Odrie, part of Gjirokastër prefecture.

   According to 2012 data, the average monthly per capita consumption in the
country was 8.477 ALL. The average per capita consumption level seemed higher
in the south of the country compared with other areas. The highest value of the
average per capita consumption was in the Central region (8.991 ALL) while the
lowest value was recorded in the Mountain region (7.368 ALL).

   Prefectures with the highest level of per capita consumption were Gjirokastër
(10.190 ALL), Korça (9.260 ALL) and Berat (8.785 ALL), while the prefectures with
the minimum level of per capita consumption were those of Kukës (7.126 ALL),
Diber (7.551 ALL) and Elbasan (7.979 ALL).

   The lowest values of per capita consumption were recorded in the communes
of Kalis (5.839 ALL), Ujmisht (5.983 ALL) and Surroj (6.124 ALL) of Kukës
prefecture. The highest values were recorded in the communes of Zagoria (13.216
ALL), Pogon (11.936 ALL) and Odrie (11.839 ALL) of Gjirokastër prefecture.

   The level of inequality measured by Gini coefficient was around 24 percent. The
highest level of inequality was in the Tirana region (25.7 percent) and the lowest
level was in the Mountain region (22.7 percent). The highest level of inequality was
recorded in the prefecture of Shkodër (25.1 percent) and the lowest level in the
prefecture of Kukës (22.4 percent).

  The level of inequality ranged from 19.7 percent in the commune of Kalis, which
was also the poorest commune of the country, to 30 percent in the commune of
Farka.

   The communes of Gryke Caj, Ujemisht and Kala e Dodës also recorded lowest
level of Gini Coefficient, around 20 percent. After commune of Farka, Municipalities
of Lezha, Durrës, Saranda, Tirana and the commune of Dajti had the highest levels
of inequality in the country, around 28 percent.

   Inequality is in the same direction with per capita consumption and in the
opposite direction with the level of poverty. However, if we take into consideration
a detailed level of geographical disaggregation we note that this condition is not
always fulfilled.




28                                                      Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania   29
References
  Ahmad, Yusuf, and Chor-ching Goh. 2007a. “Poverty Maps of Yunnan Province: Uses and Lessons
for Scaling-Up in China.” In More Than a Pretty Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies
and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi, Aline Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 143–52. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
  ———. 2007b. “Indonesia’s Poverty Maps: Impacts and Lessons.” In More Than a Pretty Picture:
Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi, Aline Coudouel,
and Kenneth Simler, 177–87. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Araujo, María Caridad. 2007. “The 1990 and 2001 Ecuador Poverty Maps.” In More Than a Pretty
Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi, Aline
Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 153–76. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Arias, Omar, and Marcos Robles. 2007. “The Geography of Monetary Poverty in Bolivia: The
Lessons of Poverty Maps.” In More Than a Pretty Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies
and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi, Aline Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 67–89. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
  Betti Gianni, Andrew Dabalen, Celine Ferrè, and Laura Neri. 2010. “Further Updating Poverty
Mapping in Albania.” Paper presented at the World Bank conference, “Poverty and Social Inclusion
in the Western Balkans,” Brussels, December 14–15.
  Betti, Gianni, Laura Neri, and Francesca Ballini. 2003. “Poverty and Inequality Mapping in
Albania: Final Report.” Unpublished working paper, World Bank and Institute of Statistics, Tirana,
Albania.
  Dabalen, Andrew, and Celine Ferrè. 2008. “Updating Poverty Maps: A Case Study of Albania.”
Unpublished working paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
  EC (European Commission). 2010. “Europe 2020: A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable, and Inclusive
Growth.” Communication from the Commission (March 3), EC, Brussels. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:2020:FIN:EN:PDF.
  Elbers, Chris, Jean O. Lanjouw, and Peter F. Lanjouw. 2002. “Micro-Level Estimation of Welfare.”
Policy Research Working Paper 2911, World Bank, Washington, DC.
  ———. 2003. “Micro-Level Estimation of Poverty and Inequality.” Econometrica 71 (1): 355–64.
  Elbers, Chris, and Roy van der Weide. 2014. “Estimation of Normal Mixtures in a Nested Error
Model with an Application to Small Area Estimation of Poverty and Inequality.” Policy Research
Working Paper 6962, World Bank, Washington, DC.
  Foster, James, Joel Greer, and Erik Thorbecke. 1984. “A Class of Decomposable Poverty Measures.”
Econometrica 52 (3): 761–66.
  Fujii, Tomoki. 2007. “To Use or Not to Use? Poverty Mapping in Cambodia.” In More Than a
Pretty Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi,
Aline Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 125–42. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Gotcheva, Boryana. 2007. “The Poverty Mapping Exercise in Bulgaria.” In More Than a Pretty
Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi, Aline
Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 90–124. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Hungary, Ministry for National Economy. 2015. “National Reform Programme 2015 of Hungary.”
Ministry for National Economy, Budapest.
  INSTAT (Albanian Institute of Statistics). 2004. “Poverty and Inequality Mapping in Albania.”
Report, INSTAT, Tirana, Albania.
  ———. 2012. Population and Housing Census, 2011: Main Results. Tirana, Albania: INSTAT.


30                                                     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania
  ———. 2013. “Albania: Trends in Poverty, 2002-2005-2008-2012.” September, INSTAT, Tirana,
Albania.
  ———. 2014. “Albania, Dwelling and Living Conditions.” May, INSTAT, Tirana, Albania.
  INSTAT (Albanian Institute of Statistics) and IOM (International Organization for Migration).
2014. “Migracioni i kthimit dhe ri-integrimi në Shqipëri, 2013” (Return migration and reintegration
in Albania, 2013). INSTAT and IOM, Tirana, Albania. http://www.instat.gov.al/al/themes/popullsia/
publications/books/2014/migracioni-i-kthimit-dhe-ri-integrimi-në-shqipëri-2013.aspx.
  Kilic, Talip, and Thomas Pave Sohnesen. 2015. “Same Question but Different Answer:
Experimental Evidence on Questionnaire Design’s Impact on Poverty Measured by Proxies.” Policy
Research Working Paper 7182, World Bank, Washington, DC.
  KSH (Hungarian Central Statistical Office) and World Bank. 2013. “Poverty Mapping in Hungary:
Making Better Policies through Better-Targeted Interventions.” Poverty Mapping Brief, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
  Lemieux, Thomas. 2002. “Decomposing Changes in Wage Distributions: A Unified Approach.”
Canadian Journal of Economics 35 (4): 646–88.
  Litvack, Jennie. 2007. “The Poverty Mapping Application in Morocco.” In More Than a Pretty
Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions, edited by Tara Bedi, Aline
Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 208–24. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Molina, Isabel, and J. N. K. Rao. 2010. “Small Area Estimation of Poverty Indicators.” Canadian
Journal of Statistics 38 (3): 369–85.
  Morocco, Planning Commission. 2004. “Carte de la pauvreté communale.” Report, Planning
Commission, Rabat, Morocco.
  Simler, Kenneth, and Roy van der Weide. 2015. “Poverty Mapping: Concepts, Policy Applications,
and Preliminary Results in Croatia.” Report presented during a World Bank mission, Zagreb,
Croatia, December 18.
  Sohnesen, Thomas Pave and Niels Stender. 2016. “Is Random Forest a Superior Methodology
for Predicting Poverty?: An Empirical Assessment.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
(7612).
  Swinkels, Rob, and Carrie Turk. 2007. “Poverty Mapping: The Experience of Vietnam.” In More
Than a Pretty Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions, edited by Tara
Bedi, Aline Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 261–86. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  Tarozzi, Alessandro, and Angus S. Deaton. 2009. “Using Census and Survey Data to Estimate
Poverty and Inequality for Small Areas.” Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4): 773–92.
  Vishwanath, Tara, and Nobuo Yoshida. 2007. “Poverty Maps in Sri Lanka: Policy Impacts and
Lessons.” In More Than a Pretty Picture: Using Poverty Maps to Design Better Policies and Interventions,
edited by Tara Bedi, Aline Coudouel, and Kenneth Simler, 225–40. Washington, DC: World Bank.
  World Bank. 2004. “Kingdom of Morocco Poverty Report: Strengthening Policy by Identifying
the Geographic Dimension of Poverty.” Report 28223-MOR, Social and Economic Development
Group, Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank, Washington, DC.
  ———. 2012. “Recommendations for the Sample Design and Estimation Procedures for the 2012
Albania LSMS.” World Bank, Tirana, Albania.
  ———. 2015. “Pinpointing Poverty on Maps of Europe.” Draft report (July 13), World Bank,
Washington, DC.
  Zhao, Qinghua, and Peter Lanjouw. 2009. “Using PovMap2: A User’s Guide.” World Bank,
Washington, DC.



Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania                                                       31
AnnexES
32   Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
Results of the 2012 Poverty Maps

                                                                                               Mean
                                             Poverty-                            Poor
   District     Commune        Population               s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita     s.e.
                                            Headcount                          population
                                                                                            consumption

    BERAT         BERAT         36,374        0.124     0.01   0.259   0.003   9,406.61      9,269.28     211.65

    BERAT        KUTALLI         9,643        0.145     0.02   0.240   0.006   2,314.62      8,443.02     311.52

    BERAT         LUMAS          3,975        0.154     0.04   0.239   0.008    949.50       8,309.24     416.36

    BERAT       VELABISHT        8,469        0.135     0.02   0.235   0.005   1,992.95      8,495.93     312.29

    BERAT         OTLLAK         9,203        0.121     0.02   0.245   0.005   2,250.88      8,926.60     338.23

    BERAT        POSHNJË         7,366        0.123     0.02   0.240   0.005   1,767.89      8,809.21     326.61

    BERAT        ROSHNIK         2,513        0.123     0.04   0.238   0.009    597.89       8,786.14     595.11

    BERAT         SINJË          3,365        0.178     0.04   0.233   0.008    783.75       7,872.54     406.04

    BERAT        TERPAN          1,699        0.160     0.04   0.224   0.009    380.86       7,900.38     467.67

    BERAT     URA VAJGURORE      7,232        0.126     0.03   0.245   0.006   1,774.81      8,908.28     404.98

    BERAT        VERTOP          4,914        0.124     0.03   0.238   0.006   1,167.30      8,707.51     419.57

    BERAT        CUKALAT         3,045        0.151     0.03   0.227   0.008    690.21       8,139.50     442.85

   BULQIZË       BULQIZË         8,171        0.136     0.03   0.226   0.006   1,847.12      8,204.99     379.96

   BULQIZË    FUSHË-BULQIZË      3,342        0.244     0.02   0.231   0.005    770.35       7,110.53     320.65

   BULQIZË       GJORICË         4,213        0.185     0.02   0.226   0.004    953.48       7,567.87     326.03

   BULQIZË      TREBISHT          993         0.179     0.04   0.233   0.010    231.11       7,752.53     721.70

   BULQIZË       OSTREN          3,034        0.202     0.04   0.242   0.008    733.17       7,636.99     637.82

   BULQIZË      SHUPENZË         5,499        0.195     0.03   0.229   0.006   1,257.73      7,538.49     552.88

   BULQIZË       ZERQAN          4,111        0.239     0.05   0.232   0.011    952.50       7,154.24     689.88

   BULQIZË     MARTANESH         1,827        0.144     0.08   0.247   0.018    451.03       8,478.82     982.58

   DELVINË       DELVINË         5,754        0.130     0.02   0.255   0.005   1,467.59      9,060.40     454.50

   DELVINË         FINIQ         1,333        0.120     0.05   0.248   0.010    330.78       9,055.23     814.25

   DELVINË     MESOPOTAM         2,786        0.119     0.03   0.247   0.007    688.13       9,059.55     485.26

   DELVINË        VERGO          1,844        0.152     0.05   0.259   0.011    478.33       8,772.81     693.48

   DEVOLL        BILISHT         6,250        0.085     0.06   0.265   0.014   1,655.37      10,510.27    682.51

   DEVOLL     QENDËR BILISHT     5,440        0.107     0.07   0.255   0.017   1,387.33      9,505.65     723.17

   DEVOLL         MIRAS          6,577        0.096     0.06   0.248   0.015   1,632.94      9,549.12     631.64

   DEVOLL        HOÇISHT         4,465        0.107     0.05   0.253   0.013   1,131.13      9,436.70     462.01

   DEVOLL        PROGËR          3,988        0.094     0.03   0.251   0.007   1,001.63      9,717.08     384.48

    DIBËR         ARRAS          3,055        0.233     0.04   0.218   0.010    666.40       7,000.51     472.05

    DIBËR     FUSHË-ÇIDHËN       2,909        0.190     0.04   0.218   0.010    633.94       7,381.44     480.09

    DIBËR      KALAEDODËS        2,252        0.250     0.06   0.204   0.015    458.49       6,721.67     577.87

    DIBËR       KASTRIOT         6,201        0.208     0.02   0.226   0.005   1,401.04      7,338.83     400.23

    DIBËR          LURË          1,096        0.197     0.05   0.242   0.011    265.45       7,671.74     459.02

    DIBËR      MAQELLARË        10,666        0.240     0.05   0.225   0.011   2,400.35      7,051.03     516.77

    DIBËR         MELAN          3,649        0.216     0.05   0.212   0.012    775.32       7,088.48     688.29

    DIBËR     FUSHË-MUHUR        2,780        0.192     0.07   0.228   0.018    635.05       7,554.82     623.59

    DIBËR       PESHKOPI        13,251        0.207     0.02   0.234   0.004   3,102.99      7,524.95     486.32

    DIBËR     QENDËR TOMIN       7,591        0.195     0.05   0.222   0.012   1,684.63      7,406.90     609.35

    DIBËR        SELISHTË        1,605        0.264     0.02   0.217   0.005    348.49       6,765.42     320.28

    DIBËR         SLLOVË         2,405        0.294     0.02   0.224   0.005    537.88       6,640.84     308.91

    DIBËR      ZALL DARDHË       1,045        0.289     0.02   0.252   0.006    263.00       6,954.80     370.42

    DIBËR        ZALLREÇ          681         0.284     0.03   0.218   0.007    148.28       6,659.97     367.84

    DIBËR         LUZNI          2,433        0.259     0.02   0.216   0.004    526.53       6,781.79     384.30

   DURRËS        DURRËS         112,957       0.141     0.04   0.279   0.009   31,532.36     9,350.70     383.86

   DURRËS        GJEPALAJ        3,449        0.197     0.03   0.236   0.007    815.11       7,658.84     404.03

   DURRËS         ISHËM          5,001        0.170     0.01   0.243   0.003   1,215.02      8,073.33     186.36

   DURRËS       KATUND I RI     10,161        0.202     0.05   0.238   0.012   2,422.19      7,606.73     743.86




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                          33
                                                                                                  Mean
                                              Poverty-                              Poor
     District    Commune        Population                 s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita      s.e.
                                             Headcount                            population
                                                                                               consumption
     DURRËS       MAMINAS         4,458        0.134       0.05   0.250   0.012    1,115.93     8,777.43     591.58

     DURRËS        MANËZ          6,652        0.209       0.02   0.251   0.005    1,670.59     7,787.06     382.27

     DURRËS      RRASHBULL       23,952        0.167       0.04   0.247   0.010    5,911.82     8,167.22     509.30

     DURRËS        SHIJAK         7,573        0.125       0.02   0.266   0.005    2,011.28     9,381.52     344.01

     DURRËS        SUKTH         15,966        0.211       0.06   0.238   0.015    3,803.94     7,514.20     682.01

     DURRËS      XHAFZOTAJ       12,381        0.160       0.03   0.249   0.008    3,079.83     8,325.25     517.96

     ELBASAN       BELSH          8,781        0.092       0.03   0.243   0.006    2,132.61     9,481.24     442.46

     ELBASAN    BRADASHESH       10,700        0.173       0.03   0.239   0.007    2,560.68     8,024.96     432.87

     ELBASAN       CËRRIK         6,695        0.147       0.04   0.257   0.009    1,721.89     8,805.69     394.97

     ELBASAN      ELBASAN        78,467        0.127       0.07   0.263   0.018   20,638.38     9,323.16     597.56

     ELBASAN       FIERZË         2,065        0.129       0.04   0.246   0.009    509.01       8,956.70     408.28

     ELBASAN       FUNARË         2,122        0.175       0.03   0.233   0.008    493.47       7,900.93     483.71

     ELBASAN      GJERGJAN        5,126        0.116       0.05   0.240   0.012    1,232.14     8,914.58     601.57

     ELBASAN       GJINAR         3,233        0.153       0.03   0.244   0.007    787.97       8,384.91     446.98

     ELBASAN      GOSTIMË         8,116        0.119       0.02   0.248   0.005    2,009.75     9,043.50     363.93

     ELBASAN       GRACEN         2,192        0.173       0.03   0.241   0.008    529.20       8,152.79     380.41

     ELBASAN       GREKAN         3,138        0.130       0.04   0.244   0.010    764.93       8,734.89     440.66

     ELBASAN       KAJAN          3,925        0.123       0.06   0.239   0.015    937.52       8,766.91     755.72

     ELBASAN        KLOS          3,262        0.133       0.03   0.236   0.007    769.54       8,526.69     381.20

     ELBASAN    LABINOT-FUSHË     7,058        0.180       0.05   0.234   0.012    1,649.48     7,838.76     684.11

     ELBASAN     LABINOT-MAL      5,291        0.232       0.03   0.222   0.006    1,174.89     7,133.00     390.75

     ELBASAN       MOLLAS         5,530        0.179       0.03   0.237   0.009    1,309.16     7,913.17     474.26

     ELBASAN       PAPËR          6,348        0.133       0.03   0.235   0.007    1,490.23     8,523.49     489.17

     ELBASAN       RRASË          1,594        0.146       0.03   0.230   0.008    366.89       8,234.83     445.28

     ELBASAN       SHALËS         3,842        0.132       0.03   0.247   0.007    950.63       8,857.88     1,181.04

     ELBASAN      SHIRGJAN        7,307        0.116       0.03   0.247   0.005    1,808.13     9,101.66     683.18

     ELBASAN      SHUSHICË        8,722        0.156       0.03   0.234   0.006    2,043.71     8,142.32     640.93

     ELBASAN       TREGAN         3,036        0.166       0.02   0.232   0.005    703.00       7,967.98     593.76

     ELBASAN       ZAVALIN        1,622        0.162       0.01   0.246   0.003    399.68       8,394.10     386.01

      FIER         CAKRAN        11,722        0.194       0.03   0.237   0.007    2,774.67     7,659.54     944.36

      FIER       DERMENAS         7,788        0.188       0.03   0.237   0.006    1,845.73     7,748.79     979.97

      FIER          FIER         55,752        0.110       0.02   0.271   0.004   15,093.48     9,826.79     736.23

      FIER        FRAKULL         6,820        0.161       0.03   0.234   0.007    1,593.22     8,011.48     1,378.06

      FIER        RUZHDIE         2,328        0.179       0.04   0.220   0.008    512.60       7,597.36     739.66

      FIER         KUMAN          5,611        0.194       0.03   0.235   0.005    1,319.16     7,660.11     1,437.85

      FIER         KURJAN         3,618        0.204       0.04   0.228   0.007    825.37       7,436.27     956.02

      FIER         LEVAN          8,159        0.162       0.02   0.246   0.005    2,011.01     8,269.19     1,207.65

      FIER        LIBOFSHË        6,149        0.151       0.04   0.245   0.008    1,505.68     8,418.25     776.19

      FIER       MBROSTAR         7,460        0.193       0.03   0.241   0.007    1,794.37     7,753.67     757.50

      FIER         PATOS         15,397        0.144       0.06   0.246   0.013    3,792.67     8,556.48     840.06

      FIER         PORTËZ         8,259        0.164       0.03   0.235   0.007    1,940.90     7,992.24     701.85

      FIER        QENDËR          4,207        0.168       0.02   0.241   0.004    1,014.89     8,103.62     510.13

      FIER       ROSKOVEC         4,975        0.150       0.03   0.245   0.006    1,219.48     8,443.80     623.15

      FIER         STRUM          7,538        0.208       0.03   0.222   0.006    1,676.02     7,286.74     704.58

      FIER         TOPOJË         4,246        0.157       0.03   0.247   0.007    1,047.42     8,385.20     571.36

      FIER        ZHARRËS         5,247        0.166       0.03   0.245   0.007    1,283.03     8,167.52     615.37

     GRAMSH       GRAMSH          8,440        0.123       0.05   0.240   0.010    2,028.71     8,750.16     683.07

     GRAMSH       KODOVJAT        2,355        0.173       0.04   0.226   0.008    531.12       7,691.24     706.28

     GRAMSH       KUSHOVË          659         0.118       0.04   0.224   0.010    147.56       8,424.68     439.94

     GRAMSH         LENIE          779         0.157       0.06   0.216   0.013    168.54       7,748.44     756.97

     GRAMSH        PISHAJ         4,906        0.200       0.06   0.233   0.014    1,145.49     7,552.86     827.59

     GRAMSH       POROÇAN         1,269        0.268       0.04   0.229   0.008    290.28       6,868.46     702.41




34                                                     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                   Mean
                                                 Poverty-                            Poor
   District       Commune          Population               s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita      s.e.
                                                Headcount                          population
                                                                                                consumption
   GRAMSH      SKËNDERBEGAS          1,239        0.175     0.03   0.249   0.008    308.80       8,101.17     479.74

   GRAMSH           KUKUR            2,560        0.123     0.03   0.239   0.007    612.85       8,564.93     541.14

   GRAMSH            SULT             631         0.202     0.05   0.218   0.012    137.38       7,338.24     691.66

   GRAMSH           TUNJË            1,393        0.193     0.02   0.230   0.005    320.52       7,593.94     597.05

 GJIROKASTËR      ANTIGONE            998         0.053     0.02   0.260   0.005    259.23       11,649.14    566.55

 GJIROKASTËR        CEPO             1,727        0.070     0.02   0.255   0.005    440.22       10,567.58    536.86

 GJIROKASTËR   DROPULL I POSHTËM     2,095        0.096     0.02   0.254   0.004    532.83       9,932.79     339.50

 GJIROKASTËR   DROPULL I SIPËRM       969         0.061     0.02   0.261   0.005    252.82       11,536.34    366.34

 GJIROKASTËR    GJIROKASTËR         19,708        0.069     0.02   0.272   0.005   5,352.86      11,295.29    405.05

 GJIROKASTËR       LAZARAT           2,801        0.070     0.05   0.268   0.011    750.90       11,195.05    1,096.89

 GJIROKASTËR      LIBOHOVË           1,992        0.064     0.06   0.249   0.013    496.55       10,736.00    800.93

 GJIROKASTËR      LUNXHËRI           1,941        0.052     0.03   0.252   0.005    488.20       11,227.19    734.71

 GJIROKASTËR        ODRIE             433         0.039     0.04   0.242   0.009    104.66       11,838.65    825.41

 GJIROKASTËR        PICAR             937         0.088     0.05   0.252   0.011    236.52       10,040.16    1,202.51

 GJIROKASTËR       POGON              432         0.031     0.03   0.228   0.006     98.54       11,935.76    809.77

 GJIROKASTËR   QENDËR LIBOHOVË       1,264        0.085     0.06   0.257   0.013    324.67       10,401.89    938.23

 GJIROKASTËR       ZAGORI             411         0.026     0.03   0.240   0.005     98.67       13,215.98    504.54

     HAS            FAJZA            3,476        0.258     0.02   0.229   0.005    794.51       6,954.45     440.03

     HAS            GOLAJ            6,187        0.231     0.04   0.237   0.009   1,469.39      7,311.64     593.26

     HAS            GJINAJ           1,106        0.257     0.01   0.213   0.003    236.09       6,806.49     276.92

     HAS           KRUMË             6,006        0.167     0.06   0.235   0.014   1,412.20      7,990.25     772.38

    KAVAJË         GOLEM             6,833        0.171     0.02   0.253   0.004   1,729.25      8,247.80     352.45

    KAVAJË          GOSË             4,120        0.164     0.02   0.246   0.003   1,011.95      8,224.78     555.14

    KAVAJË         HELMËS            3,139        0.198     0.04   0.234   0.009    733.36       7,596.85     539.60

    KAVAJË          KAVAJË          20,144        0.151     0.05   0.264   0.011   5,321.64      8,897.86     728.36

    KAVAJË        KRYEVIDH           4,662        0.174     0.03   0.242   0.006   1,129.33      8,050.43     481.88

    KAVAJË          LEKAJ            5,116        0.160     0.02   0.240   0.005   1,225.28      8,165.05     295.39

    KAVAJË        LUZIVOGEL          4,735        0.136     0.02   0.246   0.004   1,163.58      8,656.10     309.03

    KAVAJË      RROGOZHINË           6,650        0.209     0.02   0.251   0.004   1,666.04      7,769.04     392.02

    KAVAJË       SINABALLAJ          1,191        0.220     0.03   0.215   0.008    256.45       7,152.35     578.22

    KAVAJË          SYNEJ            4,995        0.165     0.03   0.252   0.007   1,258.43      8,385.83     444.64

   KOLONJË        BARMASH             480         0.077     0.07   0.235   0.017    112.86       9,994.94     1,057.55

   KOLONJË          ÇLIRIM            355         0.113     0.03   0.226   0.006     80.24       8,769.87     367.16

   KOLONJË         ERSEKË            3,746        0.071     0.02   0.246   0.005    921.10       10,266.23    249.81

   KOLONJË        LESKOVIK           1,525        0.089     0.04   0.238   0.011    362.81       9,667.71     347.69

   KOLONJË        LESKOVIK            416         0.087     0.04   0.231   0.010     96.12       9,786.44     554.13

   KOLONJË         MOLLAS            1,520        0.073     0.02   0.246   0.004    373.99       10,195.94    282.86

   KOLONJË        NOVOSELË            355         0.087     0.03   0.233   0.008     82.80       9,490.57     375.55

   KOLONJË         QENDËR            2,673        0.083     0.03   0.255   0.008    682.88       10,151.93    390.91

    KORÇË         DRENOVË            5,199        0.100     0.05   0.259   0.011   1,344.94      9,752.06     529.57

    KORÇË           GORË             1,565        0.119     0.04   0.247   0.010    386.03       9,075.09     557.84

    KORÇË           KORÇË           50,847        0.096     0.06   0.270   0.014   13,727.29     10,393.99    444.98

    KORÇË           LEKAS             386         0.143     0.06   0.245   0.015     94.60       8,626.25     677.32

    KORÇË          LIBONIK           8,922        0.116     0.05   0.247   0.012   2,204.61      9,101.16     503.79

    KORÇË          LIQENAS           3,154        0.051     0.05   0.249   0.012    786.32       11,140.89    575.27

    KORÇË           MALIQ            4,290        0.122     0.02   0.242   0.005   1,040.17      8,902.12     418.94

    KORÇË         MOGLICË             951         0.123     0.04   0.237   0.009    225.15       8,845.02     508.40

    KORÇË          MOLLAJ            3,438        0.113     0.08   0.249   0.018    854.55       9,226.25     736.11

    KORÇË            PIRG            7,652        0.138     0.03   0.241   0.007   1,845.00      8,551.97     331.51

    KORÇË           POJAN           10,864        0.115     0.03   0.253   0.006   2,747.14      9,300.05     382.16

    KORÇË          QENDËR            9,022        0.103     0.05   0.250   0.011   2,257.93      9,451.12     486.20

    KORÇË          VITHKUQ           1,510        0.110     0.03   0.248   0.007    374.83       9,312.07     730.47




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                               35
                                                                                                  Mean
                                              Poverty-                              Poor
     District     Commune       Population                 s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita      s.e.
                                             Headcount                            population
                                                                                               consumption

      KORÇË        VOSKOP         3,832        0.130       0.03   0.251   0.007    963.29       8,941.19     585.97

      KORÇË       VOSKOPOJË       1,058        0.130       0.04   0.270   0.009    285.87       9,560.73     456.59

      KORÇË       VRESHTAS        7,641        0.126       0.09   0.237   0.024    1,807.66     8,629.27     780.31

      KRUJË         BUBQ          5,874        0.090       0.10   0.252   0.026    1,480.02     9,788.12     759.77

      KRUJË         CUDHI         1,812        0.160       0.06   0.238   0.015    432.08       8,218.37     644.12

      KRUJË      FUSHË-KRUJË     18,102        0.146       0.05   0.250   0.013    4,518.06     8,618.52     596.91

      KRUJË     KODËR-THUMANË    12,334        0.141       0.10   0.253   0.024    3,119.99     8,728.76     953.74

      KRUJË         KRUJË        11,654        0.134       0.04   0.254   0.009    2,965.58     8,974.38     621.36

      KRUJË         NIKËL         9,518        0.139       0.08   0.249   0.020    2,371.77     8,732.18     653.47

     KUÇOVË        KOZARE         5,622        0.125       0.06   0.241   0.015    1,353.48     8,768.89     570.63

     KUÇOVË        KUÇOVË        12,650        0.122       0.07   0.253   0.018    3,194.31     9,211.03     665.96

     KUÇOVË        PERONDI        9,011        0.108       0.05   0.245   0.013    2,204.54     9,175.43     656.67

      KUKËS         ARRËN          462         0.227       0.04   0.215   0.009     99.19       7,118.79     593.17

      KUKËS         BICAJ         5,631        0.256       0.04   0.219   0.009    1,233.41     6,856.62     543.23

      KUKËS       BUSHTRICË       1,486        0.255       0.02   0.216   0.004    321.59       6,884.21     270.90

      KUKËS         KOLSH         1,250        0.328       0.02   0.220   0.004    274.56       6,422.92     405.26

      KUKËS         KUKËS        16,697        0.170       0.03   0.230   0.007    3,846.84     7,824.08     373.47

      KUKËS         MALZI         3,072        0.240       0.04   0.220   0.010    675.67       6,980.26     454.51

      KUKËS         ZAPOD         2,217        0.293       0.03   0.218   0.007    483.16       6,583.69     386.25

      KUKËS      SHISHTAVEC       3,835        0.265       0.03   0.235   0.008    902.38       6,974.33     447.37

      KUKËS        SHTIQËN        3,438        0.175       0.08   0.225   0.018    774.65       7,729.87     1,031.27

      KUKËS        SURROJ         1,099        0.356       0.02   0.209   0.005    229.40       6,123.54     219.94

      KUKËS       TËRTHORE        2,959        0.164       0.07   0.217   0.016    642.77       7,683.22     1,513.54

      KUKËS        TOPOJAN        1,753        0.337       0.01   0.208   0.003    365.20       6,200.18     222.57

      KUKËS       UJËMISHT        1,797        0.365       0.08   0.202   0.019    362.72       5,982.50     1,090.47

      KUKËS       GRYKËÇAJË       1,440        0.300       0.10   0.199   0.021    286.80       6,337.24     1,659.11

      KUKËS         KALIS          827         0.385       0.02   0.197   0.005    162.84       5,838.82     424.52

     KURBIN      FUSHË-KUQE       5,450        0.200       0.06   0.245   0.015    1,336.63     7,759.97     655.51

     KURBIN          LAÇ         17,067        0.188       0.07   0.249   0.017    4,247.06     7,939.04     918.19

     KURBIN       MAMURRAS       15,280        0.198       0.03   0.236   0.008    3,601.49     7,591.08     465.40

     KURBIN         MILOT         8,452        0.191       0.03   0.239   0.007    2,017.21     7,725.84     417.56

      LEZHË      BALLDRENIRI      6,138        0.201       0.03   0.242   0.008    1,485.98     7,694.39     495.51

      LEZHË        BLINISHT       3,348        0.163       0.02   0.244   0.005    815.51       8,171.05     317.24

      LEZHË         DAJÇ          3,826        0.154       0.01   0.250   0.003    957.72       8,474.26     248.02

      LEZHË        KALLMET        4,101        0.157       0.02   0.235   0.006    962.20       8,092.07     447.49

      LEZHË         KOLÇ          4,225        0.168       0.03   0.248   0.008    1,049.89     8,199.39     280.69

      LEZHË         LEZHË        15,496        0.130       0.03   0.287   0.006    4,451.21     9,811.57     564.48

      LEZHË       SHËNGJIN        8,087        0.138       0.03   0.268   0.008    2,169.05     9,128.28     439.02

      LEZHË       SHËNKOLL       12,474        0.192       0.03   0.241   0.007   3,000.97      7,734.43     604.78

      LEZHË        UNGREJ         1,587        0.202       0.02   0.221   0.004    350.97       7,368.76     388.84

      LEZHË        ZEJMEN         5,656        0.174       0.05   0.241   0.010    1,362.84     7,984.80     607.43

     LIBRAZHD     HOTOLISHT       5,700        0.220       0.03   0.215   0.008    1,227.35     7,082.10     397.87

     LIBRAZHD     LIBRAZHD        6,937        0.087       0.05   0.233   0.012    1,619.48     9,268.62     744.31

     LIBRAZHD       LUNIK         2,621        0.245       0.04   0.244   0.009    639.22       7,252.61     373.11

     LIBRAZHD      ORENJË         3,883        0.304       0.03   0.225   0.006    872.11       6,562.22     333.54

     LIBRAZHD     PËRRENJAS       5,846        0.162       0.06   0.240   0.014    1,404.01     8,125.88     422.15

     LIBRAZHD       POLIS         3,385        0.205       0.04   0.235   0.009    796.14       7,525.33     337.34

     LIBRAZHD      QENDËR         8,557        0.195       0.07   0.232   0.015    1,982.73     7,512.78     677.06

     LIBRAZHD      QUKËS          8,211        0.215       0.04   0.228   0.010    1,868.49     7,296.68     427.84

     LIBRAZHD     STËBLEVË         809         0.122       0.04   0.237   0.010    192.10       8,665.03     364.54

     LIBRAZHD      STRAVAJ        2,427        0.206       0.05   0.239   0.012    580.05       7,563.11     386.26

     LIBRAZHD      RRAJCË         8,421        0.224       0.05   0.229   0.010    1,925.70     7,227.01     539.32




36                                                     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                               Mean
                                             Poverty-                            Poor
   District       Commune      Population               s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita     s.e.
                                            Headcount                          population
                                                                                            consumption

   LUSHNJE         ALLKAJ        4,319        0.169     0.04   0.236   0.011   1,019.59      7,978.10     321.30

   LUSHNJE        BALLAGAT       2,461        0.192     0.05   0.223   0.010    547.58       7,515.81     421.36

   LUSHNJE       BUBULLIMË       5,548        0.144     0.06   0.238   0.014   1,321.26      8,343.01     373.93

   LUSHNJE         DIVJAKË       8,453        0.169     0.04   0.249   0.009   2,101.49      8,233.48     298.35

   LUSHNJE         DUSHK         7,872        0.199     0.06   0.229   0.014   1,801.46      7,499.75     552.99

   LUSHNJE       FIER-SHEGAN     7,023        0.172     0.03   0.229   0.008   1,608.99      7,792.52     191.84

   LUSHNJE         GOLEM         5,240        0.197     0.04   0.233   0.010   1,220.32      7,608.24     332.18

   LUSHNJE        GRABIAN        3,638        0.201     0.04   0.222   0.010    807.25       7,417.91     379.35

   LUSHNJE       GRADISHTË       7,521        0.149     0.03   0.242   0.008   1,818.90      8,336.68     300.83

   LUSHNJE       HYSGJOKAJ       2,603        0.191     0.03   0.220   0.008    573.21       7,474.75     279.41

   LUSHNJE       KARBUNARË       4,193        0.203     0.06   0.231   0.015    969.68       7,507.21     407.59

   LUSHNJE        KOLONJË        5,728        0.136     0.06   0.256   0.017   1,463.67      8,846.57     379.46

   LUSHNJE         KRUTJE        7,564        0.148     0.07   0.234   0.019   1,767.97      8,182.93     479.83

   LUSHNJE        LUSHNJE       31,093        0.125     0.08   0.265   0.022   8,240.47      9,343.56     539.67

   LUSHNJE        RREMAS         4,449        0.189     0.06   0.229   0.015   1,018.63      7,613.55     400.62

   LUSHNJE         TËRBUF       10,201        0.216     0.02   0.233   0.005   2,377.36      7,390.08     344.04

MALËSI E MADHE    GRUEMIRË       8,887        0.163     0.03   0.255   0.007   2,263.65      8,444.37     332.35

MALËSI E MADHE    KASTRAT        6,877        0.148     0.06   0.263   0.011   1,810.97      8,877.81     683.45

MALËSI E MADHE    KELMEND        3,056        0.170     0.06   0.250   0.012    764.37       8,297.15     547.41

MALËSI E MADHE     KOPLIK        3,734        0.093     0.03   0.264   0.008    987.22       10,134.42    347.66

MALËSI E MADHE     QENDËR        4,740        0.123     0.06   0.254   0.015   1,205.64      9,154.78     411.08

MALËSI E MADHE     SHKREL        3,520        0.181     0.04   0.258   0.010    908.30       8,283.57     507.53

 MALLAKASTËR      ARANITAS       2,709        0.196     0.03   0.223   0.006    605.17       7,458.58     459.33

 MALLAKASTËR       BALLSH        7,657        0.114     0.06   0.254   0.014   1,946.21      9,251.07     509.53

 MALLAKASTËR       FRATAR        3,435        0.201     0.05   0.232   0.010    797.68       7,519.99     407.66

 MALLAKASTËR      GRESHICË       1,152        0.173     0.05   0.230   0.011    265.51       7,841.83     365.17

 MALLAKASTËR       HEKAL         2,623        0.172     0.02   0.237   0.004    620.78       7,971.02     414.87

 MALLAKASTËR        KUTË         1,977        0.165     0.04   0.236   0.011    466.64       8,008.70     348.26

 MALLAKASTËR      NGRAÇAN         588         0.188     0.05   0.208   0.013    122.09       7,468.07     314.08

 MALLAKASTËR      QENDËR         6,253        0.178     0.03   0.233   0.007   1,455.17      7,784.03     349.95

 MALLAKASTËR       SELITË         877         0.221     0.04   0.233   0.010    204.24       7,426.92     399.23

     MAT            BAZ          2,228        0.187     0.03   0.235   0.007    523.88       7,838.82     283.15

     MAT           DERJAN        1,098        0.180     0.03   0.231   0.006    253.74       7,791.28     239.81

     MAT           GURRË         3,369        0.232     0.05   0.232   0.011    782.08       7,253.27     746.34

     MAT            KLOS         7,873        0.159     0.04   0.242   0.010   1,908.92      8,246.97     414.34

     MAT           KOMSI         4,283        0.177     0.03   0.244   0.007   1,044.01      8,070.33     237.43

     MAT             LIS         3,824        0.168     0.05   0.248   0.012    947.11       8,238.40     334.48

     MAT         MACUKULL        1,565        0.194     0.04   0.231   0.010    362.15       7,644.82     292.45

     MAT           BURREL       10,664        0.112     0.08   0.243   0.021   2,596.25      9,101.31     540.79

     MAT           RUKAJ         2,511        0.186     0.04   0.236   0.009    592.08       7,794.22     447.16

     MAT            SUÇ          2,716        0.173     0.10   0.241   0.022    655.04       8,066.61     710.86

     MAT            ULËZ         1,229        0.152     0.05   0.250   0.011    307.75       8,602.79     309.19

     MAT            XIBËR        2,660        0.204     0.06   0.238   0.016    633.68       7,659.66     480.41

   MIRDITË          FAN          2,974        0.238     0.10   0.236   0.031    703.30       7,268.04     580.12

   MIRDITË        KAÇINAR        1,016        0.180     0.03   0.246   0.006    250.34       8,109.76     282.02

   MIRDITË        KTHJELLË       2,206        0.181     0.05   0.243   0.012    535.66       7,962.58     346.28

   MIRDITË         OROSH         1,899        0.155     0.07   0.247   0.017    469.68       8,435.14     437.85

   MIRDITË        RRËSHEN        8,796        0.112     0.04   0.248   0.011   2,185.17      9,179.91     285.90

   MIRDITË         RUBIK         4,452        0.158     0.05   0.249   0.011   1,107.54      8,432.30     504.61

   MIRDITË         SELITË         745         0.189     0.10   0.242   0.028    180.61       7,913.32     516.02

    PEQIN          GJOCAJ        5,207        0.149     0.04   0.235   0.009   1,223.27      8,268.61     411.18

    PEQIN          KARINË        1,350        0.144     0.08   0.234   0.022    315.29       8,370.13     401.20




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                          37
                                                                                                 Mean
                                             Poverty-                              Poor
      District    Commune      Population                 s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita     s.e.
                                            Headcount                            population
                                                                                              consumption

      PEQIN        PAJOVË        6,626        0.137       0.08   0.244   0.025   1,613.89      8,605.66     428.39

      PEQIN         PEQIN        5,616        0.148       0.08   0.264   0.022   1,484.53      8,993.70     469.67

      PEQIN       PËRPARIM       3,423        0.125       0.10   0.240   0.030    820.31       8,794.67     484.75

      PEQIN        SHEZË         3,177        0.134       0.02   0.245   0.005    778.94       8,730.98     496.63

      PËRMET      BALLABAN       1,047        0.093       0.04   0.245   0.010    256.04       9,598.28     404.71

      PËRMET      ÇARÇOVË         910         0.067       0.04   0.247   0.008    224.66       10,640.84    568.53

      PËRMET      FRASHËR         387         0.116       0.05   0.243   0.011     93.88       9,083.72     476.19

      PËRMET      KËLCYRË        2,651        0.091       0.08   0.243   0.023    644.20       9,700.74     475.89

      PËRMET       PËRMET        5,945        0.070       0.07   0.248   0.016   1,472.49      10,359.98    496.43

      PËRMET       QENDËR        1,742        0.081       0.05   0.245   0.012    427.26       9,967.17     460.47

      PËRMET        SUKË         1,256        0.075       0.05   0.235   0.012    295.29       9,819.81     318.16

      PËRMET      DISHNICË       1,159        0.114       0.01   0.246   0.003    285.10       9,220.09     180.12

      PËRMET       PETRAN        1,622        0.092       0.05   0.247   0.012    400.99       9,750.14     444.24

     POGRADEC     BUÇIMAS       15,687        0.156       0.03   0.247   0.008   3,873.35      8,374.72     370.37

     POGRADEC     ÇËRRAVË        7,009        0.211       0.03   0.236   0.008   1,653.63      7,527.11     303.32

     POGRADEC     DARDHAS        2,182        0.156       0.03   0.243   0.008    529.30       8,382.61     461.39

     POGRADEC     POGRADEC      20,851        0.108       0.04   0.260   0.011   5,428.39      9,676.43     368.22

     POGRADEC     PROPTISHT      4,782        0.164       0.02   0.236   0.005   1,126.69      8,067.55     244.02

     POGRADEC     TREBINJË       2,481        0.147       0.03   0.232   0.006    574.39       8,225.60     436.63

     POGRADEC    HUDENISHT       5,990        0.170       0.03   0.240   0.008   1,438.58      8,118.53     273.41

     POGRADEC      VELÇAN        2,546        0.143       0.02   0.236   0.006    602.12       8,388.82     307.24

       PUKË        BLERIM         913         0.237       0.03   0.240   0.006    218.95       7,431.05     236.11

       PUKË        FIERZË        1,302        0.221       0.03   0.233   0.008    303.13       7,424.98     295.80

       PUKË      FUSHË-ARRËZ     2,513        0.187       0.01   0.245   0.002    616.10       8,022.87     200.14

       PUKË       GJEGJAN        2,846        0.174       0.03   0.242   0.007    687.34       8,040.62     318.38

       PUKË        IBALLË        1,129        0.184       0.05   0.239   0.011    269.52       7,974.87     484.03

       PUKË         PUKË         3,603        0.126       0.04   0.249   0.009    895.75       8,976.58     320.28

       PUKË        QELËZ         1,761        0.221       0.04   0.226   0.010    398.41       7,286.73     342.08

       PUKË        QERRET        1,486        0.195       0.03   0.243   0.006    361.55       7,853.75     303.88

       PUKË       QAFË MALI      1,534        0.212       0.03   0.247   0.006    379.59       7,690.50     327.01

       PUKË        RRAPË         1,357        0.154       0.03   0.244   0.009    331.20       8,386.03     314.48

     SARANDË       DHIVËR        1,396        0.068       0.02   0.236   0.005    330.00       10,502.49    290.50

     SARANDË      KONISPOL       2,123        0.152       0.03   0.261   0.007    554.72       8,818.00     297.01

     SARANDË      LIVADHJA       1,165        0.059       0.04   0.239   0.009    278.21       10,843.44    451.19

     SARANDË       LUKOVË        2,916        0.128       0.03   0.265   0.008    773.17       9,416.50     456.87

     SARANDË      SARANDË       17,161        0.107       0.03   0.278   0.008   4,766.52      10,133.88    271.47

     SARANDË       XARRË         4,254        0.162       0.03   0.227   0.008    964.22       7,880.78     420.08

     SARANDË        ALIKO        3,849        0.109       0.03   0.264   0.007   1,017.41      9,766.03     329.80

     SARANDË       MARKAT        1,859        0.136       0.04   0.241   0.008    447.31       8,663.92     364.50

     SARANDË       KSAMIL        3,003        0.139       0.06   0.247   0.014    741.52       8,641.61     568.64

     SKRAPAR       BOGOVË        1,088        0.110       0.03   0.241   0.007    261.70       9,189.55     374.53

     SKRAPAR       ÇEPAN          740         0.078       0.03   0.240   0.007    177.61       9,823.77     347.59

     SKRAPAR     ÇOROVODË        4,051        0.099       0.04   0.242   0.009    982.30       9,447.71     336.13

     SKRAPAR      GJERBËS         813         0.116       0.03   0.234   0.007    190.19       8,833.49     327.58

     SKRAPAR      LESHNJË         496         0.131       0.05   0.232   0.011    115.13       8,636.08     485.26

     SKRAPAR       POLIÇAN       4,309        0.100       0.06   0.234   0.015   1,008.38      9,149.34     609.78

     SKRAPAR       POTOM          897         0.096       0.03   0.222   0.006    199.02       8,931.75     311.52

     SKRAPAR       QENDËR        2,545        0.105       0.06   0.239   0.014    607.06       9,158.69     529.30

     SKRAPAR     VENDRESHË        984         0.131       0.05   0.234   0.011    230.26       8,625.20     424.16

     SKRAPAR       ZHEPË          779         0.169       0.03   0.240   0.006    187.12       8,111.39     369.25

     SHKODËR     ANAEMALIT       3,858        0.106       0.03   0.260   0.006   1,002.52      9,741.27     301.48

     SHKODËR      BËRDICË        5,775        0.148       0.01   0.252   0.003   1,457.39      8,690.74     225.91




38                                                    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                               Mean
                                             Poverty-                            Poor
   District     Commune        Population               s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita     s.e.
                                            Headcount                          population
                                                                                            consumption
   SHKODËR       BUSHAT         14,102        0.121     0.04   0.265   0.009    3,739.39     9,436.11     333.35

   SHKODËR         DAJÇ          3,880        0.091     0.03   0.266   0.008    1,030.91     10,269.55    267.83

   SHKODËR        GURIIZI        8,067        0.142     0.05   0.251   0.012    2,028.16     8,754.40     447.60

   SHKODËR       HAJMEL          4,415        0.189     0.03   0.255   0.006    1,123.69     8,128.08     436.75

   SHKODËR      VAU I DEJËS      8,114        0.146     0.05   0.254   0.010    2,057.86     8,715.98     383.46

   SHKODËR      POSTRIBË         7,059        0.159     0.07   0.251   0.015    1,772.67     8,426.24     645.61

   SHKODËR         PULT          1,529        0.164     0.04   0.248   0.009    378.54       8,465.82     426.07

   SHKODËR      RRETHINAT       21,133        0.170     0.04   0.258   0.010    5,454.11     8,384.77     454.09

   SHKODËR        SHALË          1,795        0.087     0.10   0.259   0.026    465.40       10,316.30    954.63

   SHKODËR       SHKODËR        75,649        0.122     0.03   0.269   0.007   20,354.73     9,621.64     304.15

   SHKODËR       SHLLAK           680         0.135     0.09   0.247   0.021    168.25       8,878.07     694.89

   SHKODËR        SHOSH           309         0.102     0.05   0.250   0.012     77.35       9,684.60     462.15

   SHKODËR       VELIPOJË        5,015        0.115     0.03   0.263   0.006    1,318.07     9,473.51     265.42

   SHKODËR      VIG-MNELË        1,509        0.190     0.03   0.246   0.007    370.62       7,996.32     276.45

   SHKODËR        TEMAL          1,559        0.142     0.04   0.244   0.008    380.42       8,653.39     351.92

   TEPELENË        BUZ            737         0.106     0.05   0.243   0.012    178.73       9,299.69     443.18

   TEPELENË   FSHAT MEMALIAJ     1,606        0.093     0.04   0.241   0.009    387.66       9,518.99     414.77

   TEPELENË      KRAHËS          2,444        0.143     0.03   0.250   0.007    610.74       8,751.06     413.46

   TEPELENË     KURVELESH         705         0.129     0.04   0.255   0.008    179.88       9,148.02     431.93

   TEPELENË       LOPËS           723         0.133     0.04   0.236   0.009    170.84       8,760.87     434.45

   TEPELENË      LUFTINJË        1,734        0.106     0.02   0.245   0.005    425.64       9,401.37     348.44

   TEPELENË     MEMALIAJ         2,647        0.120     0.03   0.243   0.006    643.77       9,019.06     424.98

   TEPELENË      QENDËR          3,119        0.116     0.03   0.250   0.007    780.11       9,224.39     269.60

   TEPELENË      QESARAT         1,379        0.136     0.07   0.253   0.017    349.12       8,967.59     585.41

   TEPELENË     TEPELENË         4,342        0.081     0.03   0.255   0.008    1,105.77     10,278.72    355.50

    TIRANË      BALDUSHK         4,576        0.132     0.03   0.234   0.007    1,071.69     8,511.35     340.08

    TIRANË      BËRXULLË        11,030        0.145     0.03   0.248   0.008    2,740.77     8,631.82     428.55

    TIRANË       BËRZHITË        4,973        0.139     0.05   0.243   0.011    1,208.45     8,610.84     410.64

    TIRANË         DAJT         20,139        0.126     0.02   0.280   0.005    5,638.56     9,732.73     267.31

    TIRANË        KAMËZ         66,832        0.252     0.03   0.253   0.008   16,903.52     7,339.52     313.26

    TIRANË       KASHAR         43,058        0.112     0.03   0.269   0.007   11,584.31     9,791.84     363.78

    TIRANË        NDROQ          5,035        0.112     0.03   0.251   0.007    1,265.77     9,264.34     412.60

    TIRANË      PASKUQAN        37,305        0.209     0.04   0.243   0.010    9,058.32     7,645.58     370.72

    TIRANË       PETRELË         5,542        0.102     0.08   0.251   0.019    1,393.10     9,492.32     654.57

    TIRANË         PEZË          6,272        0.138     0.03   0.244   0.008    1,532.12     8,650.64     366.86

    TIRANË        PREZË          4,727        0.103     0.03   0.265   0.006    1,251.91     9,966.06     413.62

    TIRANË        FARKË         22,614        0.098     0.04   0.300   0.010    6,776.34     11,001.49    566.13

    TIRANË     SHËNGJERGJ        2,186        0.146     0.03   0.235   0.007    514.32       8,323.45     539.41

    TIRANË        TIRANË        410,813       0.092     0.04   0.277   0.009   113,752.32    10,647.36    540.19

    TIRANË       VAQARR          8,922        0.149     0.03   0.249   0.005    2,224.76     8,557.52     658.85

    TIRANË         VORË         10,873        0.186     0.05   0.256   0.013    2,785.26     8,157.85     753.00

    TIRANË     ZALLBASTAR        3,380        0.147     0.03   0.232   0.006    784.42       8,271.41     750.09

    TIRANË      ZALLHERR         9,389        0.172     0.03   0.235   0.007    2,209.42     7,969.64     521.21

    TIRANË       KËRRABË         3,264        0.249     0.02   0.242   0.004    790.64       7,236.50     342.26

   TROPOJË    BAJRAM CURRI       5,337        0.100     0.04   0.249   0.010    1,327.76     9,405.96     503.45

   TROPOJË        BUJAN          2,550        0.208     0.03   0.244   0.006    622.51       7,639.10     437.75

   TROPOJË        BYTYÇ          1,563        0.116     0.05   0.243   0.011    379.62       8,757.64     650.84

   TROPOJË        FIERZË         1,607        0.159     0.04   0.250   0.009    401.53       8,306.66     531.21

   TROPOJË       LEKBIBAJ        1,205        0.341     0.04   0.217   0.009    262.00       6,301.62     404.98

   TROPOJË        LLUGAJ         1,787        0.254     0.02   0.236   0.006    421.67       7,119.03     418.34

   TROPOJË      MARGEGAJ         2,346        0.225     0.04   0.239   0.010    559.86       7,390.66     458.77

   TROPOJË       TROPOJË         4,117        0.272     0.03   0.231   0.006    952.07       6,875.83     326.83




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                          39
                                                                                             Mean
                                         Poverty-                              Poor
     District   Commune    Population                 s.e.   Gini    s.e.                  percapita     s.e.
                                        Headcount                            population
                                                                                          consumption
     VLORË       BRATAJ      2,835        0.184       0.02   0.243   0.005    688.53       7,928.65     385.09

     VLORË       HIMARË      2,815        0.116       0.03   0.272   0.006    765.57       9,933.81     336.68

     VLORË        KOTE       3,522        0.170       0.04   0.240   0.011    844.82       8,021.08     484.83

     VLORË      NOVOSELË     8,209        0.139       0.05   0.252   0.011    2,070.90     8,751.49     516.21

     VLORË      ORIKUM       5,457        0.121       0.03   0.259   0.008    1,415.44     9,301.19     361.78

     VLORË      QENDËR       7,644        0.141       0.05   0.247   0.014    1,889.47     8,608.09     424.54

     VLORË      SELENICË     2,235        0.178       0.01   0.257   0.003    573.77       8,349.75     186.89

     VLORË      SEVASTER     1,720        0.177       0.05   0.230   0.013    394.83       7,821.99     556.30

     VLORË      SHUSHICË     3,981        0.177       0.05   0.248   0.011    986.12       8,108.42     466.42

     VLORË      VLLAHINË     3,111        0.230       0.03   0.238   0.011    741.19       7,381.93     289.43

     VLORË       VLORË      78,507        0.124       0.01   0.274   0.003   21,521.72     9,620.53     222.01

     VLORË      VRANISHT     2,080        0.183       0.03   0.250   0.009    520.32       8,136.27     371.23

     VLORË       ARMEN       2,965        0.175       0.06   0.238   0.018    706.96       7,970.33     563.34




40                                                Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes   41
Results of the 2012 Poverty Maps - New Municipalities


                                                                                     Mean per
                     Total       Poverty                               Number of
  Municipality                              s.e.        Gini    s.e.                  capita     s.e.
                   population   headcount                                poor
                                                                                   consumption


       BERAT        59,924        0.129      0.01       0.253   0.01     7,735        9,008      222

 URA VAJGURORE      27,286        0.136      0.02       0.241   0.01     3,700        8,608      345

      KUÇOVË        31,258        0.124     0.02        0.247   0.01     3,873        8,983      312

      SKRAPAR       12,393        0.109     0.03        0.241   0.01     1,345        9,133      491

      POLIÇAN       10,922        0.122     0.02        0.237   0.01     1,335        8,752      371

       DIBËR        61,619        0.205     0.03        0.076   0.01    12,650        7,232      240

      BULQIZË       31,190        0.190     0.03        0.079   0.01     5,926        7,438      291

        MAT         27,402        0.153     0.03        0.246   0.01     4,194        8,434      403

        KLOS        16,618        0.187     0.04        0.242   0.01     3,112        7,889      412

      DURRËS        174,689       0.159     0.01        0.272   0.01    27,773        8,819      174

       SHIJAK       27,861        0.152     0.02        0.256   0.01     4,230        8,602      319

       KRUJË        59,294        0.135     0.02        0.252   0.01     7,994        8,849      319

      ELBASAN       141,224       0.143     0.02        0.257   0.01    20,192        8,818      227

       CËRRIK       27,445        0.141     0.03        0.248   0.01     3,881        8,666      370

       BELSH        19,503        0.113     0.02        0.245   0.01     2,201        9,077      380

       PEQIN        25,399        0.141     0.03        0.247   0.01     3,585        8,637      390

      GRAMSH        24,231        0.157     0.03        0.085   0.01     3,815        7,944      292

     LIBRAZHD       31,892        0.190     0.03        0.087   0.01     6,060        7,620      277

     PRRENJAS       24,905        0.194     0.03        0.081   0.01     4,825        7,437      237

        FIER        120,562       0.145     0.02        0.262   0.01    17,475        8,837      193

      LUSHNJE       83,644        0.154     0.02        0.253   0.01    12,888        8,470      256

       PATOS        22,972        0.154     0.02        0.245   0.01     3,537        8,360      271

     ROSKOVEC       21,742        0.192     0.03        0.235   0.01     4,174        7,668      332

      DIVJAKË       34,262        0.187     0.03        0.24    0.01     6,418        7,816      288

 MALLAKASTËR        27,271        0.166     0.03        0.245   0.01     4,528        8,143      351

  GJIROKASTËR       28,545        0.068     0.01        0.27    0.01     1,933       11,215      435

      LIBOHOVË       3,667        0.067     0.03        0.255   0.02     246         10,895      888

      PËRMET        10,606        0.076     0.02        0.25    0.01     804         10,242      481

      KËLCYRË        6,113        0.092     0.03        0.244   0.01     565          9,620      582

     TEPELENË        8,889        0.103     0.03        0.256   0.01     917          9,710      526

     MEMALIAJ       10,547        0.123            ..    ..      ..      1,297        9,095       ..

      DROPULL        3,496        0.078     0.02        0.26    0.01     273         10,670      521

       KORÇË        75,292        0.102     0.01        0.267   0.01     7,649       10,061      259

     POGRADEC       61,528        0.150     0.02        0.254   0.01     9,222        8,634      274

       MALIQ        41,885        0.124     0.02        0.246   0.01     5,185        8,911      310

      PUSTEC         3,154        0.050     0.02        0.249   0.01     158         11,213      560

      KOLONJË       11,070        0.080     0.02        0.247   0.01     882         10,020      559

       DEVOLL       26,720        0.095     0.02        0.257   0.01     2,546        9,821      370

       KUKËS        47,963        0.232     0.04        0.079   0.01    11,127        7,067      254

      TROPOJË       20,512        0.184     0.03        0.097   0.01     3,769        7,941      356

        HAS         16,775        0.233     0.04        0.085   0.01     3,905        7,192      305

       LEZHË        64,938        0.162     0.03        0.263   0.01    10,544        8,543      299

      MIRDITË       22,088        0.153     0.03        0.251   0.01     3,382        8,503      401

      KURBIN        46,249        0.193     0.03        0.243   0.01     8,926        7,770      279

      SHKODËR       134,069       0.133     0.01        0.267   0.01    17,850        9,270      210

     VAU I DEJËS    30,379        0.143     0.02        0.261   0.01     4,346        8,906      310




42                                             Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                                    Mean per
                        Total            Poverty                                                  Number of
   Municipality                                              s.e.         Gini        s.e.                           capita            s.e.
                      population        headcount                                                   poor
                                                                                                                  consumption


    MALËSI E
                        30,814             0.149            0.03         0.261       0.01           4,596             8,817            368
     MADHE

      PUKË              11,053             0.168            0.05         0.247       0.01           1,858             8,232            562

  FUSHË-ARRËZ           7,391              0.201            0.06         0.245       0.01           1,487             7,791            640

     TIRANË            550,163             0.101              ..           ..          ..          55,561             10,328            ..

      KAMËZ            104,137             0.237              ..           ..          ..          24,695             7,454             ..

      VORË              26,630             0.154              ..           ..          ..           4,091             8,685             ..

     KAVAJË             39,846             0.160            0.02         0.259       0.01           6,364             8,580            226

   RROGOZHINË           21,739             0.182            0.03         0.245       0.01           3,961             7,975            351

      VLORË            103,798             0.129            0.01         0.271       0.01          13,364             9,407            181

     HIMARË             7,811              0.140            0.03         0.269       0.01           1,091             9,266            405

    SARANDË             20,164             0.112            0.02         0.275       0.01           2,267             9,886            318

    KONISPOL            8,236              0.155            0.04         0.242       0.01           1,280             8,299            558

     DELVINË            7,598              0.138            0.03         0.256       0.01           1,045             8,937            388

      FINIQ             10,529             0.093            0.02         0.249       0.01            978              9,859            570

    SELENICË            16,388             0.186            0.04         0.243       0.01           3,045             7,917            405



Note: The indicators for four new municipalities that resulted from merging fractions of former municipalities, as opposed to combinations of
former municipalities, were calculated as population weighted averages of the indicators of the former municipalities, and the standard errors
cannot be estimated. Moreover, the Gini index cannot be calculated as a weigthed average so it is not available for these municipalities.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                      43
Annex C: Explanation of the Variables
and Relevant Data Tables
Table C.1 Log Consumption Regression Models with the Mean of the Survey and Census Variables

a. Central domain

                                                                                                 Mean,         Mean,
Variable                                                   Coefficient           p value
                                                                                              census 2011    LSMS 2012
Intercept                                                       8.56               0.00
Number of children 0 to 5 years                                 0.08               0.00              0.78      0.79
Number of children 6 to 14 years                                0.09               0.00              0.65      0.65
HH has computer                                                 0.18               0.00              0.16      0.18
HH has decoder/TV                                               0.15               0.00              0.15      0.13
Household size = 1                                              1.07               0.00              0.06      0.10
Household size = 2                                              0.71               0.00              0.18      0.19
Household size = 3                                              0.55               0.00              0.18      0.20
Household size = 4                                              0.38               0.00              0.24      0.28
Household size = 5                                              0.24               0.00              0.17      0.14
Household size = 6                                              0.12               0.01              0.10      0.06
Household head has primary education as highest level           0.16               0.00              0.09      0.10
HH has microwave                                                0.11               0.00              0.13      0.13
HH do not have central heating                                  −0.28              0.00              0.03      0.04
PSU means
Owns livestock or bees                                          0.24               0.00              0.51      0.49
HH has car                                                      0.21               0.00              0.22      0.22
Highest education level in HH is low                            −0.30              0.00              0.58      0.58
Household head is female                                        −0.38              0.00              0.13      0.13
Observations                                                                       2757
R2                                                                                 0.46
Adjusted R2                                                                        0.46
R2 alpha model                                                                     0.00



b. Coastal domain

                                                                                              Mean,           Mean,
Variable                                          Coefficient            p value
                                                                                           census 2011      LSMS 2012
Intercept_                                              8.43              0.00
Number children under age 5=0                           0.09              0.00                0.80            0.83
Number children aged 6-14=0                             0.08              0.00                0.66            0.68
HH has computer                                         0.26              0.00                0.15            0.17
Household size = 1                                      0.96              0.00                0.06            0.07
Household size = 2                                      0.58               0                  0.21            0.21
Household size = 3                                      0.34              0.00                0.18            0.20
Household size = 4                                      0.16              0.00                0.24            0.23
Household head has high education                       0.08              0.01                0.09            0.09
Household head has low education                        −0.09             0.00                0.57            0.59
HH has microwave                                        0.22              0.00                0.15            0.16
Spouse has employment                                   0.14              0.00                0.10            0.11
PSU means
HH has car                                              0.52              0.00                0.26            0.26
HH has microwave oven                                   −0.29             0.00                0.15            0.15
HH has refrigiator                                      −0.53             0.00                0.94            0.93
MSP_AGE                                                 0.01              0.00                40.34           40.38
HH has TV                                               0.28              0.01                0.92            0.92
Observations                                                              1837
R2                                                                        0.47
Adjusted R2                                                               0.46
R2 alpha model                                                            0.01



44                                                        Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
c. Mountain domain

                                                                            Mean,                      Mean,
Variable                               Coefficient          p value
                                                                         census 2011                 LSMS 2012
Intercept_                                9.58               0.00
HH has car                                0.22               0.00               0.15                   0.13
Number children under age 5=0             0.09               0.00               0.71                   0.77
Number children aged 6-14=0               0.09               0.00               0.53                   0.55
Household size = 1                        1.21               0.00               0.03                   0.02
Household size = 2                        0.77               0.00               0.10                   0.11
Household size = 3                        0.55               0.00               0.13                   0.12
Household size = 4                        0.33               0.00               0.21                   0.21
Household size = 5                        0.20               0.00               0.22                   0.24
Household size = 6                        0.09               0.07               0.16                   0.18
Household head has medium education       0.05               0.03               0.29                   0.29
Household head is an employee             0.09               0.00               0.16                   0.19
HH has internet                           0.18               0.00               0.05                   0.07
PSU means
HH has fixed telephone line               −0.18              0.00               0.14                   0.15
Household head is married                 −1.00              0.00               0.90                   0.90
Household head is self-employed           0.19               0.00               0.19                   0.19
Highest education in HH is upper
                                          1.07               0.02               0.04                   0.03
primary
HH own house                              −0.18              0.00               0.85                   0.81
Rooms per capita                          −0.29              0.00               0.78                   0.79
Observations                                                 1128
R2                                                           0.56
Adjusted R2                                                  0.56




d. Tirana domain

                                                                                          Mean,            Mean,
Variable                                         Coefficient          p value
                                                                                       census 2011       LSMS 2012
Intercept_                                         10.69               0.00
Number children aged 6-14=0                        −0.07               0.07               0.70                0.68
House is seme-detached house                       −0.15               0.00               0.11                0.10
Household size                                     −0.41               0.00               3.62                3.79
Household size squared                               0.02              0.00               15.68               17.15
Highest education in HH is high                      0.18              0.00               0.45                0.44
Highest education in HH is low                     −0.13               0.00               0.16                0.15
HH has 1 room                                      −0.27               0.00               0.04                0.03
HH has 2 room                                      −0.27               0.00               0.32                0.34
HH has 3 room                                      −0.14               0.00               0.44                0.47
Spouse has employment                                0.14              0.00               0.23                0.22
Building built between 1945 and 1960               −0.19               0.01               0.05                0.04
PSU means
Deattached house                                   −0.33               0.00               0.66                0.66
Building built between 1961 and 1980                 0.31              0.00               0.17                0.17
Observations                                                           648
R2                                                                     0.57
Adjusted R2                                                            0.56
R2 alpha model                                                         0.03




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                              45
Table C.2 Intracluster Errors as a Share of Total Errors


                                                                    Coastal                            Central                      Mountain    Tirana



     2                                                                   0.040                          0.043                           0.022   0.030
 sˆh
                                                                         5.930                          5.153                           5.559   5.013
   var( ec• )
                                  2
      ˆ c• ]
   E [u                                                                  5.970                          5.195                           5.581   5.043



                         2                                               0.007                          0.008                           0.004   0.006
   r                 I       (Y | X )
        Source: The 2012 Living Standard Measurement Study using calculations following Betti, Neri, and Ballini 2003.




Figure C.1 Mean Consumption and Poverty, by Prefecture




                                                                Tirane
  9500




                                                                           Shkoder
                                                  Berat
                                          Vlore
                                       Gjirokaster
                                                  Korce
 9000




                                                                                    Durres
  8500




                                          Elbasan
                                                                                               Lezhe



                                                                                       Fier
 8000




                                                      Diber

                                                                                                                          Kukes
  7500




                             .1                                    .15                                 .2                               .25




Figure C.2 Inequality measured by Gini, by prefecture




                     0.29                                                                                                       0.282   0.285
                     0.28                                                                                       0.271   0.271
                                                                                                       0.267
                     0.27                                                                     0.262
 Percentage (Gini)




                                                                            0.257     0.259
                     0.26                               0.252     0.253
                     0.25                     0.245
                     0.24
                     0.23
                     0.22             0.211
                     0.21
                      0.2




46                                                                                                Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
Figure C.3 Poverty Headcounts and 95 Confidence Intervals, by Prefecture



   35%
                                                           0.225
   30%
                                                               0.184
   25%
                                                                       0.154         0.139
   20% 0.123               0.165
                                        0.171
   15%
                                                       0.124                                 0.111
   10%
    5%                        0.113     0.106
                   0.127
    0%




Table C.3 Distribution of Districts, by Region

          Coastal                        Central                        Mountain                           Tirana

            Lezhë                        Devoll                           Kukës                         Tirana urban
           Kurbin                        Kolonjë                               Has                   Tirana, other urban
           Kavajë                       Pogradec                          Tropojë
         Mallakastër                     Mirditë                          Bulqizë
           Lushnjë                        Pukë                             Dibër
           Delvinë                    Malësi e Madhe                      Gramsh
          Sarandë                          Mat                           Librazhd
           Durrës                        Kuçovë
            Fier                         Skrapar
            Vlorë                         Krujë
                                          Peqin
                                       Gjirokastër
                                         Përmet
                                        Tepelenë
                                         Shkodër
                                         Elbasan
                                          Berat
                                          Korçë
                                       Tirana rural




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                   47
Main Annex: A closer look - Results by prefecture

Berat Prefecture
  The prefecture of Berat is located in the central                                        Korçë Prefecture to the east.
region. It was divided until recently into 20                                                 The poverty rate in the prefecture was 12.6
communes and 5 municipalities. The surface area                                            percent in 2012. The highest poverty rates were
of the prefecture is 1,798 square kilometers, and the                                      in the communes of Sinjë (17.8 percent) and
population is 141,783. The prefecture is bounded                                           Zhepë (16.9 percent) (map A1). The lowest
by Elbasan Prefecture to the north, Fier Prefecture                                        poverty rate occurred in the commune of Çepan
to the west, Gjirokastër Prefecture to the south, and                                      (less than 8.0 percent).




Map A1: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Berat Prefecture and communes, 2012

a. Poverty rate (headcount)			

                                                                                                                                             Prefecture of BERAT



                                             KOZARE



                            POSHNJË                                     LUMAS
                                                  KUÇOVË
                KUTALLI
                                                  PERONDI


                                                             OTLLAK
                          URA VAJGURORE
                                                                                 ROSHNIK
                  CUKALAT                                           VELABISHT

                                                            BERAT

                                                                                                                ZHEPË

                                                       VELABISHT

                                                                                    VERTOP

                                          SINJË


                                                                                                                        GJERBËS
                                                                                      POLIÇAN
                                                                                                    BOGOVË


                                                                    TERPAN

                                                                                                                                  LESHNJË

                                                                                                             QENDËR

                                                                                             VENDRESHË
                                                                                                             ÇOROVODË

                Head Count ratio (%).
                                                                                                                                  POTOM
                                 < 8.0
                             8.0 - 12.0
                            12.1 - 16.0
                            16.1 - 20.0                                                                                 ÇEPAN
                            20.1 - 24.0

                            24.1 - 28.0

                                > 28.0




48                                                                              Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prefecture of BERAT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Prefecture of BERAT
                    b. Number of the poor                                    KOZARE



                                                   POSHNJË
                                                                                 KUÇOVË                       LUMAS
                                                                                                     KOZARE

                                     KUTALLI

                                                                        POSHNJË
                                                                            PERONDI
                                                                                                         KUÇOVË                      LUMAS

                                                          KUTALLI                              OTLLAK
                                                    URA VAJGURORE
                                                                                                       PERONDI
                                                                                                                                  ROSHNIK
                                         CUKALAT                                                       VELABISHT         OTLLAK
                                                                             URA VAJGURORE
                                                                                       BERAT

                                                                                                                                                      ROSHNIK
                                                                                                                                                                             ZHEPË
                                                              CUKALAT                                                         VELABISHT

                                                                                                                 BERAT
                                                                                          VELABISHT
                                                                                                                                   VERTOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZHEPË


                                                                     SINJË                                        VELABISHT
                                                                                                                                                       VERTOP


                                                                                                                                       POLIÇAN                                                   GJERBËS
                                                                                             SINJË
                                                                                                                                                         BOGOVË



                                                                                                          TERPAN                                           POLIÇAN                                                 GJERBËS
                             Persons
                                                                                                                                                                                BOGOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                            LESHNJË

                                                < 300
                                                                                                                                   TERPAN VENDRESHË                       QENDËR
                                           300 -Persons
                                                 600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LESHNJË
                                           601 - 900                                                                                                                      ÇOROVODË
                                                                     < 300
                                          901 - 1200                                                                                                             VENDRESHË                  QENDËR
                                                                300 - 600
                                        1201 - 1500                                                                                                                                                           POTOM
                                                                601 - 900                                                                                                                    ÇOROVODË
                                        1501 - 1800
                                                               901 - 1200
                                        1801 - 2100          1201 - 1500                                                                                                                                                       POTOM


                                        2101 - 3000          1501 - 1800
                                                                                                                                                                                         ÇEPAN
                                                             1801 - 2100
                                        3001 - 9000
                                                             2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ÇEPAN
                                               > 9000
                                                             3001 - 9000


                                                                    > 9000




                    c. The average monthly per capita consumption	

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Per Capita Consumption
                       Per Capita Consumption
                                                                                                KOZARE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of BERAT
                       Prefecture of BERAT POSHNJË
                                                                                                                                      LUMAS
                                                                                                      KUÇOVË
                                                         KUTALLI
                                                                                                      PERONDI


                                                                        URA VAJGURORE                                   OTLLAK


                                                                                                                                                  ROSHNIK
                                                             CUKALAT                                                          VELABISHT

                                                                                                                      BERAT

                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZHEPË


                                                                                                                 VELABISHT


                                                                                                                                                         VERTOP

                                                                                            SINJË


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GJERBËS
                                                                                                                                                                POLIÇAN
GJERBËS
                                                                                                                                                                                   BOGOVË


                                                                                                                              TERPAN                                                                                                                Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                       Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LESHNJË                                     < 7500
          LESHNJË                              < 7500
                                                                                                                                                                                            QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7500 - 8000
                                        7500 - 8000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8001 - 8500
                                                                                                                                                                      VENDRESHË
                                        8001 - 8500                                                                                                                                          ÇOROVODË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8501 - 9000
                                        8501 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POTOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9001 - 9500
          POTOM
                                        9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9501 - 10000
                                       9501 - 10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10001 - 10500
                                     10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10501 - 11000
                                      10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11001 - 11500
                                      11001 - 11500                                                                                                                                                                ÇEPAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        > 11500
ÇEPAN
                                               > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                   Commune/Municipality Boundary

                     Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                     Population and Housing
                       The boundaries          Census and
                                        of communes      2011 municipalities                                                                                                                                                                       have been designed for statistical purpose and
                       haveStandard
                     Living been designed    for statistical
                                     Measurement      Survey purpose
                                                               – LSMS and
                                                                        2012                                                                                                                                                                       may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                       may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                       49
                       d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gini Coefficient
                                     Gini Coefficient
                                                                                       KOZARE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Prefecture of BERAT
                                     Prefecture of BERAT
                                                    POSHNJË
                                                                                                                 LUMAS
                                                                                           KUÇOVË
                                                      KUTALLI
                                                                                           PERONDI


                                                                                                      OTLLAK
                                                                    URA VAJGURORE
                                                                                                                         ROSHNIK
                                                          CUKALAT                                            VELABISHT

                                                                                                     BERAT

                                                                                                                                                       ZHEPË
                                                                                                VELABISHT



                                                                                                                            VERTOP

                                                                                   SINJË


                                                                                                                                                               GJERBËS
                                                                                                                              POLIÇAN
                                                                                                                                           BOGOVË
GJERBËS

                                                                                                             TERPAN

                                                                                                                                                                         LESHNJË

                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gini index (%)
          LESHNJË                                                                                                                                   QENDËR

                                     Gini index (%)                                                                                  VENDRESHË                                                                       < 21.0
                                                                                                                                                    ÇOROVODË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                21.0 - 22.0
                                                     < 21.0
                                                                                                                                                                         POTOM                                  22.1 - 23.0
                                                21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                23.1 - 24.0
          POTOM                                 22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                24.1 - 25.0
                                                23.1 - 24.0
                    Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                25.1 - 26.0
                                                100. - 25.0
                    with values between 0 and 24.1
                                                                                                                                                               ÇEPAN                                                  > 26.0
                                                25.1 - 26.0

ÇEPAN                                                 > 26.0

                    Source:                                                                                                                                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                    Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                               have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                    Measurement
                    Living Standard The boundariesSurvey   – LSMS and
                                                     of communes     2012 municipalities                                                                                                             may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.


                       Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
                       Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                     statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




                         The number of the poor in this prefecture was                                                               the lowest level of per capita consumption,
                       17,870 in 2012. The poor were concentrated                                                                    less than 7,500 ALL. The highest level of per
                       in the municipality of Berat (4,523 people),                                                                  capita consumption was in the commune of
                       followed by the municipality of Kuçovë (1,547)                                                                Çepan (9,854 ALL).
                       and the commune of Kutalli (1,396), while the                                                                   The Gini coefficient in the prefecture was
                       communes with the lowest number of the poor                                                                   23.8 percent. It appeared to be highest in
                       were Çepan (58), Leshnjë (65), and Potom (86).                                                                the municipalities of Berat (25.9 percent)
                         The average monthly per capita                                                                              and Kuçovë (25.2 percent), and lowest in the
                       consumption in the prefecture was 8,785 ALL.                                                                  communes of Cukalat (22.7 percent), Potom
                       The communes of Sinjë and Tërpan showed                                                                       (22.2 percent) and Tërpan (22.4 percent).




                       50                                                                                                Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                     Dibër Prefecture
                                       The prefecture of Dibër is located in                                                                   the Republic of Macedonia.
                                     the mountain region. It is divided into 4                                                                   The poverty rate in the prefecture was 19.5
                                     municipalities and 31 communes. The surface                                                               percent in 2012. The highest poverty rate
                                     area of the prefecture is 2,586 square kilometers,                                                        occurred in the communes of Sllovë (29.4
                                     and the population is 136,829. The prefecture is                                                          percent), Zall-Dardhë (28.9 percent), and
                                     bounded in the north by Kukës Prefecture, in the                                                          Zall-Reç (28.4 percent) (map A2). The lowest
                                     west by the prefectures of Durrës and Tirana, in                                                          poverty rate was in the municipality of Burrel
                                     the northwest by the prefecture of Lezhë, in the                                                          (11.2 percent).
                                     south by Elbasan Prefecture and in the east by




                                     Map A2: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Dibër Prefecture and communes, 2012
                                     a. Poverty rate (headcount)			




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Poverty Head Count
                                         Poverty Head Count                                                                                                    ZALL REÇ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture of DIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           KALA E DODËS
                                         Prefecture of DIBËR                                                                                                    ZALL DARDHË
                      KALA E DODËS
                                                                                                                                              LURË
                                                                                                                                                                                                SLLOVË


           SLLOVË                                                                                                                                            ARRAS
                                                                                                                                                                          FUSHË-ÇIDHËN

                                                                                                                                                                                    KASTRIOT
ËN

ASTRIOT

                                                                                                          RUKAJ    DERJAN         MACUKULL           FUSHË MUHUR              QENDËR TOMIN PESHKOPI
                                                                                                                                                                                                           MELAN

R TOMIN PESHKOPI                                                               ULËZ
                      MELAN
                                                                                                                                                                            LUZNI
                                                                                                         BURREL
                                                                                                                            LIS
                                                                                           BAZ                                                    SELISHTË

                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAQELLARË
                                                                                                                                     SUÇ
                      MAQELLARË                                                                  KOMSI                                                                          SHUPENZË


PENZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Head Count ratio (%).
                                                                                                         GURRË                                           FUSHË BULQIZË

                                         Head Count ratio (%).                                                              KLOS
                                                                                                                                                                                               GJORICË
                                                                                                                                               BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              < 8.0

          GJORICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8.0 - 12.0
                                                             < 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                            ZERQAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12.1 - 16.0
                                                         8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                                                  XIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16.1 - 20.0
                                                       12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  OSTREN                                20.1 - 24.0
                                                       16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                             MARTANESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24.1 - 28.0
             OSTREN                                    20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             > 28.0
                                                       24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           TREBISHT
                                                            > 28.0
                      TREBISHT


                                              Source:                                                                                                                                                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                              Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                          have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                              Living Standard
                                         The boundaries        Measurement
                                                         of communes       Survey – LSMS 2012
                                                                      and municipalities                                                                                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                         have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                               51
                                   b. Number of the poor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of poor individuals
                                                                                                                                                                             ZALL REÇ

                                    Number of poor individuals                                                                                                                                                                           Prefecture of DIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KALA E DODËS
                                                                                                                                                                              ZALL DARDHË

                                    Prefecture of DIBËR                                                                                                LURË
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SLLOVË
                    KALA E DODËS


                                                                                                                                                                           ARRAS

       SLLOVË                                                                                                                                                                           FUSHË-ÇIDHËN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        KASTRIOT




 KASTRIOT
                                                                                                               RUKAJ                        MACUKULL                FUSHË MUHUR                              PESHKOPI
                                                                                                                           DERJAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MELAN
                                                                                                                                                                                              QENDËR TOMIN
                                                                                   ULËZ

       PESHKOPI
                                                                                                                                                                                         LUZNI
                  MELAN                                                                                        BURREL
OMIN                                                                                                                                LIS
                                                                                                BAZ                                                             SELISHTË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAQELLARË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Persons
                                                                                                                                             SUÇ
                                                                                                      KOMSI                                                                                       SHUPENZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           < 300
                  MAQELLARË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       300 - 600
                                    Persons
NZË                                                                                                           GURRË                                                   FUSHË BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       601 - 900
                                                      < 300
                                                                                                                                            KLOS                                                                                                      901 - 1200
                                                  300 - 600                                                                                                                                                  GJORICË
                                                                                                                                                          BULQIZË                                                                                    1201 - 1500
                                                  601 - 900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1501 - 1800
                                                 901 - 1200                                                                                                                              ZERQAN
       GJORICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1801 - 2100
                                                1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                        XIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2101 - 3000
                                                1501 - 1800
                                                1801 - 2100                                                                                                                                                                                          3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                OSTREN
                                                                                                                                                        MARTANESH
                                                2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          > 9000
                                                3001 - 9000
          OSTREN


                                                     > 9000                                                                                                                                                                 TREBISHT




                                                  Source:                                                                                                                                                                                The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                      TREBISHT
                                                  Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                     have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                  Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                   c. The average monthly per capita consumption	

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Per Capita Consumption

                                    Per Capita Consumption                                                                                                                  ZALL REÇ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Prefecture of DIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KALA E DODËS


                                    Prefecture of DIBËR                                                                                                                      ZALL DARDHË


                                                                                                                                                         LURË
                   KALA E DODËS                                                                                                                                                                               SLLOVË



                                                                                                                                                                         ARRAS          FUSHË-ÇIDHËN
        SLLOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                 KASTRIOT




OT                                                                                                             RUKAJ                        MACUKULL
                                                                                                                          DERJAN                                 FUSHË MUHUR                QENDËR TOMIN PESHKOPI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MELAN

                                                                                   ULËZ

MINPESHKOPI
                                                                                                                                                                                          LUZNI
                   MELAN
                                                                                                              BURREL
                                                                                                                                      LIS
                                                                                                BAZ                                                           SELISHTË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAQELLARË
                                                                                                                                                 SUÇ

                                                                                                      KOMSI                                                                                      SHUPENZË

                   MAQELLARË                                                                                                                                                                                                             Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)

                                                                                                                                                                    FUSHË BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              < 7500
ZË                                                                                                            GURRË

                                    Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)                                                                                                                                                                                   7500 - 8000
                                                                                                                                          KLOS
                                                                                                                                                         BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                             GJORICË                                     8001 - 8500
                                                          < 7500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8501 - 9000
                                                     7500 - 8000
                                                                                                                                                                                         ZERQAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9001 - 9500
       GJORICË                                       8001 - 8500
                                                                                                                         XIBËR                                                                                                                          9501 - 10000
                                                     8501 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10001 - 10500
                                                     9001 - 9500                                                                                                                                               OSTREN
                                                                                                                                                       MARTANESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10501 - 11000
                                                   9501 - 10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11001 - 11500
                                                  10001 - 10500
          OSTREN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              > 11500
                                                  10501 - 11000                                                                                                                                                          TREBISHT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                  11001 - 11500
                                                        > 11500
                                                  Source:
                    TREBISHT                                                                                                                                                                                                             The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                  Population and Housing
                                                Commune/Municipality     Census 2011
                                                                     Boundary                                                                                                                                                            have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                  Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                   52                                                                                                              Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                    d. Gini coefficient (inequality)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Gini Coefficient

                                      Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                         ZALL REÇ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prefecture of DIBËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     KALA E DODËS

                                      Prefecture of DIBËR                                                                                                                 ZALL DARDHË

                                                                                                                                                         LURË
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SLLOVË
                     KALA E DODËS

                                                                                                                                                                       ARRAS
                                                                                                                                                                                    FUSHË-ÇIDHËN
          SLLOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                              KASTRIOT


N

STRIOT                                                                                                           RUKAJ    DERJAN         MACUKULL               FUSHË MUHUR             QENDËR TOMIN PESHKOPI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MELAN

                                                                                   ULËZ


 TOMIN PESHKOPI                                                                                                                                                                       LUZNI
                     MELAN                                                                                      BURREL
                                                                                                                                   LIS
                                                                                                  BAZ                                                       SELISHTË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAQELLARË
                                                                                                                                            SUÇ

                                                                                                        KOMSI                                                                             SHUPENZË

                     MAQELLARË


                                                                                                                GURRË                                              FUSHË BULQIZË
PENZË

                                                                                                                                   KLOS                                                                                             Gini index (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         GJORICË
                                                                                                                                                         BULQIZË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    < 21.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      ZERQAN
                                      Gini index (%)                                                                                                                                                                                           21.0 - 22.0
         GJORICË
                                                                                                                         XIBËR                                                                                                                 22.1 - 23.0
                                                      < 21.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               23.1 - 24.0
                                                 21.0 - 22.0                                                                                                                                                OSTREN
                                                                                                                                                       MARTANESH                                                                               24.1 - 25.0
                                                 22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25.1 - 26.0
                                                 23.1
                                                Gini   - 24.0 is a measure of inequality
                                                     coefficient
            OSTREN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   > 26.0
                                                with
                                                 24.1values
                                                       - 25.0between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                                      TREBISHT

                                                 25.1 - 26.0
                                                       > 26.0
                     TREBISHT                   Source:                                                                                                                                                                             The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                  have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                      may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                      The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                      have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                      may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                    Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
                                    Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




                                      The number of the poor in the prefecture was                                                                        (9,101 ALL). The communes of Kala e Dodës,
                                    estimated at 26,731. The largest number of poor                                                                       Luzni, Selishtë, Sllovë, Zall-Dardhë and Zall-
                                    was in the municipality of Peshkopi (2,745 poor                                                                       Reç had the lowest per capita consumption, less
                                    people) and the commune of Maqellarë (2,561).                                                                         than 7,000 ALL. The inequality measure in the
                                    The average monthly per capita consumption in                                                                         prefecture was 23.1 percent. The highest level of
                                    this prefecture was 7,551 ALL, which is below                                                                         inequality was in the commune of Zall-Dardhë
                                    the national average. The highest per capita                                                                          (25.2 percent) and the lowest level of inequality
                                    consumption was in the municipality of Burrel                                                                         in commune of Kala e Dodes (20.4 percent)




                                    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                53
Durrës Prefecture
  The prefecture of Durrës is located in the                                                          prefecture of Tirana.
coastal region. It is divided into 6 municipalities                                                     The poverty rate in the prefecture was 15.3
and 10 communes. The surface area of the                                                              percent in 2012. The highest poverty rate was in
prefecture is 766 square kilometers and the                                                           the municipalities of Sukth (21.1 percent) and
population is 261,844. The prefecture is boun­                                                        Manëz (20.9 percent), followed by the commune
ded on the east by the prefecture of Dibër, on                                                        of Katund i Ri (20.2 percent) (map A3). The
the north by the prefecture of Lezhë, on the west                                                     lowest poverty rate occurred in the commune of
by the Adriatic Sea, and on the south by the                                                          Bubq (9.0 percent).
                                                                                                                                                          Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture of DURRËS


Map A3: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Durrës Prefecture and communes, 2012
                                                                                                                                    Poverty Head Count
a. Poverty rate (headcount)				
                                                                                                                                    Prefecture of DURRËS



                                                                                ISHËM                               KODËR THUMANË


                                                                                                                                                                                            CUDHI
                                                                                                                                                                   KRUJË




                                                                                                             BUBQ

                                                           ISHËM                                    KODËR THUMANË                            FUSHË KRUJË


                                                                                                                                                                           CUDHI
                                                                                                                                          KRUJË
                                                                                                                                                                     NIKËL
                                                                                            MANËZ
                                                              SUKTH



                                                                                        BUBQ
                                                                                                                          FUSHË KRUJË

                                             KATUND I RI


                                                                                                                                              NIKËL
                                                                      MANËZ
                                           SUKTH                                            MAMINAS




                                                               XHAFZOTAJ
                                                                                   SHIJAK
                            KATUNDDURRËS
                                  I RI




                                                                                              GJEPALAJ
                                                                      MAMINAS


                                                                      RRASHBULL

                                           XHAFZOTAJ                                                                                                      Head Count ratio in (%).
                                                             SHIJAK
                  DURRËS

                                                                                                                                                                                 < 8.0

                                                                        GJEPALAJ                                                                                             8.0 - 12.0

                                                                                                                                                                           12.1 - 16.0

                                               RRASHBULL                                                                                                                   16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                    Head Count ratio in (%).               20.1 - 24.0

                                                                                                                                                                           24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                          < 8.0
                                                                                                                                                      8.0 - 12.0                > 28.0

                                                                                                                                                  12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                  16.1 - 20.0
                      Source:                                                                                                                          The  boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                  20.1 - 24.0
                      Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                               have been designed for statistical purpose and
                      Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                              24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                       may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                         > 28.0


54                                                                                  Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
      Source:                                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municipalities
      Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                            have been designed for statistical purpose and
      Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                             Prefecture of DURRËS


                                                                                                                                                      KODËR THUMANË
                                                                                                           ISHËM


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CUDHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         KRUJË

b. Number of the poor

                                                                                                                                              BUBQ
                                                                                                                                                                                   FUSHË KRUJË




                                                                                                                    KODËR THUMANË
                                                                  ISHËM                                               MANËZ                                                                          NIKËL
                                                                                                SUKTH

                                                                                                                                                                                             CUDHI
                                                                                                                                                                KRUJË




                                                                        KATUND I RI


                                                                                                            BUBQ
                                                                                                                                            FUSHË KRUJË


                                                                                                                            MAMINAS



                                                                                MANËZ                                                                       NIKËL
                                                       SUKTH
                                                                                                   XHAFZOTAJ
                                                               DURRËS
                                                                                                                   SHIJAK



                                                                                                                                                                                                      Persons
                                                                                         RRASHBULL                            GJEPALAJ
                                  KATUND I RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           < 300

                                                                                                                                                                                Per Capita Consumption                300 - 600
                                                                                      MAMINAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      601 - 900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    901 - 1200

                                                         XHAFZOTAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                Prefecture of DURRËS
                                                                                                                                                                                                1201 - 1500
                         DURRËS
                                                                          SHIJAK                                                                                                                                   1501 - 1800

                                                                                                                                                             Persons                                               1801 - 2100
                                                  RRASHBULL                             GJEPALAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                         < 300
                                                                                                                                                          Per Capita Consumption    300 - 600
                                                                                                                                                                               3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                    601 - 900
                                                                                                                                                                                  901 - 1200                             > 9000
                                                                                                                                                                  1201of
                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture      DURRËS
                                                                                                                                                                      - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                                1501 - 1800

                                                                                                                                      KODËR THUMANË
                                                                                                                                                                                1801 - 2100
                                       Source:                                                ISHËM
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The boundaries of communes and municipalities
c. The average monthly per   capita
                       Population        consumption	
                                  and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                       2101 - 3000           have been designed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CUDHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for statistical purpose and
                                       Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                  KRUJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                      may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                3001 - 9000


                                                                                                                             BUBQ
                                                                                                                                                                                       > 9000
                                                                                                                                                                FUSHË KRUJË




                                                                        ISHËM                                       KODËR THUMANË
                                                                                                                                                                                          NIKËL
          Source:                                                                                        MANËZ                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                          SUKTH
          Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                             CUDHI purpose and
                                                                                                                                                             have been designed for statistical
          Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                     may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                               KRUJË




                                                       KATUND I RI
                                                                                                          BUBQ
                                                                                                                                              FUSHË KRUJË

                                                                                                         MAMINAS


                                                                                                                                                                      NIKËL
                                                                                      MANËZ
                                                     SUKTH
                                                                           XHAFZOTAJ
                                                                                                SHIJAK
                                          DURRËS




                                                                                                           GJEPALAJ
                                    KATUND I RI

                                                                                                                                                                                Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                   RRASHBULL
                                                                                    MAMINAS                                                                                                            < 7500
                                                                                                                                                                                                   7500 - 8000

                                                                                                                                                                                                   8001 - 8500
                                                      XHAFZOTAJ
                                                                          SHIJAK                                                                                                                   8501 - 9000
                        DURRËS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                                                                  9501 - 10000
                                                                                        GJEPALAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                               10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                 (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                                                                          Per capita consumption 10501 - 11000
                                                              RRASHBULL
                                                                                                                                                                                    < 7500 11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                               7500 - 8000             > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                               8001 - 8500 Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                               8501 - 9000
                             Source:                                                                                                                                            The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                             Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                9001
                                                                                                                                                                                have   9500 designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                                                                     - been
                             Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                     may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                              9501 - 10000

                                                                                                                                                                         10001 - 10500
Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                 10501 - 11000                                                55
                                                                                                                                                                          11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                   > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                        Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                   Gini Coefficient

                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of DURRËS



                                                                                               ISHËM                        KODËR THUMANË
d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CUDHI
                                                                                                                                                                            KRUJË




                                                                                                                     BUBQ
                                                                                                                                                        FUSHË KRUJË
                                                                 ISHËM                              KODËR THUMANË


                                                                                                                                                                   CUDHI
                                                                                                                                      KRUJË
                                                                                                                                                                                NIKËL
                                                                                                         MANËZ
                                                                                    SUKTH



                                                                                             BUBQ
                                                                                                                     FUSHË KRUJË
                                                               KATUND I RI


                                                                                                                                         NIKËL
                                                                            MANËZ                       MAMINAS
                                                     SUKTH




                                                                                XHAFZOTAJ
                                                                                                SHIJAK
                                    KATUND I RI    DURRËS



                                                                          MAMINAS                         GJEPALAJ



                                                                                      RRASHBULL
                                                   XHAFZOTAJ
                         DURRËS
                                                                   SHIJAK                                                                                                Gini index (%)

                                                                                                                                                                                           < 21.0
                                                                             GJEPALAJ                                                                                                 21.0 - 22.0

                                                                                                                                                                                      22.1 - 23.0
                                                       RRASHBULL
                                                                                                                                                                                      23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                   Gini index (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                      24.1 - 25.0
                                                                                                                                                    < 21.0                            25.1 - 26.0
                                        Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality                                                            21.0 - 22.0                                 > 26.0
                                        with values between 0 and 100.
                                                                                                                                               22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                               23.1 - 24.0

                                                                                                                                               24.1 - 25.0
                                            Source:                                                                                                                      The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                               25.1 - 26.0
                                            Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                           have been designed for statistical purpose and
                Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality                                                                                         > 26.0
                                            Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012
                with values between 0 and 100.
                                                                                                                                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                   The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                              statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit
                Source:                                                                                                            The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                 have been designed for statistical purpose and
                Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                     may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




  The number of poor in the prefecture was                                                           and Durrës (9,351 ALL). The lowest level of
39,940 in 2012. The highest number of poor was                                                       consumption was in the municipalities of Sukth
in the municipality of Durrës, around 16,000                                                         (7,514 ALL), Katund i Ri (7,607 ALL), Gjepalaj
individuals, with a poverty rate of 14.1 percent.                                                    (7,659 ALL) and Manëz (7,787 ALL).
  The average monthly per capita consumption                                                           The level of inequality in the prefecture was
in the prefecture was almost the same as the                                                         24.9 percent. The highest level of inequality was
average per capita consumption in the country,                                                       in the municipalities of Durrës (27.9 percent)
8,481 ALL. The highest per capita consumption                                                        and Shijak (26.6 percent). The lowest poverty
was in the commune of Bubq (9,788 ALL) and                                                           rate occurred in the commune of Gjepalaj (23.6
in the municipalities of Shijak (9,382 ALL)                                                          percent).




56                                                                                     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                  Elbasan Prefecture
                                    The prefecture of Elbasan is located partly in                                                                                 The prefecture of Elbasan had a poverty rate
                                  the mountain region and partly in the central                                                                                  of 15.2 percent in 2012. Communes that are
                                  region. It is divided into 7 municipalities and 43                                                                             in the mountain region had a higher poverty
                                  communes. The surface area of the prefecture is                                                                                rate compared with the other communes in
                                  3,278 square kilometers, and the population is                                                                                 the prefecture. The highest poverty rates were
                                  294,599. The prefecture is bounded on the north                                                                                in the communes of Orenjë (30.4 percent),
                                  by the prefecture of Dibër, on the northwest                                                                                   Poroçan (26.8 percent) and Lunik (24.5 percent)
                                  by the prefecture of Tirana, in the west by the                                                                                (map A4). The lowest poverty rates were in the
                                  prefecture of Fier, in the south by the prefecture                                                                             municipality of Librazhd and the communes
                                  of Berat, in the southeast by the prefecture of                                                                                of Belsh, Gjergjan, Gostimë, Kushovë, and
                                  Korçë, and in the east by Republic of Macedonia.                                                                               Shirgjan, where the rates fell below 12.0 percent.




                                  Map A4: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Elbasan Prefecture and communes, 2012
                                  a. Poverty rate (headcount)				




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Poverty Head Count
                                    Poverty Head Count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      STËBLEVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Prefecture of ELBASAN
ËBLEVË
                                    Prefecture of ELBASAN                                                                                                                                             LUNIK
                                                                                                                                                                               ORENJË




                                                                                                                                                                     LABINOT MAL
                                                                                                                                             FUNARË

                                                                                                                                                                                                      QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LIBRAZHD
                                                                                                                          GRACEN
                                                                                                                                                         LABINOT FUSHË                                                HOTOLISHT

OTOLISHT
                                                                                                                                    BRADASHESH                                           POLIS
                                                                                                                                                      ELBASAN

                                                                                                                     PAPËR                                       SHUSHICË
                                                                                                   PAJOVË
                                                                                     PËRPARIM                                                                                                                                    QUKËS           RRAJCË
                                                                          KARINË
                                                                                                                                             SHIRGJAN
         QUKËS           RRAJCË                                                                                                                                                                                                          PËRRENJAS
                                                                             PEQIN
                 PËRRENJAS
                                                                          GJOCAJ                                           CËRRIK       GJERGJAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STRAVAJ
                                                                                                                 SHALËS                                                  GJINAR
                                                                                           SHEZË                                   GOSTIMË              TREGAN
AJ

                                                                                                                                                                                            ZAVALIN
                                                                                                         BELSH
                                                                                           RRASË                                      KLOS




                                                                                                                                                                                                 POROÇAN
                                                                                                FIERZË                                                                                                                                                         Head Count ratio (%).
                                                                                                            KAJAN                    MOLLAS
                                    Head Count ratio (%).                                                                                                 SULT               PISHAJ
                                                                                                                    GREKAN                                                                                                                                                     < 8.0
                                                   < 8.0                                                                                                                 GRAMSH                                                                                            8.0 - 12.0
                                               8.0 - 12.0                                                                                                                                                     KUKUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          12.1 - 16.0
                                              12.1 - 16.0                                                                                               TUNJË
                                                                                                                                                                                      KODOVJAT                                                                            16.1 - 20.0
                                              16.1 - 20.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20.1 - 24.0
                                              20.1 - 24.0                                                                                                                                                         LENIE                                                   24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                   KUSHOVË
                                              24.1 - 28.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      SKËNDERBEGAS
                                                  > 28.0


                                               Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                         The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                               Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                              have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                               Living Standard
                                    have been designed                   purposeSurvey
                                                                 Measurement
                                                         for statistical           and – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                             may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                  Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                57
                                 b. Number of the poor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Number of poor indi
                                  Number of poor individuals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  STËBLEVË                                            Prefecture of ELBAS
                                  Prefecture of ELBASAN                                                                                                                                                  ORENJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LUNIK




                                                                                                                                                               FUNARË

                                                                                                                                                                                    LABINOT MAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 QENDËR

                                                                                                                                            GRACEN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HOTOLISHT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LIBRAZHD

                                                                                                                                                       BRADASHESH
                                                                                                                                                                               LABINOT FUSHË
                                                                                                                                                                                                            POLIS
                                                                                                                                                                   ELBASAN


                                                                                                                                                                                      SHUSHICË
                                                                                                                                 PAPËR                                                                                                                          QUKËS
                                                                                                  PËRPARIM

                                                                                                               PAJOVË                                                                                                                                                                 RRAJCË
                                                                                   KARINË                                                                      SHIRGJAN                                                                                                   PËRRENJAS
KËS


                    RRAJCË                                                               PEQIN
        PËRRENJAS                                                                                                                                       GJERGJAN
                                                                                GJOCAJ                                                        CËRRIK
                                                                                                              SHEZË        SHALËS                                          TREGAN      GJINAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Persons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               STRAVAJ
                                                                                                                                                     GOSTIMË

                                  Persons                                                                                                                                                                   ZAVALIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        < 300
                                                                                                                        BELSH

                                                                                                         RRASË
                                                                                                                                                     KLOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    300 - 600
                                                    < 300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    601 - 900
                                                300 - 600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  901 - 1200
                                                601 - 900                                                                                            MOLLAS                                                       POROÇAN
                                                                                                             FIERZË         KAJAN        GREKAN
                                                                                                                                                                                       PISHAJ                                                                                                                    1201 - 1500
                                               901 - 1200                                                                                                               SULT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1501 - 1800
                                             1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1801 - 2100
                                             1501 - 1800                                                                                                                                   GRAMSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KUKUR


                                             1801 - 2100                                                                                                           TUNJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                         KODOVJAT


                                             2101 - 3000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                       KUSHOVË                                              LENIE

                                             3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SKËNDERBEGAS                                                                                                  > 9000

                                                   > 9000
                                                        Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and muni
                                                        Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                                                            have been designed for statistical purpo
                                                               Standard
                                                        Living and
                                  The boundaries of communes            Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012
                                                                   municipalities                                                                                                                                                                                                                     may not reflect exactly the territory of the
                                  have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                 c. The average monthly per capita consumption	
                                  Per Capita Consumption                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Per Capita Consumption
                                  Prefecture of ELBASAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Prefecture of ELBASA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STËBLEVË


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LUNIK
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ORENJË




                                                                                                                                                                                      LABINOT MAL
                                                                                                                                                            FUNARË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LIBRAZHD
                                                                                                                                         GRACEN
                                                                                                                                                                          LABINOT FUSHË                                                      HOTOLISHT

                                                                                                                                                    BRADASHESH                                               POLIS
                                                                                                                                                                    ELBASAN
                                                                                                                                    PAPËR                                         SHUSHICË
QUKËS                                                                                                           PAJOVË
                        RRAJCË                                                                   PËRPARIM                                                                                                                                                 QUKËS                  RRAJCË
                                                                                   KARINË
                                                                                                                                                            SHIRGJAN
           PËRRENJAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PËRRENJAS
                                                                                         PEQIN

                                                                                   GJOCAJ                                                  CËRRIK      GJERGJAN
                                                                                                             SHEZË                                                                                                                        STRAVAJ
                                                                                                                                SHALËS                                                    GJINAR
                                                                                                                                                  GOSTIMË               TREGAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAVALIN
                                                                                                                        BELSH
                                  Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)                                   RRASË                                          KLOS                                                                                                                                     Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)

                                                       < 7500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       < 7500
                                                  7500 - 8000                                                                                                                                                         POROÇAN                                                                                  7500 - 8000
                                                                                                             FIERZË                                  MOLLAS
                                                                                                                          KAJAN                                            SULT                 PISHAJ
                                                  8001 - 8500                                                                    GREKAN                                                                                                                                                                        8001 - 8500
                                                  8501 - 9000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8501 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                         GRAMSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KUKUR
                                                  9001 - 9500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                                         TUNJË
                                                 9501 - 10000                                                                                                                                            KODOVJAT                                                                                             9501 - 10000
                                               10001 - 10500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10001 - 10500
                                               10501 - 11000                                                                                                                        KUSHOVË                                               LENIE                                                             10501 - 11000
                                                11001 - 11500                                                                                                                                        SKËNDERBEGAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11001 - 11500
                                                       > 11500                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 11500
                                             Commune/Municipality Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Commune/Municipality Boundary

                                               Source:
                                  The boundaries   of communes and municipalities                                                                                                                                                                                                              The boundaries of communes and municipali
                                               Population
                                  have been designed    for and  Housing
                                                            statistical    Census
                                                                        purpose     2011
                                                                                  and                                                                                                                                                                                                          have been designed for statistical purpose an
                                  may not reflect exactly
                                               Living     the territory
                                                      Standard           of the local
                                                                 Measurement          units.
                                                                                  Survey   – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the loca

                                 58                                                                                                                      Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                         d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Gini Coefficient
                                              Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Prefecture of ELBASAN
                                              Prefecture of ELBASAN                                                                                                                                                           STËBLEVË
 STËBLEVË

                                                                                                                                                                                                           LUNIK
                                                                                                                                                                                     ORENJË




                                                                                                                                                                       LABINOT MAL
                                                                                                                                               FUNARË

                                                                                                                                                                                                           QENDËR

                                                                                                                                                                                                       LIBRAZHD
                                                                                                                            GRACEN

                                                                                                                                                           LABINOT FUSHË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HOTOLISHT
  HOTOLISHT
                                                                                                                                        BRADASHESH                                            POLIS
                                                                                                                                                        ELBASAN

                                                                                                                       PAPËR                                       SHUSHICË
                                                                                                     PAJOVË                                                                                                                                                  RRAJCË
                                                                                       PËRPARIM                                                                                                                                          QUKËS
                                                                           KARINË
            QUKËS               RRAJCË                                                                                                         SHIRGJAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PËRRENJAS
                    PËRRENJAS                                                  PEQIN

                                                                            GJOCAJ                                             CËRRIK      GJERGJAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STRAVAJ
                                                                                              SHEZË                SHALËS                                                   GJINAR
RAVAJ                                                                                                                                GOSTIMË              TREGAN


                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZAVALIN
                                                                                                           BELSH
                                                                                             RRASË                                        KLOS




                                                                                                                                                                                                      POROÇAN
                                                                                                  FIERZË
                                                                                                                                         MOLLAS                                                                                                                        Gini index (%)
                                                                                                              KAJAN
                                              Gini index (%)                                                          GREKAN
                                                                                                                                                            SULT               PISHAJ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       < 21.0
                                                              < 21.0                                                                                                       GRAMSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KUKUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21.0 - 22.0
                                                          21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                          TUNJË                                                                                                                    22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                         KODOVJAT
                                                          22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23.1 - 24.0
                                                          23.1 - 24.0                                                                                                                                                                                                              24.1 - 25.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LENIE
                                                          24.1 - 25.0                                                                                                KUSHOVË
NIE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25.1 - 26.0
                                                           25.1 is
                                               Gini coefficient    a measure of inequality
                                                                 - 26.0                                                                                                                 SKËNDERBEGAS
                                               with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                                                                                                           > 26.0
                                                                > 26.0


                                               Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                               Population
                                              The              Housing
                                                          and of
                                                   boundaries           Census
                                                                 communes      and 2011
                                                                                    municipalities                                                                                                                                                                     have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                               Living
                                              have    Standard
                                                    been       Measurement
                                                         designed               Survey
                                                                   for statistical       – LSMS
                                                                                   purpose   and 2012                                                                                                                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                              may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                         Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                         The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
                                         Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                    statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




                                           The number of the poor in the prefecture was                                                                                 the commune of Poroçan (6,868 ALL). The
                                         44,727 in 2012. About 22.0 percent of the poor                                                                                 municipalities of Belsh, Elbasan, and Librazhd
                                         in the prefecture were living in the municipality                                                                              and the communes of Gostimë and Shirgjan
                                         of Elbasan, which had the highest density of                                                                                   had consumption levels above 9,000 ALL,
                                         poor compared with other municipalities and                                                                                    significantly above the average across the
                                         communes. The areas with the lowest number                                                                                     prefecture.
                                         of poor were the communes of Kushovë and                                                                                          The measure of inequality in the prefecture
                                         Stëblevë.                                                                                                                      was 23.7 percent. The highest Gini coefficient
                                           The average monthly per capita consumption                                                                                   was in the municipalities of Elbasan and Peqin
                                         in the prefecture was 8,192 ALL. The poorest                                                                                   (above 26 percent). The lowest level of inequality
                                         commune, Orenjë, also exhibited the lowest                                                                                     were in commune of Hotolisht, Lenie and Sult
                                         consumption level (6,562 ALL), followed by                                                                                     (less than 22 percent).




                                         Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                     59
                                                                            Fier Prefecture
                                                                               The prefecture of Fier is located in the coastal                                                                                     prefecture of Vlorë.
                                                                            region. It is divided into 6 municipalities and 36                                                                                        The prefecture of Fier had a poverty rate of
                                                                            communes. The surface area of the prefecture                                                                                            15.7 percent in 2012. The lowest poverty rate
                                                                            is 1,887 square kilometers, and the population                                                                                          was in the municipalities of Fier and Ballsh,
                                                                            is 310,453. The prefecture is bounded on the                                                                                            respectively, 11.0 percent and 11.4 percent
                                                                            north by the prefecture of Durrës, on the                                                                                               (map A5). The highest poverty rates were in the
                                                                            northwest by the Adriatic Sea, on the northeast                                                                                         communes of Selitë (22.1 percent) and Tërbuf
                                                                            by the prefecture of Elbasan, on the east by the                                                                                        (21.6 percent).
                                                                            prefecture of Berat and on the south by the



                                                                                               Poverty Head Count

                                                                           Map A5:Prefecture
                                                                                   Poverty      FIER and Inequality, Fier Prefecture and communes, 2012
                                                                                             ofRate
                       TËRBUF
                                                                           a. Poverty rate (headcount)				
                                        DUSHK


DIVJAKË                                                         BALLAGAT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Poverty Head Count
                                                GOLEM                HYSGJOKAJ
                  GRABIAN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of FIER
                                                                   KARBUNARË
                                              LUSHNJE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TËRBUF


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DUSHK

                 GRADISHTË
                                                                      FIERSHEGAN                                                                                                   DIVJAKË                                                         BALLAGAT


                                                 KRUTJE
                       KOLONJË                                    ALLKAJ                                                                                                                                                           GOLEM                HYSGJOKAJ
OFSHË                                                                                                                                                                                                GRABIAN


                                  BUBULLIMË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KARBUNARË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LUSHNJE

        QENDËR

                     MBROSTAR
                                                        STRUM                                                                                              RREMAS
                                        ROSKOVEC                                                                                                                                                    GRADISHTË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FIERSHEGAN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KRUTJE
          FIER                                                                                                                                                                                            KOLONJË                                    ALLKAJ
                             ZHARRËS
                                              KUMAN                                                                                                                           LIBOFSHË


                                                                KURJAN                                                                                                                                               BUBULLIMË

                                PATOS
                                                                                                                                                                TOPOJË
                  PORTËZ                           RUZHDIE                                                                                                                               QENDËR

                                                                                                                                                                                                        MBROSTAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STRUM
                                                                      NGRAÇAN                                                                                                                                              ROSKOVEC
ULL
                                   RUZHDIE

                                                  QENDËR                                                                                                                DERMENAS
                                                                           ARANITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                             FIER               ZHARRËS
                      CAKRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KUMAN
                                                         BALLSH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KURJAN
                                                                                                                                                                LEVAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PATOS
                                                                      GRESHICË
                                                  HEKAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PORTËZ                           RUZHDIE
                                                                                      SELITË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NGRAÇAN
                                                                                                                                                                             FRAKULL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RUZHDIE
                                                                                      FRATAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ARANITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAKRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BALLSH
                                                                           KUTË


                                                                                               Head Count ratio (%).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GRESHICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HEKAL
                                                                                                               < 8.0                                                                                                                                                     SELITË

                                                                                                           8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                                          12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FRATAR
                                                                                                          16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                          20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                          24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              KUTË
                                                                                                               > 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Head Count ratio (%).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  < 8.0
                                                                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                               have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                                                 8.0 - 12.0
012                                                                                            may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  > 28.0


                                                                                                                                   Source:                                                                                                                                        The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                   Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                             have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                   Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                 may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                                                           60                                                                                                                   Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                    BALLAGAT



                                                               HYSGJOKAJ
         GRABIAN                    GOLEM




                                 LUSHNJE
                                                         KARBUNARË




     GRADISHTË                                            FIERSHEGAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Number of poor individuals

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of FIER
                                     KRUTJE
              KOLONJË                                ALLKAJ                         b. Number of the poor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TËRBUF
                        BUBULLIMË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DUSHK



                                                                                                                                                                                                        DIVJAKË
        MBROSTAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BALLAGAT

                                            STRUM
                            ROSKOVEC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HYSGJOKAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GRABIAN                     GOLEM



R
                ZHARRËS         KUMAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LUSHNJE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KARBUNARË



                                                    KURJAN
                  PATOS

                                                                                                                                                                            RREMAS
                                         RUZHDIE                                                                                                                                                                                GRADISHTË                                            FIERSHEGAN
     PORTËZ


                                                              NGRAÇAN                                                                                                                                                                                           KRUTJE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KOLONJË                                ALLKAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LIBOFSHË
                                        QENDËR
      CAKRAN
                                                               ARANITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BUBULLIMË

                                                BALLSH

                                                                                                                                                                              TOPOJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                               QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MBROSTAR
                                                              GRESHICË                                                                                                                                                                                                  STRUM
                                        HEKAL                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROSKOVEC
                                                                           SELITË


                                                                                                                                                                                             DERMENAS
                                                                                                Persons                                                                                                                  FIER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZHARRËS         KUMAN
                                                                           FRATAR
                                                                                                                 < 300
                                                                                                            300 - 600                                                                                                                                                           KURJAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PATOS
                                                                                                                                                                                     LEVAN
                                                                                                            601 - 900
                                                               KUTË
                                                                                                           901 - 1200                                                                                                           PORTËZ                              RUZHDIE


                                                                                                          1201 - 1500                                                                                                                                                                    NGRAÇAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRAKULL
                                                                                                          1501 - 1800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   QENDËR
                                                                                                          1801 - 2100                                                                                                            CAKRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ARANITAS


                                                                                                          2101 - 3000                                                                                                                                                      BALLSH




                                                                                                          3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GRESHICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HEKAL



                                                                                          Per Capita  Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SELITË
                                                                                                   > 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Persons

                                                                                          Prefecture of FIER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FRATAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            < 300
                                                                                        The boundaries of communes and municipalities
              TËRBUF                                                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                                                                                                  300 - 600
                                                                                        may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                                                                                                                                                                       601 - 900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KUTË
                            DUSHK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     901 - 1200
                                                     BALLAGAT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1501 - 1800
                                        GOLEM               HYSGJOKAJ
       GRABIAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1801 - 2100

                                                                                    c. The average monthly per capita consumption	                                                                                                                                                                                                   2101 - 3000
                                    LUSHNJE
                                                           KARBUNARË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Per Capita Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3001 - 9000

     GRADISHTË                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of FIER
                                                              FIERSHEGAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TËRBUF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           > 9000

                                         KRUTJE
              KOLONJË                                    ALLKAJ                                                                                                                                                                                    DUSHK
                                                                                                                                                      Source:                                                                                                                                                      The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                      Population and Housing Census 2011       DIVJAKË                                                                      BALLAGAT                               have been designed for statistical purpose and
                        BUBULLIMË
                                                                                                                                                      Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                               may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GOLEM               HYSGJOKAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GRABIAN

         MBROSTAR
                                              STRUM
                             ROSKOVEC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KARBUNARË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LUSHNJE
R


ER               ZHARRËS
                                    KUMAN                                                                                                                                 RREMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GRADISHTË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIERSHEGAN

                                                     KURJAN

                        PATOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KRUTJE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KOLONJË                                      ALLKAJ
      PORTËZ                              RUZHDIE                                                                                                                                                LIBOFSHË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BUBULLIMË
                                                              NGRAÇAN

                          RUZHDIE
                                                                                                                                                                                TOPOJË
                                         QENDËR
                                                                ARANITAS
          CAKRAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                MBROSTAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STRUM
                                                 BALLSH                                                                                                                                                                                             ROSKOVEC

                                                                                                                                                                                                          QENDËR
                                                              GRESHICË                                                                                                                 DERMENAS

                                         HEKAL                                                                                                                                                                    FIER                   ZHARRËS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KUMAN
                                                                            SELITË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KURJAN
                                                                                                                                                                                LEVAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PATOS
                                                                           FRATAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PORTËZ                               RUZHDIE

                                                                                                                < 7500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGRAÇAN

                                                                KUTË                                       7500 - 8000                                                                          FRAKULL                                        RUZHDIE

                                                                                                           8001 - 8500                                                                                                                                         QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARANITAS
                                                                                                           8501 - 9000                                                                                                          CAKRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BALLSH
                                                                                                           9001 - 9500
                                                                                                         9501 - 10000                                                                                                                                                                GRESHICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HEKAL
                                                                                                        10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SELITË
                                                                                                        10501 - 11000
                                                                                                        11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FRATAR
                                                                                                               > 11500
                                                                                                      Commune/Municipality Boundary                                                                                                                                                                                                   < 7500

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KUTË                                      7500 - 8000
                                                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                          have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                                                                                         8001 - 8500
                                                                                          may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8501 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9501 - 10000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10001 - 10500

                                                                                    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                                   10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Commune/Municipality Boundary

                                                                                                                                                        Source:                                                                                                                                                  The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                        Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                       have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                                        Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                           may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                               Prefecture of FIER

                 TËRBUF



                             DUSHK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gini Coefficient
KË                                              BALLAGAT



                                      GOLEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Prefecture of FIER
             GRABIAN
                                                      HYSGJOKAJ
                                                                 d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                TËRBUF
                                                    KARBUNARË
                                   LUSHNJE

                                                                                                                                                                                                            DUSHK

            GRADISHTË                                                                                                                                                     DIVJAKË                                              BALLAGAT
                                                       FIERSHEGAN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOLEM           HYSGJOKAJ
                                      KRUTJE
                 KOLONJË                           ALLKAJ                                                                                                                                   GRABIAN
Ë

                          BUBULLIMË                                                                                                                                                                                                KARBUNARË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LUSHNJE




                                                                                                                                                 RREMAS
               MBROSTAR                                                                                                                                                                    GRADISHTË
                                           STRUM                                                                                                                                                                                      FIERSHEGAN
                                ROSKOVEC

QENDËR                                                                                                                                                                                                               KRUTJE
                                                                                                                                                                                                KOLONJË                           ALLKAJ
     FIER                                                                                                                                                                LIBOFSHË
                      ZHARRËS
                                   KUMAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BUBULLIMË

                                                 KURJAN
                                                                                                                                                        TOPOJË
                         PATOS

             PORTËZ                    RUZHDIE
                                                                                                                                                                                              MBROSTAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STRUM
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ROSKOVEC
                                                       NGRAÇAN
                                                                                                                                                                               QENDËR
                            RUZHDIE                                                                                                                          DERMENAS
                                       QENDËR                                                                                                                                       FIER             ZHARRËS
                                                        ARANITAS                                                                                                                                                  KUMAN
                CAKRAN
                                             BALLSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KURJAN
                                                                                                                                                        LEVAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PATOS
                                                       GRESHICË
                                                                                                                                                                                            PORTËZ                    RUZHDIE
                                       HEKAL
                                                                    SELITË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NGRAÇAN
                                                                                                                                                                    FRAKULL                                RUZHDIE

                                                                    FRATAR                                                                                                                                            QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARANITAS
                                                                                                                                                                                               CAKRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BALLSH
                                                                                Gini index (%)
                                                          KUTË
                                                                                                < 21.0                                                                                                                                GRESHICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HEKAL
                                                                                           21.0 - 22.0                                                                                                                                             SELITË

                                                                                           22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                           23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FRATAR
                                                                                           24.1 - 25.0

                                                                                           25.1 - 26.0                                                                                                                                                      Gini index (%)
                                                                                                > 26.0                                                                                                                                   KUTË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        < 21.0

                                                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities                                                                                                                                        21.0 - 22.0
                                                                               have been designed for statistical purpose and
12                                                                             may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                                                                                                            22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    24.1 - 25.0
                                                                                                                           Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                                                                                                                           with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                           25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        > 26.0

                                                                                                 Census 2011
                                                                 Source: Population and HousingSource:                                                                                        The boundaries of communes and municipalities                have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The boundaries of communes     andbeen       designed for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         municipalities
                                                                                               Population and Housing Census 2011
                                                                 Living Standard Measurement Survey        – LSMS
                                                                                               Living Standard           2012
                                                                                                               Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                        may not reflectthe
                                                                                                                                                                                             statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly        exactlyterritory          oflocal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the territory of the  the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          local unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      units.




                                                                    About 12.5 percent of the poor in the                                                                                                 was above 9,000 ALL. The communes of Strum
                                                                  prefecture of Fier were living in the municipality                                                                                      and Tërbuf had the lowest levels of average
                                                                  of Fier, followed by about 8.0 percent in the                                                                                           consumption per capita in the prefecture,
                                                                  municipality of Lushnjë. The commune of                                                                                                 respectively, 7,287 ALL and 7,390 ALL.
                                                                  Selitë had one of the lowest numbers of poor                                                                                              The level of inequality in the prefecture is
                                                                  individuals and the highest poverty rates in the                                                                                        below the average of the country, 23.6 percent.
                                                                  prefecture.                                                                                                                             The highest inequality measure was in the
                                                                    The average monthly per capita consumption                                                                                            municipality of Fier (27.1 percent), followed
                                                                  in the prefecture was 7,979 ALL. The highest                                                                                            by the municipality of Lushnjë (26.5 percent).
                                                                  level of consumption was in the municipalities                                                                                          The lowest level of inequality is in commune of
                                                                  of Ballsh, Fier, and Lushnjë, where the level                                                                                           Ngraçan (20.7 percent).




                                                                  62                                                                                                                    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                      Gjirokastër Prefecture
                                                                        The prefecture of Gjirokastër is located in the                                                                                             Albania in 2012 relative to the other prefectures
                                                                      central region. It is divided into 6 municipalities                                                                                           and to the national average (8.3 percent). The
                                                                      and 26 communes. The surface area is 2,884                                                                                                    highest poverty rates were in the municipalities
                                                                      square kilometers, and the population is 71,863.                                                                                              of Krahës (14.3 percent), Qesarat (13.6 percent),
                                                                      The prefecture is bounded on the north by the                                                                                                 Lopës (13.3 percent), and Kurvelesh (12.9
                                                                      prefecture of Berat, on the northwest by the                                                                                                  percent) (map A6). The communes with the
                                                                      prefecture of Fier, on the south and west by the                                                                                              lowest poverty rates were Zagori, Pogon, and
                                                                      prefecture of Vlorë, on the southeast by Greece,                                                                                              Odrie at, respectively, with 2.6 percent, 3.1
                                                                      and on the east by the prefecture of Korçë.                                                                                                   percent, and 3.9 percent.
                                                                        The prefecture had the lowest poverty rate in
                                                                                                           Poverty Head Count
                                                                                                          Prefecture of GJIROKASTËR


                                                                      Map A6: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Gjirokastër Prefecture and communes, 2012
               BUZ
                                                                      a. Poverty rate (headcount)				                                                                                                                                                               Poverty Head Count
                                BALLABAN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of GJIROKASTËR
        LUFTINJË

                                              SUKË


                                                                                                      FRASHËR
MEMALIAJFSHAT MEMALIAJ

                                                  DISHNICË


                                                                                                                                                                        BUZ
            TEPELENË                                                              QENDËR                                            KRAHËS

                                                                                                                                                                                         BALLABAN
                                            KËLCYRË
                    QENDËR
                                                                                                                                           QESARAT
                                                                                                                                                                 LUFTINJË
                                                                                        PËRMET
                                                                                                      PETRAN                                                                                           SUKË


                                    ODRIE                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRASHËR
                                                                                                                      LOPËS                              MEMALIAJFSHAT MEMALIAJ
                                                                  ZAGORI
                                                                                                                                                                                                           DISHNICË
    PICAR


                                                                                                                                                                     TEPELENË                                                              QENDËR
                                            LUNXHËRI

                                                                                                                     ÇARÇOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                     KËLCYRË
                                                                                                                                                                             QENDËR
             CEPO
                                                ANTIGONË
                                                                QENDËR LIBOHOVË                                                              KURVELESH
                             GJIROKASTËR                                                                                                                                                                                                         PËRMET
                                                                                              POGON                                                                                                                                                            PETRAN


                               LAZARAT                                                                                                                                                       ODRIE
                                                                LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZAGORI
                                                                                                                                                             PICAR



                                            DROPULL I POSHTËM                                                                                                                                        LUNXHËRI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ÇARÇOVË


                                                                                                                                                                      CEPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ANTIGONË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         QENDËR LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                      GJIROKASTËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       POGON



                                                                                                                                                                                        LAZARAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LIBOHOVË
                                                                           DROPULL I SIPËRM




                                                                                                                                                                                                     DROPULL I POSHTËM
                                                                                                          Head Count ratio in (%).

                                                                                                                                 < 8.0
                                                                                                                              8.0 - 12.0

                                                                                                                         12.1 - 16.0

                                                                                                                         16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DROPULL I SIPËRM
                                                                                                                          20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                         24.1 - 28.0

                                                                                                                                 > 28.0                                                                                                                            Head Count ratio in (%).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       < 8.0
                                                                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                          have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                           8.0 - 12.0
 – LSMS 2012                                                                                              may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 24.1 - 28.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       > 28.0

                                                                                                                Source:                                                                                                                                            The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                 have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                      Portraits of Poverty       and
                                                                                      Living Standard     Inequality
                                                                                                      Measurement               2012 Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                                  Survey – LSMS in                                                                                                                                 may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.   63
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Number of poor individuals
     BALLABAN




                    SUKË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Prefecture of GJIROKASTËR
                                                                              FRASHËR

                                                                         b. Number of the poor
                              DISHNICË


                                                                                                                                                                          BUZ

                                                      QENDËR                                                                        KRAHËS


                                                                                                                                                                                             BALLABAN

                    KËLCYRË
                                                                                                                                         QESARAT

                                                                                                                                                               LUFTINJË
                                                                PËRMET     PETRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SUKË


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRASHËR
                                                                                                                                                            FSHAT MEMALIAJ
       ODRIE                                                                                                             LOPËS
                                         ZAGORI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DISHNICË
                                                                                                                                                             MEMALIAJ




                                                                                                                                                                TEPELENË                                                                       QENDËR
                LUNXHËRI

                                                                                         ÇARÇOVË

                                                                                                                                                                                                          KËLCYRË
                                                                                                                                                                                QENDËR
                              ANTIGONË

    GJIROKASTËR                                                                                                                          KURVELESH
                                         QENDËR LIBOHOVË
                                                                   POGON                                                                                                                                                                                PËRMET     PETRAN




    LAZARAT                                                                                                                                                                                    ODRIE
                                         LIBOHOVË                                                                                                                                                                               ZAGORI

                                                                                                                                                            PICAR



                    DROPULL I POSHTËM                                                                                                                                                                  LUNXHËRI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ÇARÇOVË

                                                                                                                                                                           CEPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ANTIGONË

                                                                                                                                                                                         GJIROKASTËR
                                                                                        Persons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                QENDËR LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           POGON


                                                                                                            < 300
                                                                                                                                                                                         LAZARAT
                                                                                                        300 - 600

                                                                                             601 Consumption
                                                                                    Per Capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LIBOHOVË
                                             DROPULL I SIPËRM

                                                                                                 - 900

                                                                                                       901 - 1200

                                                                                            1201 -of
                                                                                    Prefecture    1500GJIROKASTËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                           DROPULL I POSHTËM



                                                                                                      1501 - 1800

                                                                                                      1801 - 2100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Persons
                                                                                                      2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     < 300

                                                                                                      3001 - 9000                                                                                                                                                                                 300 - 600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DROPULL I SIPËRM

       BALLABAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   601 - 900

                                                                                                          > 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Per Capita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        901 - 1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1201 - 1500
                    SUKË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1501 - 1800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of GJIROKASTËR
                                                                     c. FRASHËR
                                                                        The average            of communes and per
                                                                                             monthly
                                                                                The boundaries                        capita consumption	
                                                                                                               municipalities                                                                                                                                                                  1801 - 2100
                                                                                        have been designed for statistical purpose and
                       DISHNICË                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                                                                                                                              2101 - 3000

                                                      QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                  BUZ
                  KËLCYRË                                                                                                                 KRAHËS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    > 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BALLABAN
                                                           PËRMET
                                                                           PETRAN
                                                                                                                                                QESARAT
                                                                                                                                                                           LUFTINJË
          ODRIE                                                                                              Source:                                                                                                                                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SUKË
                                         ZAGORI
                                                                                                             Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                             Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS  2012
                                                                                                                                                    FSHAT MEMALIAJ                                                                                                       FRASHËR   may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                              LOPËS                                 MEMALIAJ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DISHNICË
                  LUNXHËRI

                                                                                        ÇARÇOVË
                                                                                                                                                                           TEPELENË                                                                 QENDËR


                     ANTIGONË
                                    QENDËR LIBOHOVË                                                                                                                                                             KËLCYRË
    GJIROKASTËR                                                   POGON                                                                                                             QENDËR

                                                                                                                                                KURVELESH
      LAZARAT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PËRMET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PETRAN
                                      LIBOHOVË

                                                                                                                                                                                                        ODRIE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ZAGORI
                  DROPULL I POSHTËM                                                                                                                                   PICAR


                                                                                                                                                                                                                LUNXHËRI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ÇARÇOVË


                                                                                                                                                                                CEPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ANTIGONË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QENDËR LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                GJIROKASTËR                                                      POGON

                                              DROPULL I SIPËRM
                                                                                    Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAZARAT
                                                                                                         < 7500                                                                                                                     LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                    7500 - 8000

                                                                                                    8001 - 8500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DROPULL I POSHTËM
                                                                                                    8501 - 9000

                                                                                                    9001 - 9500
                                                                                                   9501 - 10000

                                                                                                  10001 - 10500
                                                                                                  10501 - 11000
                                                                                                   11001 - 11500                                                                                                                           DROPULL I SIPËRM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                         > 11500                                                                                                                                                                                        < 7500
                                                                                               Commune/Municipality Boundary                                                                                                                                                                       7500 - 8000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8001 - 8500
                                                                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                                                                 8501 - 9000
2                                                                                   may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9501 - 10000

                                                                     64                                                                                                                                                              in -Albania
                                                                                                                                                                                                Portraits of Poverty and Inequality 10001   10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Annexes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                                               Prefecture of GJIROKASTËR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gini Coefficient
         BALLABAN


                                                               d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Prefecture of GJIROKASTËR
                       SUKË


                                                                               FRASHËR
IAJ

                           DISHNICË


                                                                                                                                                       BUZ
                                                           QENDËR
                                                                                                                    KRAHËS

                                                                                                                                                                        BALLABAN
                     KËLCYRË
DËR
                                                                                                                        QESARAT
                                                                                                                                                LUFTINJË
                                                                 PËRMET
                                                                               PETRAN
                                                                                                                                                                                      SUKË


             ODRIE                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRASHËR
                                                                                                      LOPËS                             MEMALIAJFSHAT MEMALIAJ
                                           ZAGORI
                                                                                                                                                                                          DISHNICË



                                                                                                                                                    TEPELENË                                                              QENDËR
                     LUNXHËRI

                                                                                                 ÇARÇOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                    KËLCYRË
                                                                                                                                                            QENDËR

                         ANTIGONË
                                         QENDËR LIBOHOVË                                                                 KURVELESH
      GJIROKASTËR                                                                                                                                                                                                               PËRMET
                                                                       POGON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PETRAN


        LAZARAT                                                                                                                                                             ODRIE
                                         LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAGORI

                                                                                                                                            PICAR



                     DROPULL I POSHTËM                                                                                                                                              LUNXHËRI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ÇARÇOVË


                                                                                                                                                     CEPO
                                                                                                                                                                                        ANTIGONË
                                                                                                                                                                                                        QENDËR LIBOHOVË
                                                                                                                                                                     GJIROKASTËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POGON



                                                                                                                                                                       LAZARAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        LIBOHOVË
                                                    DROPULL I SIPËRM



                                                                                        Gini index (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                    DROPULL I POSHTËM

                                                                                                           < 21.0
                                                                                                    21.0 - 22.0

                                                                                                    22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                    23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                    24.1 - 25.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DROPULL I SIPËRM
                                                                                                    25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                           > 26.0                                                                                                                                      Gini index (%)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          < 21.0
                                                                                        The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                        have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                             21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                        may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   24.1 - 25.0
                                                                Source: Population   and Housing
                                                                                Gini coefficient            Census
                                                                                                 is a measure             2011
                                                                                                              of inequality                                                            The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25.1 - 26.0    have been designed for
                                                                                with values between 0 and 100.
                                                                Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                    > 26.0 the territory of the local unit
                                                                                                                                                                                      statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly

                                                                                               Source:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                               Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                      have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                               Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                          may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                                                  The prefecture counted 5,988 poor individuals                                                                                      and Odrie (11,839 ALL), which also showed
                                                                in 2012. The biggest concentrations of the poor                                                                                      the lowest poverty rates in the prefecture, while
                                                                were in the municipalities of Gjirokastër (1,350                                                                                     the lowest level of consumption was in the
                                                                poor individuals) and Përmet (418) and the                                                                                           municipalities of Krahës (8,751 ALL), Lopës
                                                                commune of Qendër (363), and the lowest                                                                                              (8,761 ALL), and Qesarat (8,968 ALL).
                                                                concentrations were in the communes of Odrie,                                                                                          The inequality measure in the prefecture was
                                                                Pogon, and Zagori, where the number of poor                                                                                          24.9 percent. The municipality of Gjirokastër
                                                                in each was fewer than 20.                                                                                                           showed the highest Gini coefficient, at 27.1
                                                                  The average monthly per capita consumption                                                                                         percent, followed by the communes of Lazarat
                                                                in the prefecture was 10,190 ALL in 2012, which                                                                                      (26.8 percent) and Dropull i Sipërm (25.9
                                                                was higher than the national average and higher                                                                                      percent), and the lowest coefficient of inequality
                                                                than the average in the other prefectures. The                                                                                       was exhibited by the communes of Pogon (22.8
                                                                consumption level was highest in the communes                                                                                        percent), Sukë (23.5 percent) and Lopës (23.6
                                                                of Zagori (13,216 ALL), Pogon (11,936 ALL),                                                                                          percent).


                                                                Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                                           65
Korçë Prefecture
   The prefecture of Korçë is located in the central                                              The poverty rate in the prefecture was 11.6
region. It is divided into 6 municipalities and 31                                              percent in 2012, which was below the national
communes. The surface area of the prefecture                                                    average. The majority of communes had a
is 3,711 square kilometers, and the population                                                  poverty rate between 8.0 percent and 16.0
is 219,649. The prefecture is bounded on the                                                    percent (map A7). The communes of Barmash,
northeast and east by Republic of Macedonia,                                                    Liqenas, and Mollas and the municipality of
on the south by Greece, on the southwest by                                                     Ersekë had rates at less than 8.0 percent. The
the prefecture of Gjirokastër, on the west by the                                               highest poverty rate in the prefecture belonged
prefecture of Berat, and on the northwest by the                                                to the commune of Çërravë (21.1 percent).
prefecture of Elbasan.




Map A7: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Korçë Prefecture and communes, 2012
a. Poverty rate (headcount)				

                                                                                                                                                       Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                                                       Prefecture of KORÇË


                                                                  PROPTISHT
                                                                                 HUDENISHT




                                                 VELÇAN
                                                                    TREBINJË              POGRADEC
                                                                                           BUÇIMAS


                                                                                                              ÇËRRAVË


                                                                                 DARDHAS                                             LIQENAS




                                                                                                     PIRG
                                                                                                                  VRESHTAS

                                                                     GORË


                                                                                               LIBONIK
                                                                                                                             POJAN
                                                                                            MALIQ                                                 PROGËR
                                               MOGLICË


                                                                                                                   QENDËR                            QENDËR BILISHT

                                                                               VOSKOPOJË

                                                                                                                 KORÇË                                BILISHT
                                                          LEKAS                                                                         HOÇISHT
                                                                                                VOSKOP



                                                                                                                   DRENOVË




                                                                                                     MOLLAJ

                                                                     VITHKUQ                                                            MIRAS




                                                                                               MOLLAS


                                                              ÇLIRIM




                                                                                                QENDËR


                                                                                             ERSEKË
                                                                    NOVOSELË




                                                                                                                                                       Head Count ratio in (%).
                                                                                 BARMASH


                                                                                                                                                                           < 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                       8.0 - 12.0

                                                                                                                                                                      12.1 - 16.0
                                                                              LESKOVIK                                                                                16.1 - 20.0

                                                                               LESKOVIK
                                                                                                                                                                      20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                      24.1 - 28.0

                                                                                                                                                                          > 28.0




                          Source:                                                                                                                      The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                          Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                           have been designed for statistical purpose and
                          Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                               may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




66                                                                             Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of poor individuals
b. Number of the poor                                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture of KORÇË


                                                                                      PROPTISHT


                                                                                                           HUDENISHT




                                                                VELÇAN                  TREBINJË                     POGRADEC

                                                                                                                                       BUÇIMAS

                                                                                                                                                 ÇËRRAVË



                                                                                                           DARDHAS                                                      LIQENAS




                                                                                                                                 PIRG
                                                                                                                                                    VRESHTAS


                                                                                             GORË


                                                                                                                             LIBONIK
                                                                                                                                                                POJAN
                                                                                                                     MALIQ
                                                                                                                                                                                          PROGËR
                                                              MOGLICË


                                                                                                                                                       QENDËR                                 QENDËR BILISHT

                                                                                                      VOSKOPOJË

                                                                                                                                                                                                   BILISHT
                                                                            LEKAS                                                                   KORÇË                    HOÇISHT
                                                                                                                                VOSKOP


                                                                                                                                                      DRENOVË




                                                                                                                                  MOLLAJ

                                                                                                                                                                        MIRAS
                                                                                         VITHKUQ




                                                                                                                             MOLLAS


                                                                                    ÇLIRIM


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Persons

                                                                                                                                 QENDËR                                                                                  < 300
                                                                                                                        ERSEKË                                                                                       300 - 600
                                                                                         NOVOSELË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     601 - 900

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    901 - 1200
                                                                                                      BARMASH                                                                                                      1201 - 1500

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1501 - 1800

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1801 - 2100

                                                                                                      LESKOVIK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2101 - 3000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3001 - 9000
                                                                                                      LESKOVIK



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       > 9000




                                    Source:                                                                                                                                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                    Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                         have been designed for statistical purpose and
c. The average monthly per     capita
                        Living Standard        consumption	
                                        Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                         may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Per Capita Consumption

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Prefecture of KORÇË

                                                                                             PROPTISHT
                                                                                                              HUDENISHT




                                                                        VELÇAN
                                                                                               TREBINJË                 POGRADEC
                                                                                                                          BUÇIMAS


                                                                                                                                                   ÇËRRAVË

                                                                                                                 DARDHAS                                                     LIQENAS




                                                                                                                                         PIRG
                                                                                                                                                           VRESHTAS

                                                                                                    GORË


                                                                                                                                 LIBONIK
                                                                                                                                                                     POJAN
                                                                                                                             MALIQ                                                         PROGËR
                                                                  MOGLICË


                                                                                                                                                            QENDËR                             QENDËR BILISHT

                                                                                                           VOSKOPOJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BILISHT
                                                                                                                                                           KORÇË
                                                                                 LEKAS                                                                                          HOÇISHT
                                                                                                                                   VOSKOP



                                                                                                                                                            DRENOVË




                                                                                                                                        MOLLAJ

                                                                                                VITHKUQ                                                                           MIRAS




                                                                                                                                 MOLLAS


                                                                                        ÇLIRIM




                                                                                                                                  QENDËR


                                                                                                                              ERSEKË
                                                                                               NOVOSELË

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  < 7500
                                                                                                              BARMASH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7500 - 8000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8001 - 8500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8501 - 9000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9001 - 9500
                                                                                                           LESKOVIK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9501 - 10000
                                                                                                           LESKOVIK                                                                                                       10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Commune/Municipality Boundary

                                               Source:                                                                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                               Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                            have been designed for statistical purpose and

Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                               Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         67
                                                                                                                                                                             Gini Coefficient

d. Gini coefficient (inequality)                                                                                                                                             Prefecture of KORÇË


                                                                                 PROPTISHT
                                                                                                   HUDENISHT




                                                                VELÇAN
                                                                                   TREBINJË                  POGRADEC
                                                                                                               BUÇIMAS


                                                                                                                                   ÇËRRAVË


                                                                                                   DARDHAS                                                     LIQENAS




                                                                                                                          PIRG
                                                                                                                                        VRESHTAS

                                                                                      GORË


                                                                                                                   LIBONIK
                                                                                                                                                       POJAN
                                                                                                               MALIQ                                                        PROGËR
                                                              MOGLICË


                                                                                                                                         QENDËR                                 QENDËR BILISHT

                                                                                                VOSKOPOJË
                                                                                                                                                                                     BILISHT
                                                                                                                                       KORÇË
                                                                         LEKAS                                                                                    HOÇISHT
                                                                                                                       VOSKOP



                                                                                                                                             DRENOVË




                                                                                                                          MOLLAJ

                                                                                      VITHKUQ                                                                      MIRAS




                                                                                                                   MOLLAS


                                                                             ÇLIRIM




                                                                                                                       QENDËR


                                                                                                                 ERSEKË
                                                                                   NOVOSELË




                                                                                                                                                                             Gini index (%)
                                                                                                   BARMASH

                                                                                                                                                                                                  < 21.0

                                                                                                                                                                                               21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                LESKOVIK

                                                                                                                                                                                               23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               24.1 - 25.0
                                                                                                LESKOVIK
                                                                                                                                                                                               25.1 - 26.0
                        Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                        with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                                             > 26.0



                        Source:
                                                                                                                                                                             The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                        Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                   have been designed for statistical purpose and
                        Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                       may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




  The largest concentrations of the poor in                                                                                        ALL) and Hudenisht (8,119 ALL), had the
the prefecture were in Korçë and Pogradec                                                                                          lowest level of per capita consumption.
municipalities and in Buçimas commune.                                                                                               The inequality level in the prefecture was
  The average monthly per capita                                                                                                   24.6 percent. The highest levels, over 26
consumption in the prefecture was 9,260                                                                                            percent, were in the municipalities of Bilisht
ALL. The communes of Liqenas, Mollas, and                                                                                          and Korçë and the commune of Voskopojë,
Qendër (Kolonjë) and the municipalities of                                                                                         and the lowest level of inequality was
Ersekë, Bilisht and Korçë showed the highest                                                                                       exhibited in the commune of Çlirim, at 22.6
levels of consumption, more than 10,000                                                                                            percent.
ALL. The communes of Çërravë (7,527 ALL),                                                                                            The prefecture of Kukës is located in the
followed by the communes of Proptisht (8,068                                                                                       mountain region. It is divided into 3 municipalities




68                                                                                                         Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
Kukës Prefecture
and 24 communes. The surface area is 2,373                                                         poverty rate in the country, around 22.0 percent,
square kilometers, and the population is 85,250.                                                   in 2012. The communes of Grykë-Çajë, Kalis,
The prefecture is bounded to the northeast and to                                                  Kolsh, Lekbibaj, Surroj, Topojan, Ujmisht,
the east by Kosovo, to the south by the prefecture of                                              and Zapod exhibited poverty rates above 28.0
Dibër, to the southwest by the prefecture of Lezhë,                                                percent (map A8). The municipality of Bajram
to the west by the prefecture of Shkodër, and to the                                               Curri and the commune of Bytyç had the lowest
northwest by Montenegro.                                                                           poverty rates, respectively, 10.0 percent and 11.6
  The prefecture of Kukës had the highest                                                          percent.




Map A8: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Kukës Prefecture and communes,
                                                        Poverty          2012
                                                                Head Count
a. Poverty rate (headcount)			
                                                                                                                                           Prefecture of KUKËS




                                                 MARGEGAJ
                                                                                         TROPOJË




                                                                          BAJRAM CURRI
                                                                  BUJAN
                                                                                              LLUGAJ


                                              LEKBIBAJ




                                                                                                       BYTYÇ

                                                                             FIERZË
                                                                                                                                           GOLAJ




                                                                                                                                                        KRUMË




                                                                                                                                 FAJZA
                                                                                                                                                             GJINAJ



                                                                                                                                                                      TËRTHORE

                                                                                                        MALZI
                                                                                                                                                    KUKËS
                                                                                                                                    KOLSH

                                                                                                                                                                           ZAPOD
                                                                                                                                                            SHTIQËN




                                                                                                                        SURROJ
                                                                                                                                                     BICAJ                         SHISHTAVEC

                                                                                                                                                                        TOPOJAN

                     Head Count ratio in (%).
                                                                                                                                         UJËMISHT

                                   < 8.0                                                                        ARRËN

                                8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                                                                                                      GRYKË ÇAJË
                              12.1 - 16.0                                                                                                  BUSHTRICË


                              16.1 - 20.0
                                                                                                                                         KALIS
                              20.1 - 24.0
                              24.1 - 28.0

                                   > 28.0




                     Source:                                                                                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                     Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                    have been designed for statistical purpose and
                     Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                        may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                               69
                                                                                                                                                                                 Prefecture of KUKËS




                                                    MARGEGAJ
                                                                                             TROPOJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Number of poor individuals

 b. Number of the poor                                                                                                                                                                              Prefecture of KUKËS

                                                                  BUJAN         BAJRAM CURRI

                                                                                                       LLUGAJ

                                       LEKBIBAJ
                                                                                                              TROPOJË
                                                                   MARGEGAJ



                                                                                                                         BYTYÇ
                                                                                 FIERZË
                                                                                                                                                                         GOLAJ




                                                                                BUJAN          BAJRAM CURRI

                                                                                                                        LLUGAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                           KRUMË
                                                     LEKBIBAJ


                                                                                                                                                        FAJZA

                                                                                                                                        BYTYÇ                                                GJINAJ
                                                                                                 FIERZË
                                                                                                                                                                                            GOLAJ

                                                                                                                                                                                                              TËRTHORE

                                                                                                                            MALZI
                                                                                                                                                                                 KUKËS

                                                                                                                                                            KOLSH

                                                                                                                                                                                                              KRUMË ZAPOD
                                                                                                                                                                                            SHTIQËN


                                                                                                                                                                           FAJZA


                                                                                                                                                 SURROJ                                                         GJINAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                   BICAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                            Persons                         SHISHTAVEC


                    Persons                                                                                                                                                                                     TOPOJAN      TËRTHORE

                                                                                                                                           MALZI
                                                                                                                                                                                                    KUKËS
                                           < 300
                                                                                                                                                                 UJËMISHT KOLSH
                                        300 - 600
                                                                                                                                    ARRËN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZAPOD
                                        601 - 900                                                                                                                                                              SHTIQËN

                                      901 - 1200
                                                                                                                                                                          BUSHTRICË                    GRYKË ÇAJË
                                     1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                    SURROJ
                                     1501 - 1800                                                                                                                                                      BICAJ
                                                                                                                                                                        KALIS                                  Persons                    SHISHTAVEC

                                     1801 - 2100
                                    Persons                                                                                                                                                                                   TOPOJAN

                                     2101 - 3000         < 300
                                                                                                                                                                                        UJËMISHT
                                                      300 - 600
                                     3001 - 9000                                                                                                     ARRËN
                                                      601 - 900

                                                     901 - 1200
                                          > 9000                                                                                                                                             BUSHTRICË                   GRYKË ÇAJË
                                                    1201 - 1500

                                                    1501 - 1800                                                                                                 Per Capita Consumption     KALIS

                                                    1801 - 2100
                    Source:
                    Population and Housing Census  2011
                                            2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                Prefecture    ofdesigned
                                                                                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                       have been  KUKËS
                                                                                                                                                                                  Per      for statisticalConsumption
                                                                                                                                                                                          Capita          purpose and
                    Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
c. The average monthly per capita
                            3001 - 9000 consumption	                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of KUKËS
                                                        > 9000




                                Source:
                            MARGEGAJ
                                                                               TROPOJË                                                                                                                 The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                    Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                 have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                    Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                     may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                             MARGEGAJ
                                                                                                               TROPOJË




                                                                BAJRAM CURRI
                                                     BUJAN
                                                                                    LLUGAJ


                         LEKBIBAJ
                                                                                               BAJRAM CURRI
                                                                                   BUJAN
                                                                                                                      LLUGAJ
                                                                                                           BYTYÇ
                                                       LEKBIBAJ
                                                                    FIERZË
                                                                                                                                                  GOLAJ

                                                                                                                                           BYTYÇ

                                                                                                  FIERZË
                                                                                                                                                                                           GOLAJ


                                                                                                                                                                   KRUMË




                                                                                                                                        FAJZA                                                               KRUMË
                                                                                                                                                                        GJINAJ



                                                                                                                                                                                          TËRTHORE
                                                                                                                                                                                FAJZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GJINAJ
                                                                                                            MALZI
                                                                                                                                                            KUKËS
                                                                                                                                           KOLSH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TËRTHORE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ZAPOD
                                                                                                                                            MALZI                       SHTIQËN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     KUKËS
                                                                                                                                                                                   KOLSH

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZAPOD
                                                                                                                               SURROJ                                                                         SHTIQËN
                 Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                                                                                BICAJ                                       SHISHTAVEC
                                      < 7500
                                                                                                                                                                                            TOPOJAN
                               7500 - 8000                                                                                                                         SURROJ
                                             Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BICAJ
                               8001 - 8500                                                                                                      UJËMISHT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SHISHTAVEC
                                                                    < 7500
                               8501 - 9000                                                                          ARRËN                                                                                                     TOPOJAN
                                                                7500 - 8000
                               9001 - 9500
                                                                8001 - 8500                                                                                                               GRYKË ÇAJË
                                                                                                                                                                                         UJËMISHT
                             9501 - 10000                                                                                                          BUSHTRICË
                                                                8501 - 9000                                                                         ARRËN
                            10001 - 10500
                                                                9001 - 9500
                            10501 - 11000                                                                                                       KALIS                                                                       GRYKË ÇAJË
                                                              9501 - 10000                                                                                                                  BUSHTRICË
                            11001 - 11500
                                                             10001 - 10500
                               > 11500
                                                   10501 - 11000                                                                                                                         KALIS
                          Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                    11001 - 11500
                 Source:                                  > 11500                                                                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                 Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                             have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                    Commune/Municipality Boundary
                 Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                 may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                             Source:                                                                                                                                                   The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                             Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                        have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                             Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                            may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
70                                                                                                              Portraits of Poverty and   Inequality in Albania | Annexes
d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                           Gini Coefficient

                                                                                                                                                                           Prefecture of KUKËS




                                                      MARGEGAJ
                                                                                                     TROPOJË




                                                                                      BAJRAM CURRI
                                                                              BUJAN
                                                                                                          LLUGAJ


                                                   LEKBIBAJ




                                                                                                                     BYTYÇ

                                                                                         FIERZË
                                                                                                                                                         GOLAJ




                                                                                                                                                                      KRUMË




                                                                                                                                               FAJZA
                                                                                                                                                                           GJINAJ



                                                                                                                                                                                     TËRTHORE

                                                                                                                      MALZI
                                                                                                                                                                  KUKËS
                                                                                                                                                  KOLSH

                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAPOD
                                                                                                                                                                          SHTIQËN




                                                                                                                                      SURROJ
                                 Gini index (%)                                                                                                                    BICAJ                          SHISHTAVEC

                                                < 21.0                                                                                                                                 TOPOJAN


                                            21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                       UJËMISHT
                                            22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                              ARRËN
                                            23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                     GRYKË ÇAJË
                                            24.1 - 25.0                                                                                                  BUSHTRICË

                                            25.1 - 26.0
                                                > 26.0                                                                                                 KALIS




                                Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                                with values between 0 and 100.



                                Source:                                                                                                                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                Population and Housing Census 2011
Source: Population and Housing        Census 2011
                       Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012
                                                                                                                The boundaries of communes      and municipalities have been designed for
                                                                                                                                           have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                           may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                 statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




  The largest concentration of the poor was in                                                                         of Bajram Curri had the highest level of
Kukës Municipality, the largest municipality                                                                           consumption in the prefecture, above 8,700
in the area.                                                                                                           ALL.
  Kukës was also the prefecture with the                                                                                 The level of inequality in the prefecture was
lowest monthly per capita consumption                                                                                  below the national average, at 22.4 percent.
in the country, 7,126 ALL. The majority of                                                                             The lowest Gini coefficient was in Kalis
the prefecture showed a consumption level                                                                              Commune (19.7 percent), and the highest
below 7,500 ALL. The commune of Kalis had                                                                              value belonged to Fierzë Commune (25.0
the lowest level of consumption, 5,839 ALL.                                                                            percent).
The commune of Bytyç and the municipality




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                   71
                                  Lezhë Prefecture
                                    The prefecture of Lezhë is located partly in                                                                        of Dibër, on the south by the prefecture of
                                  the coastal region and partly in the central                                                                          Durrës, and on the west by the Adriatic Sea.
                                  region. It is divided into 5 municipalities and                                                                         The poverty rate in the prefecture was 17.2
                                  16 communes. The surface area is 1,588 square                                                                         percent in 2012. The communes of Balldren i Ri,
                                  kilometers, and the population is 133,275. The                                                                        Fan, and Ungrej had the highest poverty rates in
                                  prefecture is bounded on the north by the                                                                             the prefecture, at more than 20.0 percent (map
                                  prefecture of Shkodër, on the northwest by the                                                                        A9). The municipality of Rrëshen had the lowest
                                  prefecture of Kukës, on the east by the prefecture                                                                    poverty rate, at 11.2 percent.




                                  Map A9: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Lezhë Prefecture and communes, 2012
                                 a. Poverty rate (headcount)		
                                 	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Poverty Head Count
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of LEZHË
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of LEZHË


                                                                                                                                                                                                  FAN
                                                                                                                                                                                 FAN



                                                                                     DAJÇ
                                                DAJÇ
                                                                                                          BLINISHT
                                                                   BLINISHT                                                         UNGREJ              KAÇINAR
                                                                                                 UNGREJ                   KAÇINAR


                                                                     BALLDREN I RI
                                BALLDREN I RI
                                                                                                                                                                                 OROSH
                                                                                                                                                        OROSH

                                                                                                           KALLMET
                                                                    KALLMET




                                                                                                                KOLÇ
                                                                         KOLÇ                    LEZHË                                                      RRËSHEN
                                                                                                                              RRËSHEN                                                    SELITË
                                                           LEZHË                                                                RUBIK                                  SELITË
                                                                                                RUBIK
                                                                                     SHËNGJIN
                                                SHËNGJIN


                                                                                                                                                                      KTHJELLË
                                                                                                                                             KTHJELLË
                                                                                                                 ZEJMEN
                                                                          ZEJMEN


                                                                                                                                                                                                  Head Count ratio in (%).            Head Count ratio in (%).
                                                                                            SHËNKOLL
                                                       SHËNKOLL


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      < 8.0                               < 8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.0 - 12.0                          8.0 - 12.0
                                                                                                                              MILOT
                                                                                            MILOT
                                                                                                                LAÇ                                                                                            12.1 - 16.0                          12.1 - 16.0
                                                                         LAÇ

                                                 FUSHË KUQE
                                                                                      FUSHË KUQE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               16.1 - 20.0                          16.1 - 20.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                               20.1 - 24.0                          20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                             MAMURRAS
                                                                      MAMURRAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                               24.1 - 28.0                          24.1 - 28.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     > 28.0                              > 28.0


                              Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                 The boundaries of communes and municipalities
Source:                                                                                                                                                                                           The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                              Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                      have been designed for statistical purpose and
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                have been designed for statistical purpose and
                              Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                          may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                 72                                                                                                           Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Number of poor individuals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Number    of poor individuals
                                   b. Number of the poor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of LEZHË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Prefecture of LEZHË


                                                                                                                                                                                                               FAN                       FAN



                                                 DAJÇ                                 DAJÇ
                                                                      BLINISHT                           BLINISHT                   KAÇINAR                           KAÇINAR
                                                                                                        UNGREJ                            UNGREJ


                               BALLDREN I RI                       BALLDREN I RI

                                                                                                                                                                                OROSH                           OROSH

                                                                       KALLMET                             KALLMET




                                                   SHËNGJIN                            SHËNGJIN
                                                                           KOLÇ                                KOLÇ
                                                              LEZHË                               LEZHË                                   RRËSHEN                                         SELITË                         SELITË
                                                                                                   RUBIK                               RUBIK                                 RRËSHEN



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Persons                          Persons
                                                                                                                                                        KTHJELLË                          KTHJELLË
                                                                             ZEJMEN                                ZEJMEN                                                                                                                                              < 300                             < 300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   300 - 600                        300 - 600
                                                        SHËNKOLL                             SHËNKOLL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   601 - 900                        601 - 900
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  901 - 1200                       901 - 1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1201 - 1500                      1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1501 - 1800                      1501 - 1800
                                                                                               MILOT                               MILOT
                                                                           LAÇ                                 LAÇ                                                                                                                                               1801 - 2100                      1801 - 2100
                                                   FUSHË KUQE                          FUSHË KUQE                                                                                                                                                                2101 - 3000                      2101 - 3000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3001 - 9000                      3001 - 9000
                                                                          MAMURRAS                            MAMURRAS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 9000                            > 9000




          Source:                    Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                      The boundaries of communesThe         municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  andboundaries      of communes and municipalities
          Population and Housing Census  2011 and Housing Census 2011
                                     Population                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  havepurpose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  have been designed for statistical              and for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        been designed
                                      Survey
          Living Standard MeasurementLiving          2012
                                              – LSMSMeasurement
                                            Standard            Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                                may not reflect exactly the territory
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 may notof the  local
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reflect   units. the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    exactly

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Per Capita Consumption
                                   c. The average monthly per capita consumption	
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Per Capita Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Prefecture of LEZHË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of LEZHË


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FAN



                                                                                   DAJÇ
                                                                                                                                                                                                     FAN
                                                                                                        BLINISHT
                                                                                                                                      UNGREJ                       KAÇINAR

                                       DAJÇ
                                                                  BALLDREN I RI
                                                            BLINISHT                                                                                                                                   OROSH
                                                                                             UNGREJ                      KAÇINAR

                                                                                                         KALLMET
                       BALLDREN I RI
                                                                                                                                                             OROSH

                                                              KALLMET

                                                                                                LEZHË        KOLÇ
                                                                                                                                                                       RRËSHEN                                          SELITË
                                                                                                                                     RUBIK

                                                                                   SHËNGJIN
                                                    LEZHË          KOLÇ
                                                                                                                             RRËSHEN                                               SELITË
                                                                                          RUBIK
                                                                                                                                                                                     KTHJELLË                                                                             Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                               ZEJMEN
                                        SHËNGJIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               < 7500
                                                                                          SHËNKOLL                                           KTHJELLË                                                                             Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)                      7500 - 8000
                                                                    ZEJMEN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       < 7500                             8001 - 8500
                                               SHËNKOLL                                                                                                                                                                                            7500 - 8000                            8501 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                   MILOT                                                                                                           8001 - 8500
                                                                                                              LAÇ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8501 - 9000                           9501 - 10000
                                                                                    FUSHË KUQE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9001 - 9500
                                                                                       MILOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10501 - 11000
                                                                   LAÇ                                                                                                                                                                           9501 - 10000
                                        FUSHË KUQE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11001 - 11500
                                                                                                           MAMURRAS                                                                                                                             10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11001 - 11500                       Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                               MAMURRAS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    > 11500
                                 Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                 Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                            Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                 Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                                                           may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The boundaries of communes and municipalities
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                                                have been designed for statistical purpose and
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                   Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                                      73
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of LEZHË
                                       d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Prefecture of LEZHË


                                                                                                                                                                                              FAN


                                                                                                                                                                                                             FAN
                                                     DAJÇ

                                                                        BLINISHT
                                                                                                        UNGREJ              KAÇINAR
                                                                                     DAJÇ

                                                                                                         BLINISHT
                                     BALLDREN I RI                                                                             UNGREJ                   KAÇINAR

                                                                                                                                                             OROSH
                                                                   BALLDREN I RI
                                                                        KALLMET
                                                                                                                                                                                      OROSH


                                                                                                           KALLMET



                                                                              KOLÇ
                                                                LEZHË                                                              RRËSHEN                                   SELITË
                                                                                                       RUBIK
                                                                                                                 KOLÇ
                                                     SHËNGJIN                                                                                               RRËSHEN
                                                                                                LEZHË                                                                                               SELITË
                                                                                                                             RUBIK

                                                                                     SHËNGJIN                                                KTHJELLË
                                                                               ZEJMEN

                                                                                                                                                                      KTHJELLË
                                                                                                                  ZEJMEN
                                                            SHËNKOLL


                                                                                            SHËNKOLL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gini index (%)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  < 21.0      Gini index (%)
                                                                                                   MILOT
                                                                              LAÇ                                                                                                                                             21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              < 21.0
                                                      FUSHË KUQE                                                           MILOT                                                                                              22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                 LAÇ                                                                                                                                      21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                      FUSHË KUQE                                                                                                                                                          22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              24.1 - 25.0
                                                                           MAMURRAS
Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality                                                                                                                                                                                                               23.1 - 24.0
with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                                                                                                25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          24.1 - 25.0
                            Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality                                        MAMURRAS                                                                                                            > 26.0
                            with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                                                                                                25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              > 26.0

Source:                                                                                                                                                                                                            The boundaries of communes and municipalities
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                                                 have been designed for statistical purpose and
                         Source:
Living Standard Measurement  Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The boundaries        units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of communes and municipalities
                         Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                             have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                   Source: Population and Housing    Census 2011
                         Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012
                                                                                                                                               The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed           for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                       Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                         statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




                                          The number of the poor in the prefecture was                                                                   capita consumption. The municipality of Lezhë
                                        22,926 in 2012. The municipalities of Laç and                                                                    had the highest level of consumption (9,812
                                        Mamurras and the commune of Shënkoll had                                                                         ALL), followed by the municipality of Rrëshen
                                        the largest concentrations of poor within the                                                                    (9,180 ALL) and the commune of Shëngjin
                                        prefecture. Kaçinar, Orosh, and Selitë are the                                                                   (9,128 ALL).
                                        communes with the smallest concentrations of                                                                       The level of inequality in the prefecture was
                                        the poor.                                                                                                        24.6 percent. The municipality of Lezhë and the
                                          The average monthly per capita consumption                                                                     commune of Shëngjin had levels of inequality
                                        in the prefecture was 8,142 ALL. The communes                                                                    above 26 percent. The lowest level of inequality
                                        of Fan and Ungrej had the lowest average per                                                                     was in the commune of Ungrej, at 22.1 percent.




                                       74                                                                                                    Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                      Shkodër Prefecture
                                                         The prefecture of Shkodër is located in the                                                                                                      The poverty rate in the prefecture was 14.0
                                                      northwest of Albania in the central region.                                                                                                       percent in 2012. The highest poverty rate in
                                                      It is divided into 5 municipalities and 28                                                                                                        the prefecture was recorded in the commune
                                                      communes. The surface area of the prefecture                                                                                                      of Blerim (23.7 percent), followed by the
                                                      is 1,588 square kilometers, with a population of                                                                                                  communes of Qelëz (22.1 percent), Fierzë (22.1
                                                      213,706 inhabitants. The prefecture is bounded                                                                                                    percent), and Qafë-Mali (21.2 percent) (map
                                                      on the north by Montenegro, on the east by                                                                                                        A10). The lowest poverty rate in the prefecture
                                                      the prefecture of Kukës, on the south by the                                                                                                      was in the commune of Shalë (8.7 percent),
                                                      prefecture of Lezhë, and on the west by the                                                                                                       followed by the commune of Dajç (9.1 percent)
                                                      Adriatic Sea.                                                                                                                                     and the municipality of Koplik (9.3 percent).



                                                             Poverty Head Count

                                                       Prefecture
                                                      Map   A10:    SHKODËR Rate and Inequality, Shkodër Prefecture and communes, 2012
                                                                  ofPoverty
                                                      a. Poverty rate (headcount)				


        KELMEND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture of SHKODËR
                           SHALË



L

                                                                                                                                                                                       KELMEND




          PULT

                               SHOSH                              FIERZË




                                                    IBALLË
                                   TEMAL
                                                                                       BLERIM                                                                                                           SHALË
    POSTRIBË

                                                                                                                                              KASTRAT
                     SHLLAK                                                                                                                                            SHKREL
                                            QELËZ
                                                       FUSHË ARRËZ



                                                                           QAFË MALI
                                            PUKË       RRAPË
           VAU I DEJËS                                                                                                                                                                   PULT
                                                                                                                            QENDËR
                                   QERRET                                                                                            KOPLIK QENDËR                                                          SHOSH                              FIERZË



                                                                                                                                                    GRUEMIRË
               VIG-MNELË
AJMEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IBALLË
                                                         GJEGJAN                                                                                                                                                TEMAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BLERIM
                                                                                                                                                                                 POSTRIBË


                                                                                                                                                   RRETHINAT                                      SHLLAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         QELËZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FUSHË ARRËZ

                                                                                                                                                  SHKODËR
                                                                                                                                                                  GURI I ZI                                                                             QAFË MALI
                                                             Head Count ratio in (%).                                                        RRETHINAT
                                                                                                                               ANA E MALIT                                                                               PUKË       RRAPË
                                                                                                                                                                                         VAU I DEJËS
                                                                                 < 8.0                                                           BËRDICË                                                        QERRET
                                                                             8.0 - 12.0

                                                                           12.1 - 16.0                                           DAJÇ
                                                                                                                                                                                            VIG-MNELË
                                                                                                                                                         BUSHAT               HAJMEL
                                                                           16.1 - 20.0                                                                                                                                                GJEGJAN

                                                                           20.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                               VELIPOJË
                                                                           24.1 - 28.0

                                                                                > 28.0

                                                             The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                             have been designed for statistical purpose and                                                                                                                               Head Count ratio in (%).
                                                             may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              < 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8.0 - 12.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16.1 - 20.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20.1 - 24.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24.1 - 28.0
                                                       Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                              > 28.0                                   75
                                                                                                                 Source:                                                                                                                  The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                 Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                       have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                 Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                           may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                              Prefecture of SHKODËR

ELMEND




                                                                       b. Number of the poor
                       SHALË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Number of poor individuals

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Prefecture of SHKODËR

                                                                                                                                                                                                             KELMEND
     PULT

                          SHOSH                                              FIERZË




                                                          IBALLË

                               TEMAL
BË                                                                                                 BLERIM




              SHLLAK                                                                                                                                                                                                                SHALË
                                               QELËZ
                                                                                                                                                                     KASTRAT
                                                                 FUSHË ARRËZ

                                                                                                                                                                                             SHKREL

                                                                                      QAFË MALI
                                                               RRAPË
VAU I DEJËS                                    PUKË

                           QERRET

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PULT
                                                                                                                                                 QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                           KOPLIK QENDËR                                                               SHOSH                                 FIERZË
      VIG-MNELË
                                                                 GJEGJAN
                                                                                                                                                                          GRUEMIRË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IBALLË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TEMAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      POSTRIBË                                                                                     BLERIM



                                                                                                                                                                         RRETHINAT
                                                                              Persons                                                                                                                                      SHLLAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      QELËZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FUSHË ARRËZ
                                                                                                     < 300
                                                                                                                                                                      SHKODËR
                                                                                                  300 - 600
                                                                                                                                                    RRETHINAT
                                                                                                  601 - 900                                                                             GURI I ZI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RRAPË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      QAFË MALI

                                                                                                                                                    ANA E MALIT                                              VAU I DEJËS                             PUKË
                                                                                               901 - 1200
                                                                                             1201 - 1500                                                               BËRDICË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        QERRET

                                                                                             1501 - 1800
                                                                                                                                                    DAJÇ
                                                                                             1801 - 2100                                                                   BUSHAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIG-MNELË
                                                                                                                                                                                                    HAJMEL                                                         GJEGJAN

                                                                            Per Capita Consumption
                                                                                             2101 - 3000

                                                                                             3001 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                     VELIPOJË


                                                                            Prefecture of  SHKODËR
                                                                                       > 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Persons
                                                                              The boundaries of communes and municipalities                                                                                                                                                                          < 300
                                                                              have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  300 - 600
                                                                              may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  601 - 900
END
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                901 - 1200
                                                                       c. The average monthly per capita consumption	                                                                                                                                                                          1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1501 - 1800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Per Capita     Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1801 - 2100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2101 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of SHKODËR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3001 - 9000
              SHALË

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    > 9000

                                                                                                                                          Source:                                                                                                                             The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KELMEND
                                                                                                                                          Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                  have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                                          Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                      may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

LT

                  SHOSH                                            FIERZË




                                                      IBALLË
                       TEMAL
                                                                                          BLERIM                                                                                                                               SHALË


                                                                                                                                                                    KASTRAT
       SHLLAK                                                                                                                                                                                SHKREL
                                       QELËZ
                                                         FUSHË ARRËZ



                                                                             QAFË MALI
                                       PUKË              RRAPË
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PULT
U I DEJËS
                                                                                                                                                  QENDËR
                                                                                                                                                           KOPLIK QENDËR                                                            SHOSH                                FIERZË
                       QERRET


                                                                                                                                                                          GRUEMIRË
IG-MNELË                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IBALLË
                                                           GJEGJAN                                                                                                                                                                       TEMAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BLERIM
                                                                                                                                                                                                       POSTRIBË


                                                                                                                                                                         RRETHINAT                                       SHLLAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    QELËZ
                                                                            Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)                                                                                                                                                   FUSHË ARRËZ

                                                                                                   < 7500                                                               SHKODËR

                                                                                            7500 - 8000                                                                                 GURI I ZI                                                                                  QAFË MALI
                                                                                                                                                                   RRETHINAT                                                                                     RRAPË
                                                                                                                                                     ANA E MALIT                                                                                    PUKË
                                                                                            8001 - 8500                                                                                                          VAU I DEJËS

                                                                                            8501 - 9000                                                                BËRDICË                                                           QERRET

                                                                                            9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                       DAJÇ
                                                                                           9501 - 10000                                                                        BUSHAT               HAJMEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIG-MNELË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GJEGJAN
                                                                                          10001 - 10500
                                                                                          10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                     VELIPOJË
                                                                                          11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                                                                  > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         < 7500
                                                                                         Commune/Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7500 - 8000
                                                                            The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8001 - 8500
                                                                            have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                            may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                                                                                                                                              8501 - 9000

                                                                       76                                                                                                                            Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in  Albania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9001 - 9500 | Annexes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  9501 - 10000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10001 - 10500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 11500
                                                                        Gini Coefficient

                                                                        Prefecture of SHKODËR



                  KELMEND                                   d. Gini coefficient (inequality)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gini Coefficient

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Prefecture of SHKODËR

                                   SHALË



 SHKREL
                                                                                                                                                                                               KELMEND




                    PULT

                                       SHOSH                             FIERZË




                                                             IBALLË
                                           TEMAL                                                                                                                                                                 SHALË
                                                                                              BLERIM
            POSTRIBË
                                                                                                                                                      KASTRAT
                                                                                                                                                                               SHKREL
                             SHLLAK
                                                    QELËZ
                                                                FUSHË ARRËZ



I I ZI                                                                            QAFË MALI
                                                    PUKË        RRAPË                                                                                                                            PULT
                    VAU I DEJËS
                                                                                                                                    QENDËR
                                                                                                                                             KOPLIK QENDËR                                                           SHOSH                            FIERZË
                                           QERRET


                                                                                                                                                            GRUEMIRË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IBALLË
                       VIG-MNELË
         HAJMEL                                                                                                                                                                                                          TEMAL
                                                                  GJEGJAN                                                                                                                                                                                                  BLERIM
                                                                                                                                                                                         POSTRIBË


                                                                                                                                                           RRETHINAT                                      SHLLAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QELËZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FUSHË ARRËZ

                                                                                                                                                          SHKODËR
                                                                                                                                                                          GURI I ZI                                                                            QAFË MALI
                                                                        Gini index (%)                                                 ANA E MALIT
                                                                                                                                                     RRETHINAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PUKË       RRAPË
                                                                                                                                                                                                 VAU I DEJËS
                                                                                        < 21.0                                                           BËRDICË                                                         QERRET
                                                                                    21.0 - 22.0

                                                                                    22.1 - 23.0                                          DAJÇ
                                                                                                                                                                 BUSHAT                             VIG-MNELË
                                                                                                                                                                                      HAJMEL
                                                                                    23.1 - 24.0                                                                                                                                                GJEGJAN

                                                                                    24.1 - 25.0

                                                                                    25.1 - 26.0                                       VELIPOJË

                                                                                         > 26.0


                                                                        The boundaries of communes and municipalities                                                                                                                                Gini index (%)
                                                                        have been designed for statistical purpose and
S 2012                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.                                                                                                                                    < 21.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 21.0 - 22.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 22.1 - 23.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 23.1 - 24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 24.1 - 25.0
                                                                                                                          Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                                                                                                                          with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                         25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          > 26.0
                                                            Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities      have been designed for
                                                            Living Standard Measurement Survey
                                                                                         Source:
                                                                                                 – LSMS 2012                                                                                   statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                                                                                          Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                         have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                                                                                                          Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                             may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                                                              The prefecture counted 29,912 poor individuals                                                                                                    10,000 ALL. The lowest level of consumption
                                                            in 2012. The municipality of Shkodër and the                                                                                                        was in the communes of Blerim, Fierzë, and
                                                            commune of Rrethinat had the highest number                                                                                                         Qelëz, less than 7,500 ALL.
                                                            of poor in the prefecture, respectively, 9,199                                                                                                        The level of inequality in the prefecture was
                                                            poor and 3,590 poor.                                                                                                                                25.1 percent. The highest level of inequality, over
                                                              The average monthly per capita consumption                                                                                                        26 percent, was in the communes of Bushat,
                                                            in the prefecture was 8,664 ALL. The highest                                                                                                        Dajç, Kastrat, Velipojë and in the municipalities
                                                            level of consumption was in the communes of                                                                                                         of Koplik and Shkodër. The lowest level of
                                                            Dajç and Shalë and the municipality of Koplik,                                                                                                      inequality was in the commune of Qelëz (22.6
                                                            where the level of consumption averaged over                                                                                                        percent).




                                                            Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                                             77
Tirana Prefecture
  The prefecture of Tirana is located in the                                                                   remains attractive because of the opportunities
central, coastal, and Tirana regions. It is divided                                                            in employment, education, and so on. However,
into 5 municipalities and 24 communes. The                                                                     migrants often face difficulty in becoming
surface area of the prefecture is 1,586 square                                                                 assimilated (INSTAT and IOM 2014).
kilometers, and the population is 742,515,                                                                       The poverty rate in the prefecture was 12.7
around one-fifth of the population of Albania.                                                                 percent in 2012. The highest poverty rate was
The prefecture is bounded in the north by                                                                      in the municipality of Kamëz (25.2 percent)
the prefecture of Durrës, in the northeast                                                                     and the commune of Krrabë (24.9 percent)
by the prefecture of Dibër, in the southeast                                                                   (map A11). The lowest poverty rate was in
by the prefecture of Elbasan, in the south by                                                                  the municipalities of Farkë and Tirana, at less
the prefecture of Fier, and in the west by the                                                                 than 10.0 percent.
Adriatic Sea. Tirana, the capital of Albania,




Map A11: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Tirana Prefecture and communes, 2012
a. Poverty rate (headcount)				




                                                                                                                                                          Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                                                          Prefecture of TIRANË
                                                                     PREZË                                                ZALL BASTAR
                                                                                                 ZALL HERR


                                                                        BËRXULLË
                                                                                       KAMËZ
                                                              VORË

                                                                                                 PASKUQAN
                                                                             KASHAR

                                                                                                                                             SHËNGJERGJ
                                                                                                      TIRANË                   DAJT



                                                                                                                FARKË
                                                                                       VAQARR

                                                              NDROQ
                                                                                                                    PETRELË




                                                                                                                              BËRZHITË
                                      GOLEM
                                                                               PEZË
                                                                                                                                   KËRRABË


                                                    HELMËS
                                                                                                    BALDUSHK
                                        KAVAJË



                           SYNEJ                                                                                                                          Head Count ratio (%).

                                      LUZ I VOGEL                                                                                                                             < 8.0
                                                        LEKAJ

                                                                                                                                                                          8.0 - 12.0
                                                                          SINABALLAJ
                        KRYEVIDH                                                                                                                                         12.1 - 16.0
                                                                                                                                                                         16.1 - 20.0
                                                             RROGOZHINË
                               GOSË                                                                                                                                      20.1 - 24.0

                                                                                                                                                                         24.1 - 28.0
                                                                                                                                                                              > 28.0




      Source:                                                                                                                                             The boundaries of communes and municipalities
      Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                  have been designed for statistical purpose and
      Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                      may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




78                                                                                              Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
       b. Number of the poor

                                                                                                                                                                                   Number of poor individuals

                                                                                                                                                                                   Prefecture of TIRANË
                                                                                                                                                ZALL BASTAR
                                                                          PREZË
                                                                                                           ZALL HERR



                                                                  VORË                          KAMËZ
                                                                              BËRXULLË




                                                                                                                PASKUQAN
                                                                                     KASHAR
                                                                                                                                             DAJT
                                                                                                            TIRANË
                                                                                                                                                                   SHËNGJERGJ



                                                                                                                           FARKË
                                                                                               VAQARR


                                                                  NDROQ

                                                                                                                               PETRELË




                                                                                                                                                BËRZHITË
                                       GOLEM
                                                                                        PEZË
                                                                                                                                                         KËRRABË                   Persons

                                        KAVAJË           HELMËS
                                                                                                           BALDUSHK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        < 300
                                                                                                                                                                                                    300 - 600
                              SYNEJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                    601 - 900
                                                                                                                                                                                                  901 - 1200
                                         LUZ I VOGEL
                                                            LEKAJ                                                                                                                                1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1501 - 1800
                                                                                  SINABALLAJ
                           KRYEVIDH                                                                                                                                                              1801 - 2100

                                                                  RROGOZHINË                                                                                                                     2101 - 3000
                                GOSË
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3001 - 9000


                                                                                                                                                                                                      > 9000




   Source:                                                                                                                                                                         The boundaries of communes and municipalities
   Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                              have been designed for statistical purpose and
   Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.


       c. The average monthly per capita consumption	

                                                                                                                                                                                  Per Capita Consumption

                                                                                                                                                                                  Prefecture of TIRANË

                                                                         PREZË                                                               ZALL BASTAR
                                                                                                          ZALL HERR




                                                                             BËRXULLË            KAMËZ
                                                                  VORË

                                                                                                          PASKUQAN
                                                                                   KASHAR


                                                                                                                                                                     SHËNGJERGJ
                                                                                                               TIRANË                           DAJT



                                                                                                                            FARKË
                                                                                                 VAQARR


                                                                  NDROQ
                                                                                                                                   PETRELË




                                                                                                                                              BËRZHITË
                                        GOLEM
                                                                                      PEZË
                                                                                                                                                    KËRRABË

                                                                                                                                                                                  Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)
                                                       HELMËS
                                                                                                             BALDUSHK
                                          KAVAJË
                                                                                                                                                                                                       < 7500
                                                                                                                                                                                                  7500 - 8000
                            SYNEJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                  8001 - 8500
                                        LUZ I VOGEL
                                                            LEKAJ                                                                                                                                 8501 - 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                  9001 - 9500
                                                                             SINABALLAJ

                          KRYEVIDH
                                                                                                                                                                                                 9501 - 10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                10001 - 10500
                                                                RROGOZHINË

                                GOSË
                                                                                                                                                                                                10501 - 11000
                                                                                                                                                                                                11001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                       > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                             Commune/Municipality Boundary


Source:                                                                                                                                                                           The boundaries of communes and municipalities
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                                have been designed for statistical purpose and
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.


       Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                                                                 79
                       d. Gini coefficient (inequality)

                                                                                                                                                                     Gini Coefficient

                                                                                                                                                                     Prefecture of TIRANË
                                                                                             PREZË                                                ZALL BASTAR
                                                                                                                        ZALL HERR


                                                                                                BËRXULLË
                                                                                                               KAMËZ
                                                                                      VORË

                                                                                                                        PASKUQAN
                                                                                                     KASHAR

                                                                                                                                                                     SHËNGJERGJ
                                                                                                                             TIRANË                    DAJT



                                                                                                                                        FARKË
                                                                                                               VAQARR

                                                                                      NDROQ
                                                                                                                                            PETRELË




                                                                                                                                                      BËRZHITË
                                                              GOLEM
                                                                                                       PEZË
                                                                                                                                                           KËRRABË


                                                                            HELMËS
                                                                                                                           BALDUSHK
                                                                KAVAJË



                                                   SYNEJ

                                                              LUZ I VOGEL
                                                                                                                                                                     Gini index (%)
                                                                                LEKAJ
                                                                                                                                                                                     < 21.0
                                                                                                  SINABALLAJ
                                                 KRYEVIDH
                                                                                                                                                                                  21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  22.1 - 23.0
                                                                                     RROGOZHINË
                                                       GOSË                                                                                                                       23.1 - 24.0
Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality                                                                                                                                       24.1 - 25.0
with values between 0 and 100.
                                                                                                                                                                                  25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      > 26.0

Source:                                                                                                                                                              The boundaries of communes and municipalities
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                                   have been designed for statistical purpose and
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                       may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




                      Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                         The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
                      Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                    statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




                         The number of the poor in the prefecture was                                                                 consumption were in the municipalities of
                       83,845 in 2012. The municipalities of Kamëz                                                                    Farkë (11,001 ALL) and Tirana (10,647 ALL).
                       and Tirana and the commune of Paskuqan                                                                         The lowest consumption levels were in the
                       had the largest concentrations of poor. An area                                                                communes of Kamëz, Krrabë and Sinaballaj, at
                       that is less poor in terms of the poverty rate                                                                 less than 7,500 ALL.
                       may be poorer in terms of the number of the                                                                      The level of inequality in the prefecture was
                       poor. This was the case, for example, of Tirana                                                                25.0 percent. The areas with the highest level of
                       Municipality.                                                                                                  inequality in the prefecture, at over 26 percent, were
                         The average monthly per capita consumption                                                                   Dajt, Farkë, Kashar, Kavajë, Prezë and Tirana.
                       in the prefecture of Tirana was lek 8,584 in
                       2012. The highest levels of monthly per capita




                      80                                                                                               Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
             Minimunicipalities of Tirana
               The municipality of Tirana is divided into                                                 (Tirana 4), Kombinati (6), and Laprakë (11)
             11 neighborhoods or minimunicipalities. The                                                  (map A12). The lowest poverty rate, below
             poverty rate in the municipality was 9.2 percent                                             8.0 percent, was in Qyteti Studenti (Tirana 2),
             in 2012. The highest poverty rates, at more than                                             Tirana e Re (5), and City Center (10).
             12.0 percent, were in Allias and Kinostudio




             Map A12: Poverty Rate and Inequality, minimunicipalities of Tirana, 2012
             a. Poverty rate (headcount)				




                                                                                                                                           Poverty Head Count
                                                                                                                                                   Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                                           Municipality of TIRANË
                                                                                                                                                   Municipality of TIRANË




                                                                                                                   4       4
                                                                  11       11
                                                                                                 8         8
                                                                                    9            9
                                                                                                                           3       3



                                                                       7        7                                              1
                                                                                        10                                             1
                                                                                                     10



                                                                                5            5
                                                                                                                                           Head count ratio (%)count ratio (%)
                                                                                                                                                         Head
                                                                                                               2       2
                                        6               6
                                                                                                                                                                < 8.0               < 8.0
                                                                                                                                                            8.0 - 10.0         8.0 - 10.0
                                                                                                                                                          10.1 - 12.0         10.1 - 12.0
                                                                                                                                                               > 12.0              > 12.0
                                                                                                                                                      Mini municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                        Mini municipality Boundary




Source:          Source:                                                                                                                                      communes
                                                                                                                                           The boundaries ofThe             andof municipalities
Population and Housing  Census                                                                                                                                    boundaries       communes and municipalities
                 Population and 2011
                                Housing Census 2011                                                                                        have been designed   forbeen
                                                                                                                                                                    statistical
                                                                                                                                                             have                purpose
                                                                                                                                                                          designed         and
                                                                                                                                                                                      for statistical purpose and
Living Standard Measurement  Survey
                 Living Standard     – LSMS 2012
                                 Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                            may not reflect exactly the reflect
                                                                                                                                                             may not    territory of thethe
                                                                                                                                                                                exactly  local units. of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                             territory




              Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                               81
               b. Number of the poor
                                                                                                                                                                                Number of poor individuals
                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of poor individuals
                                                                                                                                                                                Municipality of TIRANË
                                                                                                                                                                                        Municipality of TIRANË



                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                              11
                                                                             11
                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                 9
                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                    3

                                                                               7
                                                                                        7                                                                       1
                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                       10



                                                                                                      5                                 2
                                                     6                                                                 5                        2
                                                                    6                                                                                                           Persons
                                                                                                                                                                                                Persons
                                                                                                                                                                                                  < 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     < 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                              2000 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2000 - 3000
                                                                                                                                                                                              3001 - 5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                               3001 - 5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                    > 5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 > 5000
                                                                                                                                                                                             Mini_Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mini_Municipality Boundary

Source:                                                                                                                                                                         The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                Source: Census 2011
Population and Housing                                                                                                                                                          have been designed   for statistical
                                                                                                                                                                                                The boundaries     ofpurpose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      communes andand municipalities
                Measurement
Living Standard Population andSurvey – LSMS
                               Housing      2012
                                       Census 2011                                                                                                                              may not reflect exactly the territory
                                                                                                                                                                                                have been   designed  offor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            statistical purpose and
              Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                    may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.


               c. The average monthly per capita consumption	


                                                                                                                                                                                    Per capita consumption
                                                                                                                                                                                                Per capita consumption




                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                    11                                                                                  4
                                                                                   11                      8
                                                                                            9                                       8
                                                                                                                   9                            3
                                                                                                                                                                3


                                                                         7                                                                          1
                                                                                                710                                                                     1
                                                                                                                           10



                                                                                        5
                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                                                                                    Per capita consumption ( ALL/month )
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Per capita consumption ( ALL/month )
                                   6                                                                                                            2                                                          < 9000
                                                          6                                                                                                                                                                           < 9000
                                                                                                                                                                                                     9000 - 10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9000 - 10000
                                                                                                                                                                                                    10001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10001 - 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                           > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     > 11500
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mini - Municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mini - Municipality Boundary

        Source:
                                                                                                                                                                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                               Source: 2011
        Population and Housing Census                                                                                                                                               have been designed for statistical   purpose
        Living Standard Measurement Survey  – LSMS  2012                                                                                                                                                      The boundaries   ofand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  communes and municipalities
                               Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                                   may not reflect exactly the territory
                                                                                                                                                                                                              have  beenof  the localfor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          designed    units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         statistical purpose and
                              Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.


               82                                                                                              Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
    d. Gini coefficient (inequality)

                                                                                                                                          Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                   Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                          Municipality of TIRANË
                                                                                                                                                   Municipality of TIRANË


                                                                                                            4
                                                           11
                                                                                              8                  4
                                                                11           9
                                                                                                    8                 3
                                                                                     9
                                                                                                                              3

                                                                7                                                         1
                                                                                 10
                                                                     7                                                            1
                                                                                         10


                                                                         5

                                                                                 5                      2
                                                                                                                                          Gini Index (%)
                                              6
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                          < 26.5
                                                                                                                                                   Gini Index (%)
                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                        26.5 - 27.0
                                                                                                                                                                    < 26.5
                                                                                                                                                        27.1 - 27.2
                                                                                                                                                                 26.5 - 27.0
                                                                                                                                                            > 27.2
Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                                                                                                                                                                 27.1 - 27.2
with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                         Mini municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                     > 27.2
         Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
Source: with values between 0 and 100.                                                                                                                          Mini municipality Boundary
                                                                                                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities
Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                        have been designed for statistical purpose and
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                            may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
         Source:                                                                                                                                  The boundaries of communes and municipalities
         Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                       have been designed for statistical purpose and
         Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                            may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




    Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                         The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
    Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                    statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




        The relatively smallest number of poor were                                               10). The lowest level of consumption was in
     living in the City Center (Tirana 10).                                                       Kombinati (Tirana 6). The level of inequality in
        The average monthly per capita consumption                                                the municipality of Tirana was 27.7 percent.The
     in the municipality of Tirana was 10,647 ALL in                                              highest level of inequality, over 27 percent, was
     2012. The highest levels of monthly per capita                                               in 21-Dhjetori (Tirana 7), Medreseja and Selvia
     consumption, more than 11,500 ALL, were in                                                   (Tirana 8). The lowest level of inequality was in
     Tirana e Re (Tirana 5) and City Center (Tirana                                               Kombinati (Tirana 6).




     Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                                                                                                       83
Vlorë Prefecture
   The prefecture of Vlorë is located in the coastal                                             the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic Sea. The poverty
region. It is divided into 7 municipalities and 19                                               rate in the prefecture was 13.2 percent in 2012.
communes. The surface area of the prefecture                                                     The commune of Vllahinë is the poorest area
is 2,706 square kilometers, and the population                                                   in the prefecture, with a poverty rate of 23.0
is 174,524. The prefecture is bounded on the                                                     percent (map A13). The lowest poverty rates
north by the prefecture of Fier, on the east by                                                  were in the communes of Dhivër and Livadhja,
the prefecture of Gjirokastër, on the south by                                                   at less than 7.0 percent.
Greece, and on the southwest and the west by



Map A13: Poverty Rate and Inequality, Vlorë Prefecture and communes, 2012
a. Poverty rate (headcount)			



                                                                                                                         Poverty Head Count

                                                                                                                         Prefecture of VLORË
                                 NOVOSELË




                                                                  SELENICË
                                            QENDËR   SHUSHICË
                                                                             ARMEN
               QENDËR

                                            VLORË
                                                                       VLLAHINË




                                                                                  SEVASTER


                                                                KOTE




                                        ORIKUM
                                                                                  BRATAJ




                                                                                      VRANISHT




                                                                                      HIMARË




                                                                                                                     VERGO

                                                                                                      LUKOVË


                                                                                                                                     DELVINË




                                                                                                                                               MESOPOTAM
                                                                                                                           FINIQ
                                                                                                               SARANDË

                        Head Count ratio in (%).
                                                                                                                                                      DHIVËR
                                         < 8.0                                                                               ALIKO

                                     8.0 - 12.0

                                    12.1 - 16.0                                                                     KSAMIL
                                                                                                                                                     LIVADHJA

                                    16.1 - 20.0
                                    20.1 - 24.0                                                                      XARRË
                                                                                                                                                           MARKAT
                                    24.1 - 28.0
                                        > 28.0                                                                                                    KONISPOL




                        Source:                                                                                          The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                        Population and Housing Census 2011                                                               have been designed for statistical purpose and
                        Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                   may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




84                                                                                         Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
                                                                                                                                                                              Number of poor individuals
b. Number of the poor
                                                          NOVOSELË
                                                                                                                                                                              Prefecture of VLORË

                                                                                SHUSHICË       SELENICË
                                                                       QENDËR

                                                                                                    ARMEN
                                  QENDËR
                                                                       VLORË

                                                                                                       VLLAHINË




                                                                                                                   SEVASTER
                                                                                             KOTE




                                                                     ORIKUM
                                                                                                              BRATAJ




                                                                                                                        VRANISHT




                                                                                                                    HIMARË




                                                                                                                                                LUKOVË

                                                                                                                                                             VERGO




                                                                                                                                                                              DELVINË




                                           Persons                                                                                                                                          MESOPOTAM
                                                                                                                                                         SARANDË      FINIQ
                                                              < 300
                                                           300 - 600
                                                           601 - 900                                                                                                                                      DHIVËR
                                                                                                                                                                       ALIKO
                                                          901 - 1200
                                                         1201 - 1500
                                                                                                                                                             KSAMIL
                                                         1501 - 1800                                                                                                                                 LIVADHJA


                                                         1801 - 2100
                                                                                                                                                                   XARRË
                                                         2101 - 3000                                                                                                                                  MARKAT



                                                         3001 - 9000                                                                                                                        KONISPOL



                                                             > 9000




c. The average monthly per capita
                             Source: consumption	                                                                                                                               Per Capita Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                              The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                           Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                                 have been designed for statistical purpose and
                                           Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                     may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.

                                                                                                                                                                                Prefecture of VLORË
                                                                          NOVOSELË




                                                                                                                  SELENICË
                                                                                     QENDËR    SHUSHICË
                                                                                                                             ARMEN
                                                QENDËR

                                                                                     VLORË

                                                                                                                      VLLAHINË




                                                                                                                                 SEVASTER


                                                                                                            KOTE




                                                                                   ORIKUM
                                                                                                                                 BRATAJ




                                                                                                                                     VRANISHT




                                                                                                                                      HIMARË




                                                                                                                                                                               VERGO

                                                                                                                                                           LUKOVË


                                                                                                                                                                                                DELVINË



                                                     Per capita consumption (ALL/Month)                                                                                                                   MESOPOTAM
                                                                                                                                                                                    FINIQ
                                                                           < 7500                                                                                     SARANDË

                                                                       7500 - 8000

                                                                       8001 - 8500                                                                                                                                  DHIVËR
                                                                                                                                                                                        ALIKO
                                                                       8501 - 9000
                                                                       9001 - 9500
                                                                                                                                                                              KSAMIL                               LIVADHJA
                                                                     9501 - 10000

                                                                  10001 - 10500
                                                                  10501 - 11000                                                                                                 XARRË
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MARKAT

                                                                  11001 - 11500
                                                                          > 11500                                                                                                                             KONISPOL

                                                                Commune/Municipality Boundary



                                                     Source:                                                                                                                    The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                                                     Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                                         have been designed for statistical purpose and

Portraits of Poverty and Inequality      in Albania | Annexes
                                Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                                                  may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            85
d. Gini coefficient (inequality)

                                                                                                                                         Gini Coefficient
                                                                                                                                         Prefecture of VLORË
                                                NOVOSELË




                                                                                 SELENICË
                                                                    SHUSHICË
                                                           QENDËR
                                                                                            ARMEN
                         QENDËR

                                                           VLORË

                                                                                      VLLAHINË




                                                                                                 SEVASTER


                                                                               KOTE




                                                          ORIKUM
                                                                                                 BRATAJ




                                                                                                     VRANISHT




                                                                                                      HIMARË




                                                                                                                                     VERGO

                                                                                                                      LUKOVË


                                                                                                                                                     DELVINË



                           Gini index (%)
                                                                                                                                                               MESOPOTAM
                                                                                                                                           FINIQ
                                                < 21.0                                                                         SARANDË

                                            21.0 - 22.0
                                                                                                                                                                      DHIVËR
                                            22.1 - 23.0                                                                                      ALIKO

                                            23.1 - 24.0

                                            24.1 - 25.0                                                                             KSAMIL                           LIVADHJA


                                            25.1 - 26.0
                                                                                                                                     XARRË
                                                 > 26.0                                                                                                                    MARKAT



                                                                                                                                                                  KONISPOL


                           Gini coefficient is a measure of inequality
                           with values between 0 and 100.



                           Source:                                                                                                       The boundaries of communes and municipalities
                           Population and Housing Census 2011                                                                            have been designed for statistical purpose and
                           Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                                may not reflect exactly the territory of the local units.




Source: Population and Housing Census 2011                                                           The boundaries of communes and municipalities have been designed for
Living Standard Measurement Survey – LSMS 2012                                                      statistical purpose and may not reflect exactly the territory of the local unit




  The prefecture counted 23,092 poor individuals                                                                (10,134 ALL). The lowest level of consumption was
in 2012. The municipality of Vlorë had the largest                                                              in the commune of Vllahinë, less than 7,500 ALL.
number of the poor in the prefecture, at 9,699.                                                                   The level of inequality in the prefecture was
  The average monthly per capita consumption in                                                                 25.1 percent. The highest level of inequality, over
the prefecture of Vlorë was 8,867 ALL. The highest                                                              27 percent, was in the municipalities of Himarë,
levels of monthly per capita consumption were found                                                             Sarandë, and Vlorë. The lowest level of inequality
in the communes of Livadhja (10,843 ALL) and                                                                    was in the communes of Sevaster and Xarrë, at less
Dhivër (10,502 ALL) and the municipality of Sarandë                                                             than 23 percent.




86                                                                                               Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
Annex A: Updates to the First Albania
Poverty Maps, 2001–2010

  The analyses of poverty and inequality maps during the initial mapping exercise in Albania was
carried out by Betti, Neri, and Ballini (2003), based on the methodology fully described in Elbers,
Lanjouw, and Lanjouw (2003). This methodology (the ELL) combined data of the 2001 census and
the 2002 LSMS to produce detailed disaggregated maps that described the spatial distribution of
poverty and inequality in the country.

  Dabalen and Ferrè (2008) updated the first poverty mapping by means of the 2001 census and
the new round of the LSMS, the Albania 2005 LSMS. The contribution of this work relied on a
reweighting scheme. Specifically, the method, which followed the research of Lemieux (2002),
involved the construction of a counterfactual consumption distribution for the old household
survey, in our case the Albania LSMS 2002, using the information contained in the latest survey, the
Albania LSMS 2005. The method projected how the consumption distribution for the 2002 LSMS
(which was conducted about the time the 2001 census was done) would look if the parameters (the
coefficients of a consumption model) and the distribution of the characteristics of the sample and,
therefore, population were as reported in the 2005 survey. The derived counterfactual distribution,
together with the 2001 census, were then used to obtain an updated poverty map of the country
using the ELL methodology as applied in the original poverty and inequality mapping by Betti,
Neri, and Ballini (2003).

  Later, Betti et al. (2010) updated the poverty mapping in Albania by using the procedure proposed
by Dabalen and Ferrè (2008). They constructed a counterfactual distribution of the monetary
variable for the LSMS 2002 using information from the latest survey, the Albania LSMS 2008, and
the 2001 census. They then applied the original ELL method on the basis of the counterfactual
distribution, which led to a monetary distribution in the 2001 census data related to the 2008 LSMS.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                         87
Annex B: The ELL Methodology:
Innovations and Criticisms
  ELL has been used to produce more than 100 poverty maps worldwide. Its wide popularity
partly derives from the development of the PovMap software by the World Bank that has made the
implementation of the technique more tractable.7



      Box 1: The Small Area Estimation Method Developed by ELL (2003)

      The method proposed by ELL has three stages. First, a set of variables deemed to have
      similar distributions in the survey and the census are identified.

                                                                  n yc
      Second, a model of log per capita consumption expenditure ( l  h ) is estimated in the
      survey data based on the identified variables:

                                                   ′    ′
                                            h = Xc
                                         n yc
                                         l       h b + Z g + uc
                                                              h (1)

                     ′
      where X c h is the vector of explanatory variables for household h in cluster c, β is the vector
                                      ′
      of regression coefficients, Z is the vector of location specific variables, g is the vector
      of coefficients, and u c h is the error term due to the discrepancy between the predicted
                                                            ′
      household consumption and the actual value. X c     h   Is household level variables that have
                                                                 ′
      similar distributions in both survey and census, while Z include location specific averages
      of variables found in census, and potentially other external variables available at local levels
      for the entire country, as for instance GIS based variables.

      This error term is decomposed into two independent components: u c    h = h c + ec
                                                                                       h where
      h c is cluster-specific effect and e c
                                           h a household-specific effect. This error structure
      allows for both a location effect – common to all households in the same area—and
      heteroskedasticity in the household-specific errors. The location effect can be any level.

      In the third part of the analysis, poverty estimates and their standard errors are computed. There
      are two sources of errors involved in the estimation process: errors in the estimated regression
      coefficients ( bˆ,g  ˆ ) and the disturbance terms, both of which affect poverty estimates and the
      level of their accuracy. ELL propose a way to properly calculate poverty estimates as well as their
      standard errors while taking into account these sources of bias. A simulated value of expenditure
                                                                                           ′ˆ    ′ˆ
      for each census household is calculated with predicted log expenditure X c         h b + Z g and
      random draws from the estimated distributions of the disturbance terms, h c and e c      h . In the
      case of Albania, these simulations are repeated 200 times. For any given location (such as a
      district or a commune), the mean across the 200 simulations of a poverty statistic provides a
      point estimate of the statistic, and the standard deviation provides an estimate of the standard
      error. A so-called Alpha model (see Elbers et al., 2003) is also used in these models.

   7. PovMap is a freeware available at Software for Poverty Mapping (database), World Bank, Washington, DC, http://go.worldbank.
org/QG9L6V7P20. In addition to the software, the site also includes links to the large literature on the topic. This includes examples of
applications around the globe. See also Zhao and Lanjouw (2009).


88                                                             Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
  Box 1 recaps the methodology and the stepwise approach.

  There have been several recent methodological developments within the literature on small area
estimation that have been included in the new version of the PovMap software, PovMap2. The
methodological improvements include estimations via the empirical best method, an estimation
method proposed in Molina and Rao (2010) that utilizes existing information in the household
survey more efficiently and has a particular advantage if surveys cover a large number of PSUs.
Further improvements also include the options of utilizing the empirical best method based on
an approximated empirical distribution (the normal mixtures approach) instead of an assumed
distribution (Elbers and van der Weide 2014). These recent methodological contributions are used
in the Albanian poverty map.

  A major advantage of the ELL-based approach is that, in addition to estimating key indicators
such as poverty rates, the depth of poverty, and a range of inequality measures, it also estimates
the standard errors associated with these indicators. The importance of standard errors becomes
a critical aspect in gauging how much trust to have in the predictions. A prediction that, say, 15
percent of an area is poor is not so valuable if it comes with a 95 percent confidence interval of,
say, 0 percent to 30 percent. As illustration of standard errors that are more useful, the 95 percent
confidence interval for the national poverty estimate of the LSMS survey is 12.5 percent to 16.1
percent poor.

  A number of factors influence the standard errors of our poverty estimates. This includes
sampling and measurement errors in the survey, which are beyond the control of the process for the
construction of the poverty maps. Other aspects that we do have some control over are the precision
of the consumption model, the spatial level at which cluster effects are estimated, and the number
of households in each spatial area for which we estimate poverty. In this application 200 iterations
were made to simulate standard errors.

  Tarozzi and Deaton (2008) highlight some concerns with the ELL methodology. Notably,
they show that, under certain circumstances, the ELL method can result in an overly optimistic
assessment of the standard errors of the local poverty estimates. The specific concerns raised by
Tarozzi and Deaton (2008) can be summarized as follows. First, differences in consumption patterns
not captured in the model can bias the poverty estimates and the standard errors. The ELL method
estimates a consumption model that is assumed to apply to all households within each model. The
implicit assumption is that the relationship between household expenditures and their correlates are
the same for all households and that all remaining differences arise because of nonstructural factors.
This is not a minor assumption and is explicitly acknowledged as such in Elbers, Lanjouw, and
Lanjouw (2003). However, Elbers, Lanjouw, and Lanjouw (2003) provide evidence that the concern
does not have large practical implications.

  Second, Tarozzi and Deaton (2008) caution that the misspecification in the error structure can
lead to underestimation of standard errors. They show that, under some conditions, ignoring the
spatial correlation can cause a bias in the standard errors of the poverty estimates.




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                           89
Annex D: Differences and Similarities:
2002 and 2012 Maps
  This appendix makes a comparison of the poverty maps of 2002 and the new poverty maps. The
comparison has two purposes: (1) to document the technical differences and similarities in the
estimations and (2) to provide insights on the degree of comparability between the two sets of maps.

   The estimations in both years rely on the same methodology, with several variations in
implementation, including some that may impact the results. Nonetheless, the two sets of maps
should be reflect reasonably unbiased estimates of poverty at two points in time, which should be
comparable. However, we do not have any evidence or experience on how much the variations
may impact the estimated results. For this reason, any analysis based on the estimates should be
careful and systematic, and any comparison of individual municipalities is not recommended. This
is particularly true in the case of the communes because many communes have small populations,
and the estimates are therefore associated with a larger degree of uncertainty.


Data
  Both mapping exercises were able to rely on a survey and a census close in time: the 2002 mapping
process depended on the 2001 census, while the 2012 mapping process depended on the 2011
census.




Estimation methodology and implementation
  Both sets of maps rely on the ELL estimation method. A standard implementation of the ELL
includes the following stages:

  Stage 0: Comparability of survey and census

  Stage 1: Regression modeling

  Stage 2: Simulation and estimation

  Below, the maps are compared at each stage.


Stage 0: Comparability of survey and census
  During stage 0, the basic explanatory variables are identified through a detailed comparison of the
questionnaires and the distributions of the variables in each data source. Normally, only variables
found to be similar in both data sources are utilized in the regression models. In 2002, only a few
variables were found to have similar distributions in the survey and the census, and stage 0 was not
undertaken. Variations in the distributions could have two causes:

  Changes in the economy between the census and the survey


90                                           Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
  Differences in the survey instruments or in the survey implementation

  If the variations arose because of changes in the economy, this would mean that the estimated
levels of poverty reflect the situation in the year of the census (2001) instead of the year of the
survey (2002). With just one year between the two data sources, it seems unlikely that most variables
underwent massive changes.

   If the variations arose because of differences in the instruments or the implementation, this means
the estimates may be biased. Imagine, for instance, that use of the Internet is an explanatory variable
and that this variable has a mean of 40 percent in the survey and a mean of 25 percent in the census.
If this variation derives from differences in the survey instrument or in the implementation (say, one
source included Internet use in public locations, but the other did not), then the inclusion of such
a variable would lead to a bias in the estimated levels of poverty. If the variation is associated with
sampling, this would be less of a concern. However, there is a trade-off between the low R squared
in the models and the bias because of nonmatching distributions.

  In 2012, stage 0 was implemented according to the standard procedure, with only variables
similarly defined and with similar distributions included in the regressions. Perhaps because of the
stage 0 restrictions, the R2 levels in 2012 were lower than those in 2002 for a similar number of
variables. The R2 levels in 2002 were in the range of 0.56–0.65, while the range was 0.46–0.57 in
2012 for a similar number of explanatory variables. The lower levels of R2 in 2012 will lead to larger
standard errors in the estimated poverty levels; however, the estimated results will pertain to the
year of the survey, and there is no doubt about the potential bias in variables with diverging means.
Also, in 2002, to produce a complete dataset, a few variables with missing data were imputed based
on a model. This was not an issue in 2012.


Stage 1: Estimation models
  In 2002, six models were established based on the stratification used for sampling in the 2002
household survey (central urban, central rural, mountain, Tirana, coastal urban, and coastal rural)
(Betti, Neri, and Ballini 2003). In 2012, only four models were established because the urban and
rural strata were combined in the coastal and central areas. Some municipalities and communes
have both urban and rural observations, and, for these areas, the estimated headcounts rely on
two separate prediction models. In this case, the estimated standard errors of the Foster-Greer-
Thorbecke (1984) family of poverty measures and inequality measures are only correct under the
assumption that the two estimation models are uncorrelated. This assumption does not seem likely
to be true; so, joint models were preferred over split models. Using a combined model could lead
to a bias if a single model cannot embed both rural and urban patterns. This does not seem to be a
problem because there are no systematic differences between the relative size of the location effect
between the 2002 and 2012 maps. If a joint model were not able to capture both rural and urban
patterns, one should expect a larger location effect in the joint model, compared with each of the
urban and rural models. This is not the case.

  In 2002, household weights were only applied to the model in stratum 3, but not to other strata.
In 2012, household weights were applied to all models. In both years, the models were relatively
parsimonious with 10–15 household-level variables and 2–10 enumeration area–level variables.


Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                                            91
Stage 2: Simulation stage
  At the simulation stage, both sets of maps utilize the ELL approach in simulating the beta
coefficients from the main model. The maps vary slightly in the simulation of the cluster and
household error terms because the 2002 maps bootstrap from the actual error terms in the
estimation model in the survey. The 2012 maps use the normal mixtures approach, an alternative
method not developed until 2014, whereby the error terms from the survey models were used to
approximate a nonparametric distribution, which was then used in the bootstrapping.


Boundaries over time
  There was only a limited change in the administrative boundaries between the 2001 and 2011
census. Only a single commune was merged.


Estimated commune poverty levels
   It is key that any interpretation of the trends in poverty between 2001 and 2012 at the commune
level should only be carried out based on an in-depth analysis of all the data. Such an analysis is
beyond the scope of this report, but a few observations and illustrations highlight one aspect. Figure
E.1 illustrates the changes in poverty across communes in each prefecture. It shows that there is
notable variation in the levels of poverty reduction, mostly within prefectures. An analysis of these
changes should take into account that communes are small units for the estimation of poverty.
Most poverty maps use areas with larger populations in each area, and, as a reflection of the small
populations, the estimates are also associated with notable standard errors. This is illustrated in
figure E.2, which shows larger changes in poverty in communes with smaller populations. Hence,
much of the large shifts observed in poverty may merely be variations within the standard errors
and not necessarily significant changes in poverty.




92                                           Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes
Figure E.1 Change in Commune Poverty Rates over Time, by Prefecture

   80
   60
   40
   20
   0
   -20




             1   10   11    12    2     3    4     5    6     7   8   9




Figure E.2 Absolute Change in Poverty over Time and Log Number of Households,
Communes
  80
  60
   40
   20
    0




         4                  6               8                10           12
                           Log number of HHs in commune in 2012




Portraits of Poverty and Inequality in Albania | Annexes                        93
