Working with
Smallholders
A Handbook for Firms Building
Sustainable Supply Chains
Photo Credits:
Introduction: © Curt Carnemark / World Bank
Page 1: © Charlotte Kesl / World Bank
Chapter 1: © Stephan Bachenheimer/ World Bank
Chapter 2: © IFC
Chapter 3: © Bradford L.Roberts
Page 29: © Gosia Nowakowska-Miller/ IFC
Chapter 4: © Curt Carnemark / World Bank
Page 43: © Ray Witlin / World Bank
Chapter 5: © Gennadiy Ratushenko / World Bank
Page 66: © IFC
Chapter 6: © Scott Wallace/ World Bank
Chapter 7: © Curt Carnemark / World Bank
Chapter 8: © Tran Thiet Dung/ IFC
Page 106: © Bruno Déméocq/ IFC
Chapter 9: © Nugroho Nurdikiawan Sunjoyo / World Bank
Working with
Smallholders
A Handbook for Firms Building
Sustainable Supply Chains
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, creates opportunity for people to escape poverty and
improve their lives. We foster sustainable economic growth in developing countries by supporting
private sector development, mobilizing private capital, and providing advisory and risk mitigation
services to businesses and governments. This report was commissioned by IFC through its Sustainable
Business Advisory, which works with clients to promote sound environmental, social, governance,
and industry standards; to catalyze investment in clean energy and resource efficiency; and to support
sustainable supply chains and community investment.

The conclusions and judgments contained in this report should not be attributed to, and do not
necessarily represent the views of, IFC or its Board of Directors or the World Bank or its Executive
Directors, or the countries they represent. IFC and the World Bank do not guarantee the accuracy of
the data in this publication and accept no responsibility for any consequences of their use.
Table of Contents


Introduction 	                                                                        1

The Business Case for Working with Smallholder Farmers	                               11

An Evidence-Based Approach to Program Design	                                         19

Aggregation Through Producer Organizations	                                           29

Effective Training and Communication Strategies for Changing Smallholder Behavior	    43

Standards and Certification of Smallholder Supply Chains	                             63

Increasing Access to Inputs	                                                          75

Improving Farm Management Skills	                                                     91

Incorporating Gender into Supply Chain Interventions	                                101

Measuring Results	                                                                   117
Acknowledgements

The preparation of this handbook was led by Dieter Fischer with significant input from
Katherine Scaife Diaz, Anna Akhalkatsi, Mehnaz Haider, Kate Bottriell, Susan Pomar
Queirolo, and Sanwaree Sethi. The views expressed in the handbook are those of the
authors only.

We would especially like to thank Usha Rao-Monari, John Kellenberg and Alan Johnson
for their guidance and support throughout the development of the handbook.

We would like to thank the following people who provided valuable comments, insights,
and case studies.

From IFC:

Toyin Adeniji, Andi Wahyuni Baso, Ernest Bethe, Thu Hong Dang, Alexis Diamond, Sarak
Duong, Mario João Gomes, Richard Henry, Deborah Horan, Ivan Ivanov, Ross Jaax, Rick Van
der Kamp, Liana Korkotyan, Charles Lor, Natalie Macawaris, Maria Iturralde MacDicken,
Emmanouela Markoglou, Carmen Niethammer, Liliana Miro Quesada, Chris Richards,
Bradford Roberts, Christian Rahbek Rosenholm, and Colin Taylor.

From firms and other organizations:

Jane Abramovich (TechnoServe), Kwesi Acquah (Esoko), Fritz Brugger (Syngenta
Foundation), Bai Akridge (National 4-H Council), Grahame Beaumont Dixie (World Bank),
Karen Feely (Comprehensive Learning Solutions), David Feige (Making Cents), Andreanne
Grimard (Solidaridad Network), Stephanie Hanson (One Acre Fund), Jan Lühmann
(Sucafina), Alice Mostert (Solidaidad Network), Mark Neilson (Consultant), Laurens
van Oeijen (UTZ Certified), Sylvain Roy (CNFA), Amanda Satterly (TechnoServe), Eugenia
Serova (Food and Agriculture Organization), Alex Serrano (National Cooperative Business
Association), and Lucas Simons (SCOPEinsight).

The handbook was edited by Laura Mesko and designed by Ryan Clennan and Amy Orr
of Studio Grafik.

Please visit the website, www.farms2firms.org, to provide comments and to access
updated information about new IFC publications and services.
Foreword

One of our greatest challenges is meeting society’s food needs while simultaneously
reducing agriculture’s environmental harm. This will require the “sustainable intensification”
of agriculture: producing more food on less land in a more sustainable way. Growth
in emerging markets and rising demand for higher quality food products mean huge
opportunities for private firms along the whole value chain. More production of food
with increasingly scarce land and water resources will require ingenuity, innovation, and
considerable investments for decades to come. The future of agriculture depends in large
part on innovative solutions emerging from private firms. But it also means new and
innovative partnerships between different stakeholders in the food system. Firms need to
establish and expand new ways of working with consumer groups, governments, research
institutes, civil society organizations, and the millions of smallholder farmers—especially
in emerging markets—who are critical to the future supply of many agricultural products
including livestock, coffee, cocoa, vegetables, and oil palm.

In the 2012 fiscal year, IFC doubled its programs in agriculture from $2 billion per annum
to over $4 billion. We aim to double our investments again in another three years. We
are scaling up programs that improve the livelihoods of smallholder farmers by linking
them to modern supply chains providing opportunities to increase their productivity
and improve their farming practices. IFC supports innovative partnerships between
agribusiness, financial institutions, technical assistance providers, governments, donors,
and other stakeholders in building new systems of sustainable food production.

This handbook is a guide for firms who wish to expand their supply chains by working
with smallholder farmers. The purpose is to enable more productive interactions between
private firms and smallholders. This contribution is a part of our larger investment and
advisory services in agribusiness that aim to shift our global food system to one where
sustainable production is the norm and food and nutritional security is secured for this
and for future generations.




Usha Rao-Monari 
Director for Sustainable Business Advisory
Introduction
Introduction
Agribusinesses operate in a rapidly changing world. Demand for agricultural crops is expected
to double as the world’s population reaches 9.1 billion by 2050. Food production will need to
provide sufficient carbohydrates, proteins, and fats for the estimated 870 million people who
currently lack food security. Concurrently, rising incomes and urbanization will drive increased
consumption of meat, dairy, and bio-fuels.

Increasing the quantity and quality of food in response to this growing demand will be a
challenge for a variety of reasons. First, the remaining unused arable land is concentrated in a
few countries and is difficult to access. Second, yields for staple crops, such as rice, maize, wheat,
and soybeans, have stagnated or declined in one-quarter to one-third of their production areas
during the past 40 years.1 Third, climate change, water scarcity, and an aging rural population
also pose risks to agribusinesses seeking innovative solutions to sourcing their products.

In the face of these challenges, firms recognize that the world’s 525 million smallholder
farmers represent an opportunity to expand market share and secure a sustainable supply of
key agricultural commodities. Sourcing directly from smallholders can expand a firm’s supply
base, reduce margins paid to collectors and middlemen, and facilitate quality and productivity
improvements. Smallholders also represent a potential customer base for firms marketing
inputs, information, and financial services.

However, sourcing from smallholders presents numerous challenges:

•	 Productivity and crop quality are often low.
•	 Smallholder suppliers may lack knowledge on how to mitigate social and environmental
   impacts.
•	 Poor farm management skills and lack of aggregation reduce smallholders’ ability to
   achieve scale.
•	 Transparency and traceability measures are needed along the supply chain to address food
   safety and sustainability.
•	 Certification programs have difficulty evaluating the sustainability of farming practices
   through layers of collectors and middlemen.

Responding to these challenges can require costly investments with returns spread over the
short and long term.




                                                                                                         1
     UNDERSTANDING SMALLHOLDER FARMERS


     Efforts to improve the quality and productivity of smallholder farmers can only be
     sustainable if those efforts incorporate farmers’ incentives.



     A smallholder farm in the developing world is typically a family-          the expected harvest. There may not be a clear distinction between
     owned enterprise that produces crops or livestock on two or less           traditional village collector networks and more democratic producer
     hectares. In some countries and sectors, however, smallholdings can        organizations or cooperatives. At the same time, the rapid spread
     exceed 10 hectares. Many smallholders are not farmers by choice,           of cell phones among farmers and their families allows farmers to
     but rather by default because they lack more lucrative opportunities.      increase their knowledge of and interaction with markets.
     Family members provide most of the labor and derive their primary
     means of support from the farm.                                            Because smallholder farming is predominantly a household business,
                                                                                household dynamics affect farm decision making. Men often make
     An estimated 525 million smallholder farms currently exist                 the major decisions about farming and crop marketing, especially
     worldwide. The majority (388 million) are in Asia, with 44 million         when cash crops are involved. Women often manage their own
     in Europe and the Russian Federation, 33 million in Africa, and five       plots, particularly for food crops. However, the number of female-
     million in the Americas. The size of smallholdings in Asia and Africa      headed farms is increasing, particularly in Asia, where women head
     has declined by 25 to 40 percent over the past 50 years, as these          more than 20 percent of smallholder households in some areas.
     farms are passed from generation to generation.
                                                                                Quality and productivity vary widely among smallholder farmers
     Smallholders work and live within traditional support and power            depending on their ability to invest in production. The productive
     structures, but increased access to information is changing the            assets of a smallholding could be as basic as a hand hoe or as
     way smallholders organize and interact with markets. Typically,            expensive as a tractor. Farmers may have no knowledge of post-
     smallholders sell their crops through traditional supply chains, which     harvest processing, or they may be capable of highly detailed
     begin with village collectors or producer organizations and continue       grading and processing. In another example, as shown in the map
     through a series of aggregators. Smallholders may also wait by the         on pages 4-5, fertilizer consumption is near zero in some African
     roadside with their crops, hoping to sell to travelling traders. Village   countries, while it exceeds 500 kg per hectare in China and Egypt.
     collectors usually extend credit and may also provide agricultural         Literacy rates, which tend to be lower in rural areas, also vary
     inputs, such as fertilizer, on loan basis, with repayment coming at        considerably.




    Table 0.1. Global distribution of smallholders (Millions).




                                                          44                                  33
                388                                                                                                                    5




2
UNDERSTANDING SMALLHOLDER FARMERS (cont.)

Smallholders face a variety of challenges, including:                         urban settings, agricultural loans are typically paid off after the
                                                                              harvest, which may be eight to twelve months after the loan
•	 Traditional cultivation methods. Farmers learn agricultural                is taken. This delay creates a further disincentive for financial
   techniques from their parents rather than external sources.                institutions.
   Traditional cultivation practices can, in theory, be sustainable.
   However, common practices, such as slash-and-burn agriculture          •	 Poor soil fertility and limited water resources. Most
   with reduced fallow periods and plowing straight down                     smallholders live in tropical zones with naturally low soil fertility
   hillsides, degrade soil fertility and cause erosion. In developing        and high acidity. Farmers have further stripped nutrients from
   countries, government-supported technical assistance and input            the soil during decades of harvests with inadequate fertilizer
   support have declined significantly in the last 30 years, leaving         use. Many smallholders do not know how to improve their soil
   smallholders with few resources to improve agricultural practices.        fertility because they lack an understanding of soil systems and
   In addition, many smallholders, particularly in Africa, live too far      have inadequate soil testing services.
   from or cannot afford to use improved inputs on their fields. The
   widespread existence of counterfeits and poor-quality products         •	 Changing weather patterns and water scarcity.
   also reduces farmers’ trust in the effectiveness of inputs.               Smallholders who rely on traditional cultivation techniques
                                                                             face enormous challenges as they try to adapt to changing
•	 Limited access to markets. Many smallholders lack physical                weather patterns. Unpredictable rainy seasons reduce
   and economic access to lucrative markets for their crops.                 farmers’ confidence in planting crops at the traditional time.
   Distance, poor roads, and access to only bicycles or motorbikes           Traditional varieties may produce low yields or fail altogether
   for crop transport, cause physical isolation. Small quantities            during drought or flooding. Changes in temperature and
   of crop to sell, a need for immediate payment, no capacity to             humidity increase the prevalence of pests and diseases.
   safely store crops, and limited knowledge of prices and quality           Smallholders who rely on groundwater for irrigation have
   requirements beyond the farm gate are economic constraints.               found that water tables are dropping beyond their reach.
   As a result, most smallholders sell their crops on the roadside
   near their farms. In this situation, their power to negotiate with     •	 Inefficient inter-cropping techniques. Subsistence and
   buyers is very limited.                                                   cash crop cultivation are often combined on the same farm.
                                                                             Farmers often intercrop food crops with cash crops like cocoa
•	 Largely unorganized. Only about 14 percent of Asian                       and coffee, or they may consume a portion of the food crop
   farmers, 7 percent of African farmers, and 19 percent of Latin            harvest, such as maize or rice, and sell the remainder. Both
   American farmers are members of agricultural cooperatives,                cases can reduce marketable yields.
   which can improve market access through collective ownership
   of trucks and storage facilities. Many of the active cooperatives      •	 Low literacy and numeracy. Many smallholders have little
   that do exist have low capacity.2                                         formal education, which limits their ability to keep adequate
                                                                             written records or educate themselves about improved
•	 Informal landholding. Property is often allocated by                      agricultural practices. They may have only a vague idea of basic
   tradition and culture. The vast majority of smallholders do not           metrics, such as farm size, crop yield, and real costs, on their
   have formal title to the land they farm. They may own the land            own farms.
   through traditional structures, or they could be sharecroppers
   or renters. Lack of formal land tenure makes it difficult for          •	 An aging population. The population of smallholder farmers
   smallholders to use their land as collateral for financing. Trading       is aging. With alternative economic opportunities available to
   or consolidating landholdings is also difficult. If farmers are           youth in urban areas, farming has lost its appeal among the
   sharecropping or renting their land, they may not be willing to           next generation.
   invest in inputs.
                                                                          Despite these challenges, smallholders respond positively to
•	 Poor access to credit. Financial institutions often view               opportunities that enable them to join global supply chains and
   smallholders as unattractive clients due to insufficient collateral    contribute to food security, poverty reduction, and economic growth.
   (such as formal land title), lack of written records, and the small    The main goal of this handbook is to find opportunities where both
   size of loans requested by farmers. In contrast to small loans in      farmers and firms can benefit from greater engagement.




                                                                                                                                                     3
    A GLOBAL SNAPSHOT OF SMALLHOLDER FARMERS




                                                                                      MEXICO
                                                                                Average Farm Size: 25 Ha
                                                                                   Literacy Rate: 93%
                                          NICARAGUA                              Fertilizer Consumption:
                                        Average Farm Size: 4 Ha                       54.5 Kg/Ha/Yr
                                          Literacy Rate: 78%
                                        Fertilizer Consumption:
                                               30 Kg/Ha/Yr




                                                                          PERU
                                                                  Average Farm Size: 20 Ha
                                                                     Literacy Rate: 90%
                                                                   Fertilizer Consumption:
                                                                         106 Kg/Ha/Yr




4
                                                                    RUSSIAN
                                                                  FEDERATION
                                                             Average Farm Size: 50 Ha
                                                               Literacy Rate: 100%
                                                              Fertilizer Consumption:
                                                                     16Kg/Ha/Yr
      GHANA
Average Farm Size: 2.3 Ha
   Literacy Rate: 67%
 Fertilizer Consumption:
      20.3 Kg/Ha/Yr
                                                                                                        CHINA
                                                                                                Average Farm Size: 0.7 Ha
                                                                                                   Literacy Rate: 94%
                                                                                                 Fertilizer Consumption:
                                                                                                       504 Kg/Ha/Yr




                                                          INDIA
                                                Average Farm Size: 1.6 Ha                                                   VIETNAM
                                                   Literacy Rate: 63%                                                  Average Farm Size: 0.5 Ha
                                                 Fertilizer Consumption:                                                  Literacy Rate: 93%
                                                       167 Kg/Ha/Yr                                                     Fertilizer Consumption:
                                                                                                                              404 Kg/Ha/Yr




                                    ETHIOPIA
                                Average Farm Size: 1 Ha
                                  Literacy Rate: 30%
                                                                                           INDONESIA
                                Fertilizer Consumption:
                                                                                        Average Farm Size: 0.9 Ha
                                       18 Kg/Ha/Yr
                                                                                           Literacy Rate: 93%
                                                                                         Fertilizer Consumption:
                                                                                               181 Kg/Ha/Yr

                DEMOCRATIC
                REPUBLIC OF
                  CONGO
              Average Farm Size: 0.5 Ha
                 Literacy Rate: 67%
               Fertilizer Consumption:
                     0.5 Kg/Ha/Yr




                                                                                                                                                   5
                                 This handbook responds to the challenges agribusinesses face by laying out the business case
                                 for working with smallholder farmers. It also provides a framework for decision making and
                                 recommends tools and resources for firms engaging with smallholder farmers.

                                 Intended Audience for the Handbook

                                 This handbook is designed for operational managers who are responsible for integrating
                                 smallholder farmers into value chains as suppliers , clients, or customers. Examples include:

                                 •	   Product and sales managers for input manufacturers, distributors, wholesalers, and retailers
                                 •	   Field managers for financial institutions
                                 •	   Managers for training service providers working with smallholders
                                 •	   Supply chain and sustainability managers for off-takers
                                 •	   Sustainability managers for processors and food companies

                                 Although the handbook is designed for the private sector, it may also be useful to governmental
                                 or nongovernmental agricultural development programs working with smallholders.

                                 How the Handbook Is Organized

                                 Working with Smallholders leads firms through the three phases of planning, implementing,
                                 and evaluating a smallholder engagement initiative. The following is an overview of the
                                 handbook’s content:

                                 •	 Chapter 1 presents the business case for working with smallholders.
                                 •	 Chapter 2 details the steps for planning and designing a cost-effective engagement strategy
                                    (Step 1 in Figure 0.1 below).
                                 •	 Chapters 3 through 8 each examine one of six interventions (Step 2 in Figure 0.1). Each of these
                                    chapters begins with the business case for the intervention discussed before turning to solutions,
                                    strategies, and best practices. The chapters close by reviewing important considerations for
                                    firms when implementing these tools. A list of useful resources and references, including service
                                    providers, practice groups, and relevant research, is located at the end of each chapter.
                                 •	 Chapter 9 presents tools and strategies to help firms incorporate the third phase (Step 3
                                    in Figure 0.1), results measurement, into their smallholder engagement strategies.

    Figure 0.1. Developing effective programs requires a step-by-step approach.



               PLAN AND DESIGN                             IMPLEMENT                                 MEASURE RESULTS


                                                         Farm         Aggregation
                                                      Management



                       1                              Inputs
                                                                 2          Training
                                                                                                           3
                                                                Standards




                                                               GENDER
                                  Gender is a consideration in each phase of a supply chain intervention



6
Throughout the handbook, boxes titled “In Practice” highlight innovative approaches
implemented by firms and service providers when working with smallholder farmers. These
examples are drawn from projects that IFC and other firms or nongovernmental organizations
have implemented in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. Best practices are highlighted by an icon
of a trophy alongside a summary of the essential points. The handbook’s companion website
provides more information on these topics as well as tools and updated content of interest to
firms working with smallholders. The website address is www.farms2firms.org.

IFC Expertise in Agribusinesses and Supporting Smallholder Supply Chains

IFC has made agribusiness a priority because of its potential for broad development impact and
its especially strong role reaching rural areas where three-quarters of the world’s poor live. IFC
has doubled financing for agribusiness to address critical constraints along the agribusiness
value chain, and IFC aims to double investments again by 2016, bringing total investments
in agribusiness to $8 billion. Through investments and advisory services, IFC helps the private
sector address higher demand and escalating food prices in an environmentally sustainable
and socially inclusive way. IFC also supports global initiatives for sustainable production of
agricultural commodities.

IFC works with agribusinesses, trading companies, and financial intermediaries, particularly
in low-income countries, to improve smallholders’ access to markets, financing, technical
assistance, and inputs like fertilizer and seeds. These initiatives include efforts to strengthen
firms’ supply chains by helping smallholder farmers increase productivity and apply appropriate
environmental, social, and quality standards. IFC aims to bring land into sustainable production,
to improve the use of inputs by transferring technologies and practices, and to make the
best use of water and other resources. IFC seeks commercially viable solutions and helps
companies set benchmarks for responsible production in line with industry best practices.




    In addition to direct and indirect financing and investments, IFC provides advisory service support to
    agribusinesses, including:

    •	 Improving practices of farmers and small businesses
    •	 Supporting increased knowledge and access to agricultural inputs
    •	 Facilitating market development of local supply by helping farmers meet quality and quantity
       requirements so they can access and develop markets
    •	 Working with banks and other financial institutions to provide access to credit and insurance
    •	 Raising standards of corporate governance and business transparency
    •	 Supporting the development and uptake of eco-standards for global commodity value chains




                                                                                                             7
    NOTES
    1. Ray, Deepak, Ramankutty, Navin et al. “Recent Patterns of Crop Yield Growth and Stagnation,”
    Nature Communications. December 18, 2012.

    2. Mayo, Ed. Global Business Ownership 2012: Members and Shareholders Across the World.
    Co-Operatives UK, 2012.




8
9
10
CHAPTER 1
The Business Case
for Working with
Smallholder Farmers




                      E
    Why read this chapter?


    Working with smallholder farmers presents firms
    with the opportunity to expand market share
    by increasing access to sustainable supply and
    reaching new markets for sales of firms’ agricultural
    inputs and services. This chapter lays out the
    business case for smallholder engagement by first
    presenting the drivers for working with smallholder
    farmers and then exploring the risks of investing in
    smallholder supply chains.




F
The Business Case for Working with
Smallholder Farmers
THE DRIVERS FOR WORKING WITH SMALLHOLDER FARMERS
The drivers behind firms’ decisions to work with smallholders include the need to:

•	 Meet global food demand in a resource-scarce world.
•	 Respond to consumer demand for increased sustainability.
•	 Prevent contamination and food-borne illness.

Meeting Global Demand for Food and Raw Materials

While world food production must increase by 50 percent by 2030 to meet growing global
food demand, unused arable land for expansion is constrained. Globally, 1.5 billion hectares of
land are used for crop production, and another 1.4 billion hectares are theoretically available
for agricultural expansion. However, nearly half of this potentially arable land is concentrated
in just seven countries: Brazil, Argentina, Sudan, China, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Angola, and Mozambique. In these countries and elsewhere, the remaining arable
land is often inaccessible by road and includes steep and relatively infertile terrain. Clearing
forested land for crops is no longer acceptable due to the negative impacts on biodiversity
and climate change. Due to their preponderance in these countries, smallholders will be
crucial to future food security.

Increased raw material supplies can be met through cooperation with smallholders, either
through provision of necessary inputs and technical information or through greater control of
production. A growing reality is that local resistance to land privatization in many indigenous
areas means that large exporters must work with smallholders and their small landholdings
in order to increase exports. It is often less costly, both financially and socially, to co-opt
smallholder production for a defined and profitable market opportunity than it is to invest in
farmland directly.




    UPPER WEST AGRO-ENTERPRISE AND SOYBEAN PRODUCTION1

    A soybean processing enterprise in the upper west region of Ghana (Upper West Agro- Enterprise)
    partnered with smallholder farmers to supply soy beans. The processing enterprise provides farmers
    with tractor services for plowing, fertilizers, seed, and haulage services. Farmers provide land and labor
    for soybean production and deliver the produce to the processing enterprise at harvest. The grain is
    cleaned, weighed, and stored by the enterprise. When the farmer decides to sell, he is paid the current
    market price net of costs of inputs and services provided by the processing enterprise. The processing
    plant does not seem to have problems with marketing its output. Because these relations evolve over
    long periods of time and under different contexts (e.g. macroeconomic policy, trends in world market
    prices, and institutional and socio-cultural factors), a particular model that is successful in one socio-
    cultural context may not be successful at a different time or under a different context. It may therefore
    be inappropriate to prescribe one model as the most workable. Instead, it is beneficial to identify the
    ingredients that have facilitated successful contractual relationships.




                                                                                                                 11
     Simply put, the business case for an off-taker to work with smallholders is based on increasing
     the quantity, quality, and/or traceability of supply, while reducing procurement costs. For
     providers of inputs, financial services, or information, the business case is an expanded
     customer base at acceptable service delivery costs.

     In some sectors, such as coffee and cocoa, smallholder farmers dominate production, so
     firms must work with smallholders to secure supply. In other sectors, such as horticulture and
     other labor-intensive crops, smallholders may be more efficient than large farms. Smallholders
     can be competitive against larger suppliers when they bring a differentiated product to the
     market, such as a higher-quality grade or a niche-market product destined for fair trade,
     organic, or boutique markets.

     Responding to Demands for Increased Sustainability

     Growing consumer concern for safe and sustainably sourced food drives the expansion of the
     market for certified products from specialty retailers to high-volume retailers. Agribusinesses
     face environmental and social risks that can damage their businesses. These risks can occur at
     facilities directly under the firm’s control or further up the supply chain at smallholder farms.
     With the adoption of internationally recognized standards and certifications, agribusinesses
     face significant risk if their products fail to meet consumer expectations. For example, a food
     manufacturer could face reputational risk if it purchases palm oil that has been grown on
     deforested land. Purchasing cocoa that has been grown using child labor is an example of a
     social risk. Financial institutions loaning to agribusinesses face the same risks as their clients.

     By working more closely with smallholder farmers, firms create opportunities to learn about
     potential environmental and social risks occurring along the supply chain. This early warning
     system allows firms to proactively respond to issues before they become crises and liabilities.

     Responding to Food Safety Concerns

     Contaminated foods cause about 1.5 billion illnesses and three million deaths per year
     worldwide. While the number of reported and documented incidents is much lower, the
     reputational risk for firms and the potential for economic losses are significant. Understanding
     and mitigating risks to food safety are priorities, and often legal requirements, for firms.

     Food contamination can occur during production, post-harvest, or processing. For example, a
     common food safety concern is unapproved or improperly used pesticides. Another concern
     is Aflatoxin, a carcinogen produced by mold that grows on improperly dried or handled crops.
     The toxin can also be transmitted to livestock through contaminated feed. In 2004, maize
     contaminated with Aflatoxin caused 317 cases of liver failure and 125 deaths in Kenya and
     presented a liability to both suppliers and buyers.

     Firms that engage with smallholders to develop traceable supply chains are better able to
     monitor all the steps involved in production, harvest, and processing. When problems are
     detected, such as improper crop drying that could result in mold growth and Aflatoxin
     formation, firms will already have systems in place to rapidly and effectively train farmers on
     improved practices.




12
IN PRACTICE   IMPACT OF FOOD SAFETY STANDARDS ON EXPORT-ORIENTED SUPPLY CHAIN IN KENYA2

              Kenyan exports of Nile perch to the European Union provide a notable example of efforts to comply with stricter
              food safety requirements in industrial countries. Although food safety requirements had evolved over the past
              two decades in their major markets, most notably the EU, most Kenyan exporters made little attempt to upgrade
              their hygiene standards. Likewise, the legislative framework of food safety controls and facilities at landing sites
              remained largely unchanged. Both exporters and the Kenyan government were forced to take action when the
              EU applied a series of restrictions to exports between 1997 and 2000. Processors responded by upgrading their
              hygiene controls, but some facilities closed reflecting the significant costs of compliance within the context of
              excess capacity in the sector. Remaining facilities upgraded their hygiene controls and made efforts to diversify
              their export base away from the EU. Legislation and control mechanisms were also enhanced. While hygiene
              facilities at landing beaches were improved, they still remain a major area of weakness.

              The Kenyan case illustrates the significant impact that stricter food safety requirements can have on export-
              oriented supply chains. In Kenya, most of the concerted effort to comply with food safety requirements was
              stimulated by the sudden loss of market access in a “crisis management” mode of operation. The challenges of
              the Kenya case illustrate the importance of responding to emerging food safety requirements in a proactive rather
              than a reactive manner.




                  THE CHALLENGES OF WORKING WITH SMALLHOLDERS COULD BE BUSINESS
                  OPPORTUNITIES

                  •	 Smallholders make up 85 percent of the world’s farmers and farms but own an average of just
                     two hectares of land. In Africa, smallholders account for 60 percent of agricultural land. For many
                     agribusinesses, working with smallholders is a necessity. Doing this work effectively can increase
                     sales of inputs, expand supply of crops, and reduce costs.
                  •	 Many smallholders lack access to advice, varieties, inputs, and finance. Providing these factors can
                     significantly increase smallholder yields.
                  •	 Many smallholders depend on insecure or volatile markets, making them vulnerable to food
                     insecurity. Firms can provide secure markets and incomes, allowing smallholder household to
                     increase investment in human and agricultural resources.
                  •	 Many smallholders farm land with uncertain or contested land titles. They have few incentives to
                     invest in their land through use of improved inputs. Firms can create incentives to adopt improved
                     agricultural practices by gaining the trust and allegiance of farmers over the long term.
                  •	 Social media allows rapid and extensive information sharing, creating both risks and opportunities
                     for agribusinesses. Poor practices by suppliers, such as clearing tropical forests or using child labor
                     to produce crops, can damage a firm’s reputation. Conversely, publicizing good practices, such as
                     training smallholders and assisting them with certification, can improve a firm’s reputation.




                                                                                                                                     13
     THE RISKS OF INVESTING IN SMALLHOLDER FARMERS
     Every investment carries a risk that the costs will outweigh the expected benefits. For agribusinesses,
     shifts in commodity prices and changes in weather patterns bring additional risk to investments
     aimed at improving supply. Working with smallholder farmers can also be a risk for firms.

     It is important to note that smallholder farmers are not a uniform group with a single risk
     profile. From region to region, and even within a single country, smallholder farmers and
     farms vary significantly in terms of capability and capacity, creating varying degrees of risk.
     Segmenting smallholders to evaluate risks and design engagement strategies is a best
     practice. Generally, however, firms face the following risks when working with smallholders:

     Side-Selling
     One of the greatest risks for off-takers is failing to recuperate the cost of their investment
     because farmers divert some or most of their increased productivity to other buyers, known
     as side-selling. The structure of the supply chain greatly affects the risk of side-selling. Risk
     is reduced in a “tight” supply chain where there are relatively few buyers and a high degree
     of supplier loyalty. In a “loose” supply chain, where many buyers exist and suppliers are
     fickle, investment is riskier because farmers are more likely to side-sell. The risk of side-selling
     also increases when farmers live on subsistence incomes or rent their land. When the threat
     of poverty is high, farmers cannot afford to consider the long-term benefits of building a
     relationship with a firm. Instead, their income strategy is to sell to the highest bidder.

     Chapters 4 and 6 present strategies to reduce side-selling by improving supplier loyalty.

     Farmers Fail to Adopt New Practices
     Another risk for firms is that farmers don’t adopt improved agricultural practices despite
     investments by the firm aimed at helping them do so. Non-adoption may occur when farmers
     are not sufficiently convinced that new practices will benefit them or when they cannot afford
     the new practices. Lack of access to financing and high interest rates can also contribute to
     the perceived high price tag of improved practices.

     The box, “Assessing Smallholder Constraints,” on the next page explores in detail the barriers
     to adoption that farmers may face. Strategies to address those constraints are presented in
     the implementation chapters (three through eight) of the handbook.

     Adoption Is Unsustainable for Farmers
     Related to the risk of non-adoption is the risk that the improved agricultural practices are
     not sustainable for smallholder farmers. While farmers initially may be enthusiastic about
     new practices, they ultimately may decide that practices aimed at increasing productivity are
     not cost-effective options for their businesses. For example, smallholders will reduce or stop
     using fertilizer if the required product and labor costs are higher than the income generated
     by the increased output. When adopting new inputs, smallholders often look for dramatic
     yield gains, partly because they do not measure their results closely enough to detect small
     gains. However, dramatic gains are rarely possible because smallholder yields are constrained
     by multiple factors that are difficult to address simultaneously. Efforts to incorporate farmers
     into a certification program run a similar risk. If farmers determine that the premium for
     certification is not enough to cover the additional labor requirements or more expensive
     inputs, they will discontinue the practices, and a firm will lose its investment.

     The implementation chapters of the handbook (chapters 3-8) highlight opportunities to align
     the incentives of firm and farmer to ensure the sustainability of an investment in smallholder
     supply chains.




14
ASSESSING SMALLHOLDER CONSTRAINTS CAN HELP ALIGN INCENTIVES TO PROGRAM GOALS

Ensuring that smallholder farmers adopt improved agricultural             LACK OF FARM RECORDS AND COLLATERAL
practices is a challenge even when the benefits of adopting new           Because most smallholders do not keep written records, their ability to
behaviors seem obvious to an outsider. Understanding smallholders’        accurately evaluate the benefits of new agricultural practices is reduced.
constraints when presented with new techniques can help firms             Even if yields increase, most improved practices require additional inputs
design interventions that increase the likelihood of success.             or labor which increases costs. Without the ability to compare costs and
                                                                          revenues, farmers may not be able to confidently assess whether their
LACK OF EDUCATION                                                         profitability has increased as a result of the improved practices. Without
Literacy and education levels in rural populations vary widely across     written records documenting the enterprise’s profitability, farmers
regions and within individual countries. Young men tend to have the       also face greater difficulty obtaining bank financing. This problem is
most formal education while women and older populations have less         compounded by a lack of land titles or other collateral.
education. Education levels influence farmers’ ability to capture and
understand training material. Higher levels of education correlate        Mitigating Strategy: Firms may consider including a farm
with a greater capacity to experiment with improved agricultural          management component, such as recordkeeping, within a larger
techniques and to appropriately assess risk.                              training package. Chapter 7 discusses farm management training
                                                                          techniques.
Mitigating Strategy: Adapting training to participants’ educational
levels can increase their ability to capture and retain knowledge.        LACK OF LABOR
Chapter 4 elaborates on strategies for adapting training.                 The area and intensity of production on small farms is highly
                                                                          dependent on the amount of labor the family can provide. New
LACK OF INFORMATION                                                       practices, which may increase yields or sustainability, often require
The gap between smallholders’ knowledge of agricultural practices         more labor. If the new practices increase revenue, farmers can hire
and the knowledge available at agricultural research institutions         casual labor to cover the extra work. However, farmers often lack
is huge. The main sources of agricultural information for many            the cash required to pay for extra labor until they sell their crops.
smallholders are other farmers and occasional visits from government      In addition, potential laborers in rural areas are often smallholders
or non-profit extension staff. While radio, television, SMS, video,       themselves, so they may not be available when the work needs to
and agricultural newspapers represent increasingly important              be done. These dynamics may lead smallholders to employ children.
information sources, they are not universal, and the information they
provide is not always sufficient.                                         Mitigating Strategy: A careful evaluation of increased
                                                                          requirements on farmers’ time can identify potential labor
Mitigating Strategy: In-depth market research carried out                 shortages before they arise. Firms might discuss the time
before program design and implementation will help firms                  demands with farmers to identify potential solutions including
identify farmers’ information gaps and respond to their needs.            community labor-sharing groups or shifts in household
Chapter 2 discusses farmer segmentation as a strategy for                 responsibilities. Chapter 8 suggests strategies to help firms
targeting training for farmers.                                           identify the time demands on both male and female participants.

LACK OF ACCESS TO HIGH-QUALITY INPUTS                                     RISK AVERSION
Few financial resources, poor technical knowledge, and physical           Smallholders tend to be highly risk averse and are often unwilling
distance conspire to inhibit smallholders’ ability to obtain and          to adopt new practices if the outcomes are uncertain or the benefits
effectively use high-quality inputs. Many smallholders, particularly in   take time to manifest themselves. Studies indicate that only 5 to
Africa, do not have a well-stocked agro-retailer within a reasonable      10 percent of smallholders are willing to take risks, and 50 to 75
distance. Even when inputs are accessible, the widespread existence       percent of smallholders are moderately to extremely risk-averse.
of counterfeits and poor-quality products reduces trust in the
products’ effectiveness.                                                  High risk aversion among smallholders makes sense when placed in
                                                                          economic context. Smallholder farmers face the same risks as large
Mitigating Strategy: Outgrower schemes and other models for               farms, including crop diseases, inadequate rainfall, flooding, high input
channeling inputs to farmers can help smallholders gain access            prices, and low crop prices. However, these risks impact smallholders
to quality inputs. When firms suspect that farmers might side-sell        and larger farmers differently. Most smallholders lack access to risk
part of their harvest, partnership models with input suppliers and        mitigation mechanisms, such as crop insurance and hedging. While this
financial institutions can transfer some of the risk away from the        is beginning to change in eastern and southern Africa, the insurance
off-taker. Chapter 6 discusses these options.                             is relatively expensive. In addition, the consequences of failure are




                                                                                                                                                       15
     ASSESSING SMALLHOLDER CONSTRAINTS CAN HELP ALIGN INCENTIVES TO PROGRAM GOALS (cont.)

     more severe for smallholders. In countries with limited social services,   NEGATIVE ATTITUDES TOWARD SUCCESS
     a reduction in farm production or revenue can lead to malnourishment       In theory, a successful demonstration by a lead farmer should
     and an inability to afford medical services or children’s’ education.      encourage neighboring farmers to adopt new production techniques.
     Risk taking has much greater consequences for smallholders lacking         In practice, however, cultural attitudes towards success vary. In some
     a financial or social safety net. Because of these consequences, firms     contexts, dramatic increases in production may provoke fatalism,
     that work with smallholders have a responsibility not to expose            envy, theft, or even accusations of sorcery. Because some farmers
     their suppliers or clients to excessive risks that could damage their      may also have other income-generating activities, they may not
     livelihoods. For example, new agriculture practices should be carefully    want to put additional labor into their farms. These dynamics may
     tested for efficacy before they are widely disseminated.                   dissuade farmers from seeking higher yields.

     Mitigating Strategy: Firms may encourage farmers to adopt                  Mitigating Strategy: Careful partnerships with farmer
     new strategies on a portion of their land so they can experience           leaders during implementation can highlight negative
     the practices’ efficacy before expanding to their entire plot.             community reactions that might emerge as a result of program
     Facilitating access to loans and crop insurance can also help              implementation. Chapter 4 offers insights into working with
     ensure that farmers have a financial safety net in case crops fail.        farmer leaders.
     The tools and strategies identified throughout this handbook are
     intended to reduce risk for farmers and support their adoption of
     good practices.




16
USEFUL RESOURCES
Collier, Paul and Stefan Dercon. African Agriculture in 50 Years: Smallholders in a Rapidly Changing
World? Presented at the FAO and UN Expert Meeting on How to Feed the World in 2050. Rome, Italy.
June 24–26, 2009, ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/012/ak983e/ak983e00.pdf
	
Conference on New Directions for Smallholder Agriculture. International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD). January 24–25, 2011, www.ifad.org/events/agriculture/

Dalberg. Catalyzing Smallholder Agricultural Finance. September 2012, www.dalberg.com/documents/
Catalyzing_Smallholder_Ag_Finance.pdf

Foley, J, N. Ramankutty, K. Brauman et al. “Solutions for a Cultivated Planet,” Nature 478 (October 20,
2011).

The Future of Small Farms. A research workshop jointly organized by the International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI), Overseas Development Institute (ODI) and the Imperial College, London. June
26–29, 2005, www.ifpri.org/sites/default/publications/sfproc.pdf

Guide to Developing Agricultural Markets and Agro-Enterprises, The World Bank, 2004,
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTARD/0,,contentMDK:20445349~pagePK:2100
58~piPK:210062~theSitePK:336682,00.html

Pretty, et al. 2010. “The Top 100 Questions of Importance to the Future of Global Agriculture.”
International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability 8(4).

Smallholder Value Chains, 2012. This is Africa, http://www.thisisafricaonline.com/Media-Library/Files/
AGRICULTURE-Smallholder-value-chains-Special-report-English-version


NOTES
1. Ramatu M. Al-Hassan, Daniel B. Sarpong, Akwasi Mensah-Bonsu, Linking Smallholders to Markets
(University of Ghana, 2006). Accessed via International Food Policy Research Institute website: http://
www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/gsspwp01.pdf

2. Spencer Henson and Mitullah Winnie, Kenyan Exports of Nile Perch: The Impact of Food Safety
Standards on an Export-Oriented Supply Chain (The World Bank, 2004). Accessed via The World Bank
website: http://econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK=544849&piP
K=64165421&menuPK=64166093&entityID=000009486_20040730093127




                                                                                                          17
18
CHAPTER 2
An Evidence-Based
Approach to Program
Design




                      G
    Why read this chapter?


    As with any investment, investing in smallholder
    supply chains requires a careful assessment of
    the costs, impacts, and external factors that may
    affect the project. Gathering and analyzing data
    on the sector, farmer suppliers, and potential
    environmental and social risks can help firms
    develop a program that comprehensively responds
    to smallholder constraints.




H
                                An Evidence-Based Approach to Program Design
                                No single model for strengthening smallholder supply chains applies universally. Different
                                commodities, origins, regions, smallholder producer groups, supply chain structures, and
                                retail market dynamics affect a project’s feasibility and effectiveness. Firms can increase the
                                likelihood of success through careful planning and program design.

                                This chapter lays the groundwork for a firm’s investment in smallholder supply chains with an
                                overview of program design. The chapter also presents tools and resources for collecting and
                                analyzing background information for a potential supply chain intervention. It then discusses
                                ways to organize that information into an effective program design.

                                Table 2.1 presents the two steps that are useful during the planning phase of smallholder
                                engagement. The first step is to collect information about the sector, supply chain, and
                                potential risks of engaging (or not engaging) with smallholder suppliers and customers. This
                                information provides the basis for the second step, during which firms analyze the data to
                                identify priority goals, develop a realistic timeline, evaluate the costs and benefits, and design
                                a strategy that achieves program goals.


Table 2.1. Knowledge and proper planning leads to effective program design.

                                                   PHASE I: PLAN AND DESIGN


 A                      B               C      Understand
                                                                   A    Prioritize goals
                                                                                           B                   C
        Perform a           Segment                                                            Analyze costs       Identify activities
                                              environmental              and estimate
      sector analysis        farmers                                                           and benefits         based on goals
                                              and social risk             timeframe

         STEP 1: COLLECT INFORMATION                                         STEP 2: ANALYZE AND DESIGN

                                STEP 1: COLLECT INFORMATION
                                A. Perform a Thorough Sector Analysis

                                Any supply chain investment begins with a thorough understanding of the supply chain and
                                the crop sector. For off-takers, this usually involves one crop, while input producers, financial
                                institutions, and training providers may need to consider multiple crops to best respond to
                                smallholder clients’ needs. For example, farmers may use a particular fertilizer blend for
                                several crops, or they may grow multiple crops that require financing. In such cases, it is useful
                                to analyze the value chains of several important crops.

                                Even an off-taker who has purchased a crop for many years may find that operational staff
                                lack a complete understanding of the sector. In particular, staff may not be aware of the
                                resources, such as improved varieties, new production techniques, and pest control measures,
                                available at national, regional, and international research institutions and universities. Input
                                manufacturers, such as seed companies, often do not understand the changing quality
                                requirements of crop buyers or the effects of climate change. In both cases, a better
                                understanding of the sector will enable more effective program design.




                                                                                                                                         19
                                      IFC, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and other organizations
                                      have developed tools that may be useful for firms interested in identifying potential
                                      interventions for improving smallholder supply chains. The USAID methodology, known as
     Find a guide for performing      sub-sector analysis, is a useful tool for understanding an entire crop sector, including the
     sub-sector analysis on our       firm and its competitors, as well as the subsector. The results of a subsector analysis can be
     website, www.farms2firms.org.    summarized in a map, as shown in figure 2.1. First, a subsector is broadly defined, beginning
                                      with relevant research institutions for inputs and ending with export or final consumers
                                      of domestic crops. The presence or absence of formal and non-formal financial services is
                                      another important input to analyze. At each stage, the number of farmers, micro-enterprises,
                                      or firms is estimated, along with the volume and value of inputs and crops they handle.

                                      Data for subsector analysis comes from interviews with participants at each stage of the value
                                      chain. Interviewees are asked about their role in the value chain, as well as their knowledge of
                                      the links above and below them. By asking the same questions of people at various points in
                                      the chain, an accurate map summarizing the sector can be developed. Government statistics
                                      can also be useful, although they should be cross-checked in the field.

                                      The subsector analysis helps to identify potential interventions and to determine whether the
                                      supply chain is “tight” with suppliers linked closely to off-takers or “loose” with significant
                                      competition between buyers. Points of leverage can also be identified. For example, if farmers
                                      are using outdated varieties, multiplying new planting material from a research institution
                                      could be an effective intervention that would not require extensive farmer training.

                                      IFC has developed a variation on subsector analysis designed to enable off-takers to evaluate
     IFC’s Supply Chain Diagnostic    their supply chains. This set of tools, called the Supply Chain Diagnostic, consists of a series
     tool can be found on our         of questions that firms can adapt to suit their supply chains. Table 2.2 provides an overview
     website, www.farms2firms.org.    of the tool.




     Figure 2.1. Map of an agricultural subsector.

                                        1 international institute
                                        for variety development


                                     1 national institute producing
                                            foundation seed


                                           1 seed company                     2 fertilizer companies


                                                              5 agro-wholesalers                                     100 agro-retailers


                                      500,000 farmers with < 2 Ha                          50,000 farmers with > 2 Ha                     3 plantation > 300 ha


                                          1,000 village collectors

                                                                                   100 town collectors and sorters (100)


                                     12 exporters of high-grade crops                     2 exporters of low-grade crops                   20 domestic buyers




20
                                   Table 2.2. Components of IFC’s supply chain diagnostic tool.
                                    Diagnostic      Purpose of diagnostic analysis
                                    component
                                    Firm            To assess the firm’s capacity to invest in the supply chain.

                                    Smallholder     To analyze farm-level productivity and the critical issues that impact it. This should help
                                    supplier        firms identify critical points at the farm level that need to be addressed in order to make
                                                    significant productivity gains.
                                    Post-harvest    To analyze the efficiency of the supply chain and help identify leakage/ value erosion points
                                    activities      that should be controlled to improve efficiency of the overall supply chain.
                                    Benchmarking    To analyze the lead firm’s supply chain productivity compared with regional, national, and
                                                    international productivity levels.
                                    Institutional   To understand the institutional context under which the supply chain operates and identify key
                                    mapping         stakeholders who have a significant role in productivity enhancement in the supply chain.



                                   B. Evaluate the Needs of Smallholder Farmers and Segment Smallholders
                                   Based on Individual Characteristics

                                   Firms can strengthen investments in a supply chain by first analyzing the needs and
                                   preferences of smallholder suppliers before designing and implementing a project. A robust
                                   understanding of smallholder suppliers and their families, including demographics, cultural
                                   practices, attitudes towards risk, and specific constraints, will ensure that a supply chain
                                   strengthening program addresses farmers’ unique needs and provides appropriate incentives.

                                   Segment Farmers
                                   In the past, firms have viewed smallholders as a single group with similar characteristics
                                   irrespective of geographic region. A more sophisticated approach is to segment smallholders
                                   in a supply chain and apply different approaches based on the particular characteristics of the
                                   farmer and farm that can influence program goals.

                                   Farmer segmentation identifies the varying capacity levels and constraints of farmer suppliers
Farmer segmentation helps firms
                                   in order to tailor a supply chain intervention that best meets their needs. Factors such as
tailor programs to the different
needs and capacities of their
                                   literacy, farming knowledge, and age should be considered. As reflected in the box on page
supplier farmers.                  22, field surveys are an important tool for segmenting farmers. For example, while the
                                   average farm size may be reported as being two hectares, in reality, some farms will be 0.5
                                   hectares and others will be more than five hectares. The differences in land size could impact
                                   the selection of the most cost-effective machinery and agricultural practices.

                                   Segmentation is a common practice in the retail industry and is becoming an important tool
                                   for input providers and off-takers. However, it requires a sophisticated understanding of the
                                   supply chain and potential improvements, as well as the capacity to implement different
                                   engagement strategies for different segments.




                                                                                                                                                     21
                                             FIELD SURVEYS PROVIDE ESSENTIAL DATA ABOUT SMALLHOLDER SUPPLIERS

                                             Surveys of a supply chain catchment area can be effective tools for segmenting a population of
                                             smallholder suppliers and identifying characteristics that will guide the development of a supply chain
                                             intervention. The survey may request the following information:

                                             •	 Name of farmer, village, and district

                                             •	 Age, gender, and number of household members

                                             •	 Highest grade attained by adults in household (men and women)

                                             •	 Ability to read and write (men and women)

                                             •	 Predominant language(s) spoken/written in household

                                             •	 Type of housing (thatch vs. metal roof, soil vs. cement floor and walls)

                                             •	 Productive and home assets (radio, bicycle, television, cell phone, motorbike, irrigation equipment, or
                                                walk-behind tractor).

                                             •	 Farm size—A sample of farms should be measured by pacing or with GPS to determine the accuracy
                                                of farm sizes provided by farmers during surveys.

                                             •	 Land tenure (legal tenure, traditional tenure, or leased)

                                             •	 Membership in farmer group or community association




                                          Align Incentives
                                          Supply chain interventions that guide smallholder farmers to sustainable, improved agricultural
                                          practices through a series of short-term welfare improvements will be most likely to succeed.
                                          While many firms have the resources and foresight for long-term planning, smallholders
     The logic for a “double bottom       generally look for immediate financial benefits when deciding whether to adopt new practices
     line” is simple—unless there are     or inputs. While longer-term benefits of environmental sustainability, such as maintaining soil
     tangible benefits for both parties   fertility or bio-diversity, can also factor into smallholder decision making, they are often heavily
     in the relationship, neither will    discounted. Farmers are more likely to adopt new practices related to input use, crop production,
     have an incentive to implement       and marketing if they are offered the right incentives and have help overcoming constraints.
     and sustain new practices.


                                          C. Assess Environmental and Social Risk

                                          Firms should include an assessment of environmental and social risks as part of an analysis of
                                          the investment potentials of a smallholder supply chain. Identifying environmental and social
                                          risks at the outset of a project allows the firm to proactively address potential concerns. For
                                          example, if sourcing from smallholders in a particular area carries the risk of purchasing crops
                                          grown with child labor, firms may mitigate the risk by assisting communities to construct
                                          schools close to the farms in order to facilitate school attendance.




22
                                   IFC investment or advisory services clients must meet a series of eight performance standards,
                                   the first of which is conducting an environmental and social risk assessment. Based on this
                                   assessment, IFC and the firm develop a plan for meeting the other standards, including labor
Details of the IFC performance     and working conditions and the sustainability standards most applicable to smallholder farmers.
standards and diagnostic tools
for assessing environmental and    Once the risks are understood, effective environmental and social risk management requires
social risk can be downloaded at   a clear understanding of the production and processing stages of the chain by either the
www.farms2firms.org.
                                   firm or proxies, such as third-party certification. At a more advanced level, firms may develop
                                   segregated supply chains, traceable back to individual suppliers.


                                   STEP 2: USE AN EVIDENCE-BASED APPROACH FOR PROGRAM DESIGN
                                   Background research on a potential smallholder supply chain investment becomes the basis
                                   for designing an effective engagement strategy with smallholder farmers. An engagement
                                   strategy includes: identifying priority intervention areas, estimating the amount of time needed,
                                   evaluating the costs and benefits, and identifying activities based on expected outcomes.


                                   A. Identify Priority Interventions and Timeframe

                                   Programs that focus on one intervention or a small number of interventions tend to be more
                                   successful than programs with too many goals. This handbook discusses five broad types of
                                   interventions: farmer aggregation in chapter 3, training and communication in chapter 4,
                                   providing certification and standards in chapter 5, increasing access to inputs in chapter 6,
                                   and improving farm management skills in chapter 7.
Pilot phases can be
more costly because                The best practice is to design program implementation to take place in three phases:
they lack the benefits             •	 Phase 1: Information collection, program design, cost-benefit analysis, training material
of scale, but they                    development, and baseline data collection; may take up to 12 months.
                                   •	 Phase 2: Pilot phase with limited scope; may take up to three years, depending on how
are an opportunity
                                      long it takes to achieve results.
to improve                         •	 Phase 3: Expansion phase; may take up to five years, depending on the number of farmers
implementation                        and crops.

and increase the                   Given the need to meet annual performance and budget targets, firms may be tempted to
likelihood of success.             shorten these phases. However, reducing these timeframes is risky, especially with tree crops
                                   that may take three years to begin producing a crop.

                                   The pilot phase is especially critical because it provides both the firm and the farmer with the
                                   opportunity to field test and fine-tune cost and benefit assumptions that were made during
                                   the design phase. Learning during the pilot phase also enables segmentation of the supply
                                   chain and provides the opportunity to create a well-trained and organized extension staff. The
                                   cost per farmer is likely to be higher during the pilot because approaches are not yet optimal,
                                   and the learning phase requires resources. This is justifiable as long as there is a concrete plan
                                   to reduce costs in the expansion phase.




                                                                                                                                        23
                                      B. Analyze the Costs and Benefits of Smallholder Engagement

                                      Firms should analyze the costs and benefits of smallholder engagement, just as they analyze costs
                                      and benefits before investing in a new piece of equipment. Costs can be divided into three categories:

                                      Start-up costs: These costs are associated with collecting data on the sector and supply
                                      chain, program planning, training material development, and the training of trainers.

                                      Pilot phase costs: Costs during this phase include costs per farmer per year for inputs, demonstration
                                      plots, field staff, vehicles and other logistics, written training materials, other forms of information
                                      dissemination, third-party certification costs, results measurement, and management.

                                      Expansion phase: In the expansion phase, cost per farmer should decrease because only the
                                      most effective interventions identified in the pilot phase are continued, and more efficient
                                      information delivery methods are used.

                                      The benefits of supply chain engagement range from more tangible:

                                      •	   Increased volumes of crops resulting from productivity gains
                                      •	   Increased volumes of crops resulting from greater supplier loyalty
                                      •	   Lower costs for procurement or input marketing
                                      •	   Lower processing due to greater on-farm sorting or processing
                                      •	   Increased sales of inputs, information, financial services, or training services
                                      •	   Higher-quality crops that can be sold for a premium price
                                      •	   Certified and/or traceable crops that can be sold for a premium price or open new markets

                                      To less tangible:

                                      •	   Reduced environmental and social risks
                                      •	   Reduced vulnerability to climate change
                                      •	   Improved brand image from providing support to smallholder farmers to improve their livelihoods
                                      •	   More sustainable land use, leading to stable production

                                      Benefits may differ depending on the length of the intervention. Table 2.3 details short-, medium-,
                                      and long-term benefits for different types of firms. The costs and benefits—and setting clear goals
                                      to reduce the costs and attain the benefits—should be completed by the end of the pilot phase.



     Table 2.3. The benefits of working with smallholder farmers depend on the investment’s time range and the business model.
                                  Short-term benefits                    Medium-term benefits               Long-term benefits
      Input manufacturers and     Increased sales                        More efficient distribution        Markets for new products designed
      suppliers                                                          through groups                     for smallholders
      Financial institutions      Large numbers of potential customers   Development of outgrower           -- Market for new financial products
                                                                         arrangements to facilitate         -- Loyalty among emerging medium-
                                                                         repayment                             scale farmers
      Agricultural information    Large numbers of potential customers,   Partnerships with off-takers or   Information needed to develop new
      and training providers      who can be reached via ICTs at low cost input suppliers who may pay for   products and services
                                                                          services
      Off-takers and processors   -- Greater production from the same    -- Traceability                    -- Stability of supply
                                     area                                -- Certification                   -- Increased supplier loyalty
                                  -- Better quality                      -- Reduced environmental and
                                  -- More efficient logistics               social risk




24
                                C. Use a Logical Framework to Identify Activities Based on Program Goals

                                The logical framework methodology is an effective tool for ensuring that there is a justifiable
                                causal link between proposed activities and expected outcomes. The framework identifies goals
                                and builds back to the activities required to reach those goals. At each step, the framework
                                specifies how success will be measured and identifies circumstances beyond the program’s control
                                that may prevent success. The result of this process can be summarized in a four-by-four matrix
                                called a logical framework, which is often shortened to log frame. As table 2.4 demonstrates,
                                the top row, goal, identifies broad impacts intended as a result of the proposed activity. The
                                second row, purpose, identifies the program’s single undertaking that will contribute to the goal.
                                It is important to include only one item in each row so there is no confusion about competing
                                priorities. The purpose, outputs, and activities rows should all be quantified and time bound. The
                                columns for indicators and verification explain how results will be measured. The assumptions
                                column only includes events that could influence program success, but are beyond the control of
                                program management.



                                   ORIGINS OF LOGICAL FRAMEWORKS

                                   Logical frameworks (log frames) were developed in 1969 for a USAID project to assist in effective
                                   program planning and results measurement. Although it is still relatively unknown in the private sector,
                                   versions of the logical framework are used by virtually every nongovernmental organization and donor
                                   in the development field.




                                Poor assumptions in a logical framework will still lead to poor results. However, the
                                methodology provides a step-by-step method for developing a program, and it summarizes
A manual for building logical   the results in an easy-to-explain format. Familiarity with log frames is a useful skill for firms
frameworks is available at      that work in partnership with nongovernmental development programs or that apply for
www.farms2firms.org.            donor funding. Chapter 9 provides guidance on selecting effective indicators and verifying
                                them in a convincing way.


                                Table 2.4. Sample log frame for a coffee off-taker.
                                              Summary                 Indicators              Verification             Assumptions
                                 Goal         Increase volume of      Metric tons             Purchase receipts
                                              coffee purchased        purchased
                                 Purpose      Increase productivity   Tons per hectare        Log books                -- There is no
                                              of coffee suppliers                             maintained by               drought
                                              from X to Y within                              farmers                  -- Coffee prices
                                              Z years                                                                     remain above X
                                 Outputs      -- X seedlings sold     -- Number of trees      -- Records of nursery
                                                 per year                sold                    owners
                                              -- Y trees pruned       -- Number of trees      -- Annual farm
                                                 correctly per year      pruned                  survey
                                 Activities   -- Establish X coffee   -- Number of         -- Weekly reports
                                                 seedling nurseries      nurseries            from field staff
                                              -- Train Y farmers to      established       -- Monitoring visits
                                                 prune correctly      -- Number of farmers    by supervisors
                                                                         trained




                                                                                                                                              25
     USEFUL RESOURCES
     A Field Manual for Subsector Practitioners: Tools for Microenterprise Programs: Nonfinancial Assistance
     Section, Haggblade, Steven and Matthew Gamser. Growth and Equity Through Microenterprise
     Investment and Institutions (GEMINI), November 1991.
     pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNABJ797.pdf

     Christen, P. and J. Anderson. Segmentation of Smallholder Households, Consultative Group to Assist
     the Poor (CGAP), May 7, 2013. www.cgap.org

     Guide for Developing a Logical Framework, Center for International Development and Training.
     University of Wolverhampton, www.hedon.info/docs/logical_framework-CentreForInternationalDevelop
     mentAndTraining.pdf

     International Finance Corporation: Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability,
     http://www1.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/ifc+sustainability/
     publications/publications_handbook_pps

     The Logical Framework, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), www.fao.org/WAIRdocs/x5405e/
     x5405e0p.htm

     Demographic and technical information on crops may be obtained from a variety of sources,
     either online or in person. These include:

     The Food and Agriculture Organization has national data on crop production, input use, and many
     other topics. FAO also provides summaries and links to national agricultural censuses, which provide
     agricultural data in greater depth.

     Most countries conduct an agricultural census every 10 years. The websites for national statistics
     departments may contain regional or district data. Visiting statistical department offices at national or
     regional levels in person may uncover additional information at greater levels of disaggregation.

     The World Bank website has easily accessible data covering more than 8,000 indicators for every
     country in the world. The site also has in-depth reports on the agricultural sectors of many countries.

     The land grant universities in the United States conduct and publish research on international
     agricultural development topics. The Collaborative Research Support Programs focus on specific crops
     and topics (www.crsps.net). Universities with useful areas of expertise include:

     •	   Iowa State University: farmer training and extension
     •	   Michigan State University: Africa, supermarkets, Famine Early Warning System, pulses, and cotton
     •	   University of Nebraska: sorghum and millet
     •	   Oregon State: aquaculture and water use
     •	   Pennsylvania State University: dairy
     •	   University of California at Davis: risk management for smallholders and horticulture
     •	   University of Georgia: peanuts
     •	   Virginia Polytechnic Institute: integrated pest management
     •	   Washington State University: rural livelihoods

     The CGIAR Centers and other research institutes, such as CIRAD in France, have information on
     smallholder production of most crops. Important CGIAR centers include the International Research
     Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, the International Food Policy Research Institute, the International
     Center for Tropical Agriculture and the International Rice Research Institute.

     Donor-funded agricultural development projects usually conduct baseline surveys. These may or may
     not appear online, but they can usually be obtained with an email or personal visit.




26
27
28
CHAPTER 3
Aggregation
Through Producer
Organizations




                   I
    Why read this chapter?


    Producer organizations provide an opportunity
    to efficiently market inputs, procure supply, and
    convey information between firms and smallholder
    farmers. The scarcity of capable producer
    organizations means that firms may need to invest
    in organizing farmers or building capacity of farmer
    groups or partner with organizations that specialize
    in this field.




J
Aggregation Through Producer Organizations
THE BUSINESS CASE FOR SUPPORTING FARMER AGGREGATION
The term aggregation describes the process of working with groups of smallholder farmers
rather than individual farmers. When discussing farmer aggregation, this handbook uses the
term producer organization because it includes small and large, as well as formal and informal
groups. There are many types of producer organizations, including farmer field schools,
rotating savings and credit associations, farmers’ associations, clubs, and cooperatives.

In rural regions of developing countries, as few as 20 or as many as 80 percent of households
are members of formal or informal organizations, depending on the country. Many of these
organizations support agricultural or financial activities and may be useful partners for
firms marketing inputs or procuring crops. The percentage of farmers belonging to formal
cooperatives is 7 percent in Africa, 19 percent in the Americas, 14 percent in Asia Pacific, and
16 percent in Europe. Despite their formal status, agricultural cooperatives in Africa and Asia
tend to lack effective management and resources.

Aggregating smallholder farmers into groups is both critical and challenging for agribusinesses
building efficient supply chains. Aggregation is critical because firms cannot deal one-on-one
with thousands of dispersed farmers, each producing small volumes. It is challenging because
farmer groups are lacking in most regions, and those that exist often have limited capacity.
Building new groups and raising capacity tends to be expensive and time consuming.

However, aggregation presents numerous cost-saving opportunities, including:

•	 Information dissemination: Aggregation reduces the cost of collecting and disseminating
   information for firms seeking certified crops or increased supplier productivity.

•	 Logistical support: Aggregation reduces logistical costs and may be a tool for improving
   quality. Producer organizations can also add value to crops through sorting, drying, storing,
   and other functions, depending on their capacity. However, groups that lack transport may be
   unable to procure crops from a broad geographic area. Firms may need to combine purchasing
   from groups with other procurement methods to ensure comprehensive supply from an area.

•	 Marketing and distribution: Aggregation can reduce marketing, distribution, loan-
   making, and servicing costs for firms marketing inputs or financial services to smallholders.




                                                                                                   29
         FARMERS WHO ARE AGGREGATED CAN HELP EXPAND THE PIE INSTEAD OF
         REQUIRING A GREATER SLICE OF IT

         When farmers join producer organizations, their ability to negotiate higher prices with buyers is enhanced
         because they control larger volumes of crops. Some firms may view this as a disadvantage of aggregation.
         However, this is a short-sighted view for three reasons:

         •	 Increased margins for producer organizations usually come from middlemen, whose services are not
            needed when farmers themselves aggregate crops.

         •	 Aggregation presents opportunities to improve quality during marketing and through cleaning and
            sorting, which can justify higher prices.

         •	 When farmers receive equitable prices, they are more likely to invest in their farms. This investment
            raises productivity, which benefits both farmer and firm. This inclusive business model creates
            sustainable enterprises over the short and long term, giving the next generation of smallholders an
            incentive to continue farming.




     CHALLENGES OF WORKING WITH PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS

     As with small businesses in general, many producer organizations fail in the first years. This is particularly true
     when donor-funded programs or governments have encouraged, or even forced, farmers to form organizations.
     Often, handouts, such as fertilizer, are given to groups, so there are few business incentives for the group to
     exist once the subsidy ends. Nepotism, corruption, and other forms of mismanagement are problems when
     members are not sufficiently involved in selecting and monitoring their organization’s leadership. Even with good
     management, producer organizations may lack financing or other critical inputs. High failure rates and limited
     effectiveness have given the term “cooperative” a negative connotation in many parts of the world.

     To procure significant volumes of crops, producer organizations usually need financing and infrastructure.
     Financing may be in the form of an advance from an off-taker or a loan from a financial institution. Infrastructure
     may range from a locally constructed building to a modern concrete or metal warehouse.

     Procuring perishable commodities, such as fruits, vegetables, or specialty coffee in cherry form, presents unique
     challenges. With these high-value crops, quality is evaluated at the time of purchase, and any post-harvest delay
     by a producer organization will degrade the quality of the product. In these cases, if producer organizations are
     procuring the crops, they must have vehicles and infrastructure, such as packing sheds, or firms must procure
     directly from individual farmers in spite of the cost.


     THE SPECTRUM OF PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS
     Producer organization capacity is often evaluated from the perspective and needs of the
     producer organization. This handbook proposes an alternative system that responds to the
     needs of agribusinesses. The system groups producer organizations into three tiers (see figure
     3.1) that differentiate their capacity to manage information and resources such as crops,
     inputs, or money.




30
      Figure 3.1. Sample classification system for producer organization (PO) based on the needs of an off-taker.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •	 PO markets inputs and/or procures crops using
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       resources from outside the organization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A                                                                                                                         •	 PO is legally registered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •	 PO has a storage facility and other assets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •	 PO maintains auditable business records
Sophistication




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •	 PO engages in collective business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B                                                                                                                      •	 PO procures crops using internal resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •	 PO maintains some business records


                                                                                                  • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                                  • PO has a written membership list                                                        • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                                   • PO has a written membership list                                              • PO has a written membership list
                                                                                                  • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                               • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                     • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                                • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                           • PO has evidence of regular meetings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 PO has a written membership list
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                          • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                          • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                 • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list
                                                          • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                       • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                              • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •	 PO has evidence of regular meetings

                  • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                                        • PO has a written membership list                                                                  • PO has a written membership list                                                                • PO has a written membership list                                              • PO has a written membership list                                                                   • PO has a written membership list                                              • PO has a written membership list
                  • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                     • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                               • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                             • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                           • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                                                • PO has evidence of regular meetings                                           • PO has evidence of regular meetings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Prevalence


      Well-defined categories are useful because they allow firms to map and identify producer organizations based on their capacity. If capacity
      development is necessary, categories may be used to chart progress.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Class C Producer Organizations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Class C organizations are farmer groups or assemblies (often informal) that have only basic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      capacity to manage information. An example is a group of farmers that attends regular training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sessions on certification or improving productivity. Another example would be a milk purchase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      point and chilling facility owned by a dairy. Although the milk may come from individual farmers,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the purchase point acts as a hub where trainings are held and information is disseminated.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      By gathering in one location, Class C organizations provide the firm with an efficient venue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      for disseminating information about techniques to improve productivity and certification
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      requirements. Firms can also use these groups to collect information on farming practices.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Similarly, an input provider or financial institution might explain a new product to the group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      of farmers, rather than to individuals. At this level of organization, it is not necessary for group




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TRADITIONAL COMMUNITY GROUPS ARE BASIC PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Water user groups are a specialized type of producer organization that date back thousands of years. These
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        organizations divide limited irrigation, livestock, or drinking water between families according to cultural
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        norms or other systems. Members are allowed to open a canal to their fields for a set period of time or draw a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        certain number of buckets a day from a communal These groups could be leveraged as Class C organizations..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        31
                                        members to have a shared purpose or even to trust one another. Since they are externally
                                        driven, these groups tend to exist only as long as useful information is being provided.

                                        Class C producer organizations can assist firms by:

                                        •	 Providing a central location for information transmission
                                        •	 Building and strengthening loyalty among suppliers
                                        •	 Identifying farmer leaders to support future interventions

                                        Class B Producer Organizations

                                        Class B producer organizations operate as small enterprises, collectively managing resources
                                        belonging to group members. Depending on the situation, the group might manage inputs, crops,
                                        savings, land, or water. Many such producer organizations have only 20 to 30 members, often from
                                        a single village. Their relatively small size means that aggregation is beneficial but may not lead to
                                        significant savings in procurement because the volumes remain too low to gain much efficiency.

                                        Class B groups may be formally registered with a bank account in the group’s name or tenure over
                                        a plot of land. However, formalization may matter less to the firm than the group’s cohesiveness.
                                        Collective management of resources requires trust in the group’s leadership and trust in one another.
                                        It also requires a shared vision of the group’s business plan and overall purpose. These elements of
                                        group dynamics are sometimes termed “cohesion” because cohesive groups have a shared vision
                                        and can take action together. Figure 3.2 compares the types of groups more likely to demonstrate
     Producer                           group cohesion. Strong producer organizations often develop from religious organizations because
     organizations are                  members of the same religion generally trust each other and share a common outlook.

     most useful to firms               Class B producer organizations can assist firms by providing the services of Class C
     when they generate                 organizations plus:

     bulk purchase of                   •	   Pooling resources to purchase inputs in bulk
     inputs and provide                 •	   Sharing labor to grow crops on individual or communal land
                                        •	   Combining harvested crops to facilitate transport and marketing
     crop marketing                     •	   Saving money as a group
     services.                          •	   Allocating and scheduling drinking or irrigation water use




     Figure 3.2. Group cohesion in producer organizations.




     Group cohesion typically                      Traditional Leadership                                        Democratically
     develops through traditional                       Structures                     Groups that             Formed Organizations
     leadership structures or through                                               form in response
     democratic processes.
                                             •	 May require less outside          to shared needs that        •	 May be more flexible
                                                support to develop              can be resolved through          and dynamic
                                             •	 May have difficulty            collective action are more     •	 May require more time
                                                 incorporating into more         likely to demonstrate             to reach decisions
                                                   complex aggregation                cohesiveness.
                                                     structures




32
     “SECOND-TIER” ORGANIZATIONS MAY FIT THE CLASS A
     CATEGORIZATION FOR FIRMS.

     The development community often refers to “second tier” organizations to describe networks
     of agricultural cooperatives or associations. The terminology “second-tier” may suggest that the
     organization would belong in Class B. However, according to this handbook’s methodology, using well-
     established, business-oriented cooperatives would likely meet the criteria for Class A organizations.




Class A Producer Organizations

Class A producer organizations can support supply chain efficiency and reduce the costs of
marketing inputs and purchasing crops. They do so in part by managing external resources and
coordinating farmer members throughout the production process. This role is similar to the
role of a typical middleman because the producer organizations earn a margin from trading.
In some cases, a number of grassroots producer organizations join together to increase input
and crop volumes. These groups of producer organizations have been called “depots” or
“fora.” In other cases, individual producer organizations (or groups of organizations) receive
loans from financial institutions or advances from off-takers for crop purchases.

Class A organizations are likely to be formally registered and actively operating in markets.
Nevertheless, the organizations still have some business development needs. The cohesion of
Class B groups—trust in leaders, trust in other members, and a shared purpose—is required
to an even greater degree in Class A producer organizations. In addition, Class A groups
need systems for managing cash, crops, and inventory. They also need time to develop these
systems, establish a track record, and build trust with outside parties.

Class A producer organizations can assist firms by providing the services of Class B and C
organizations plus:

•	   Aggregating crops from a significant geographic area
•	   Managing loans to purchase inputs that might then be resold to other farmers
•	   Taking advances from off-takers or loans to purchase from members and non-members
•	   Coordinating post-harvest processing, drying, storage, and transport
•	   Improving traceability to smallholder farms
•	   Reducing side-selling through group cohesion
•	   Facilitating fair trade certification, which requires crop purchases through formal producer
     organizations




     WIDESPREAD COMMUNITY BENEFITS FROM PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS

     The farmers who belong to producer organizations benefit from access to information and higher prices due
     to increased volume, value-added processing, and brand development. Producer organizations can also earn
     margins by procuring crops from non-members and reselling them to larger firms. When producer organizations
     procure crops from their neighbors, the non-members benefit from increased market access. However, prices
     tend to be competitive for the area, reflecting the margin earned by the producer organization.

     Producer organizations may also provide social services, such as road repair or construction of health clinics,
     that benefit the wider community. Cooperatives that are certified by fair trade organizations receive social
     premiums, which are used to fund community initiatives.




                                                                                                                       33
                   SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES FOR BUILDING
                   EFFECTIVE SUPPLY CHAINS WITH PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS
                   In most countries, the majority of smallholders belong to some sort of producer organization.
                   It is likely that a number of Class C or B producer organizations are present in given a region,
                   but they may fail to meet a firm’s expectations. Even the capacity of legally registered Class
                   A cooperatives can be too low for a firm’s needs. If a firm only needs the organization as a
                   means of transmitting information, such as agronomy advice or certification requirements, the
                   capacity of existing groups may suffice. If however, the firm expects the producer organizations
                   to manage advances, bulk crops, or process crops, additional capacity may be needed. For
                   example, firms cannot transfer payment for crops electronically, which is a common assumption,
                   if the producer organization with which it partners lacks a bank account and the capacity to
                   manage one. Existing producer organizations may also have gaps in coverage, with geographic
                   areas in which farmers do not belong to any group. These farmers may be selling their crops to
                   collectors, taking the product out of the supply chain and impeding certification efforts.

                   Building the capacity of producer organizations to be useful partners to firms is time
                   consuming and expensive. However, firms can successfully undertake this process, especially
                   in tight supply chains where a central processing mill creates a ready market.




     IN PRACTICE   BUILDING THE CAPACITY OF PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS IN THE OIL PALM SECTOR1

                   PT Hindoli, a subsidiary of Cargill Tropical Palm Holdings, is purchasing oil palm fresh fruit bunches from
                   8,880 independent smallholders located near its mill and plantation in South Sumatra. This is a specialized
                   form of outgrower scheme called “nucleus/plasma.” The firm has 11 field staff members who work directly
                   with 17 farmers’ cooperatives. This team provides training on agronomy, organizational development, financial
                   management, human resources, and communications through the cooperative structure. PT Hindoli is also
                   supporting the cooperatives to become certified by the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil and to receive the
                   more complex International Sustainable Carbon Certification.




                   Develop Partnerships to Establish and Build Producer Group Capacity

                   Building the capacity of Class C organizations to Class B or A levels usually requires training
                   and mentoring over two or three production and marketing cycles. Firms may find the cost
                   of extended training prohibitive, especially when combined with other supply chain activities,
                   such as crop procurement, certification, and productivity training. Effective development of
                   producer-organization capacity requires trainers with business development skills that typical
                   agricultural extension agents may not possess. In addition, field staff often have multiple
                   responsibilities including crop purchase, certification management, and farmer training.
                   Building the capacity of producer organizations is relatively complex, so it may not be possible
                   to task field staff with this additional responsibility. Conversely, employing dedicated staff to
                   support the development of producer organizations is costly.

                   Because of these constraints, many firms find that partnering with third parties, such as local and
                   international national governmental organizations or the government, is an effective solution. Figure
                   3.3 presents the advantages and disadvantages of each. International organizations or NGOs using
                   donor funds can support a firm’s efforts to increase the capacity of a producer organization. In the
                   most successful examples, the firms coordinate closely with the NGOs. However, some firms have
                   built supply chains based on producer organizations without the assistance of NGOs and donors.




34
Figure 3.3. Advantages and disadvantages of partnering with third parties.

                                                                                                                            GOVERNMENT
              EXISTING NGOS                                             NEW NGO
                                                                                                                           EXTENSION STAFF

  +    Expertise in producer organization
                                                         +      Goals of organization can be
                                                                                                               +     Linkage to national agriculture
                                                                                                                     development program
       development                                              aligned with firm


  +    Training materials already
       developed                                         -      Lack of track record can make
                                                                fundraising difficult
                                                                                                               -     Staff may lack capacity in producer
                                                                                                                     organization development

  -    May not share firm’s priorities
                                                                                                               -     Goverment development of
                                                                                                                     cooperatives has a poor history
  -    Firm has no control over NGO
       funding




                                         Best practices for collaboration between firms and third parties:

                                         •	 Develop a memorandum of understanding
                                         •	 Defining roles and responsibilities before a project’s launch can safeguard against
                                            misunderstandings.
                                         •	 Agree on common policies regarding critical issues
                                         •	 Firms and third parties should discuss the sanctions for side-selling and non-repayment of
                                            loans prior to entering into an agreement.
                                         •	 Agree on a uniform scale for benchmarking the capacity of Producer Organizations
                                         •	 Determine the producer organization’s performance benchmarks together before the
                                            program starts.
                                         •	 Base benchmarks in realistic assumptions of future performance and justifiable reasoning
                                            based on firm’s needs.

                                         Build Trust with Clear, Sequential Steps That Develop the Relationship

                                         Strategies at the operational level can increase efficiency, reduce costs, and build long-term
                                         relationships that benefit the firm, partner NGOs, and smallholder farmers. The first step for
                                         doing so includes building trust between the firm and farmers, as illustrated in figure 3.4.




        IN PRACTICE                      SOURCING ORGANIC COTTON THROUGH PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS

                                         Solidaridad, a nongovernmental organization that specializes in support to producer organizations, is partnering
                                         with off-takers of organic and fair trade cotton in Senegal, Tanzania, Mali, and India. The firms provide ginning
                                         and markets for the high-value fiber, while Solidaridad provides agronomic training in organic production
                                         techniques and capacity building to the producer organizations.

                                         In India, the program is working with a producer organization called the Chetna Organic Farmers Association, which
                                         has more than 10,000 members. They are organized in three levels—730 self-help groups at village level, which
                                         form nine cooperatives, which are, in turn, federated into one apex organization.




                                                                                                                                                              35
              IN PRACTICE                   A FIRM’S LONG-TERM PERSPECTIVE DEVELOPS SUPPLIER LOYALTY

                                            In southeast Asia, Cooperative Business International has formed joint venture companies with cooperatives for
                                            the procurement and export of coffee and spices. These cooperatives have approximately 500,000 smallholder
                                            members. At the start of the process, CBI provides resources to create joint ventures, including working capital,
                                            logistics, and processing facilities, and usually owns a minimum of 51 percent of the JV shares. Over a number
                                            of years, the cooperatives purchase shares, eventually reaching 49 percent. During this process, CBI and its sister
                                            organization, the not-for-profit National Cooperative Business Association, provide mentoring and technical
                                            assistance to the cooperative and joint venture staff. This approach has increased productivity, built supplier
                                            loyalty, and curbed side-selling.




     Figure 3.4. Building trust allows partnerships between producer organizations and firms to begin taking on risk.



       PHASE 1                                              PHASE 2                                              PHASE 3
       ESTABLISHING TRUST                                   ASSUMING RISK                                        SHARING INCENTIVES

       A firm sends a truck to a producer                   Producer organization uses its own capital           Firm and producer organization share the
       organization on a particular date, and               to buy member and non-member crops.                  margin between the commodity’s price at
       members deliver their crops for purchase.                                                                 farm gate and export. More traceability
                                                            Producer organization obtains bank loan to           and higher quality can increase export
                                                            buy member and non-member crops.                     prices and the margins accruing to firm and
                                                                                                                 producer organization.
                  Trust the truck will                      Firms advance funds to producer
          appear on time                                    organizations to purchase farmers’ crops at
                                                            agreed prices.


                                                                                                                          Producer Organizations
                                                                        Risk that firm will not
                     Trust the agreed-upon                    buy at agreed-upon price or
          price will be paid                                  quantity                                                    Firms



                 Trust the crop will
                 be the agreed- upon                                    Risk of
          amount and quality                                  decapitalization




                                                                        Risk that the
                                                              organization can’t get another
                                                              loan or loses its collateral



                                                                      Risk that the producer
                                                                      organization will
                                                              not meet the terms of the
                                                              agreement for volume or
                                                              quality




36
Best practices for using producer organizations to procure crops include:

•	 Begin with groups that have already conducted business activities together, such as Class
   B organizations.
•	 Use both traditional and democratically organized groups, which can be effective at village level.
•	 Establish written agreements with producer organizations specifying crop quality and
   price (or premium above prevailing market price, depending on the value added by the
   producer organization).
•	 Establish a dispute resolution process and clear consequences for not fulfilling agreements.
•	 Encourage producer organizations to keep written records so annual profit/loss statements
   can be prepared.
•	 Use automated systems, such as Frontline SMS, eSoko, and FarmForce, to collect and
   disseminate information about prices and crop volumes.
•	 Encourage financial institutions to provide loans or basic supplies and equipment that enhance
   the producer organization’s ability to process and procure crops. These supplies may include
   empty grain bags, UV-resistant film for solar crop dryers, weighing scales, moisture meters,
   crop fumigants, and cement to seal the floors of traditional warehouses. In many countries,
   there are donor or government funds available to construct or improve rural crop storage
   facilities. Firms may assist producer organizations to apply for these resources. Providing
   producer organizations with empty grain bags is also a good strategy to reduce side-selling.

Loans Can Help Producer Organizations Upgrade Their Capacity

Producer organizations may be good customers for loans if they are legally registered, have
written records, and can demonstrate strong relationships with input firms or buyers. These
may be seasonal loans to individual members for crop production or shorter-term loans to the
group for crop marketing. In the case of individual loans, the business plan might require a
guarantee in the event of default.

Producer organizations that work with livestock are also good customers for loans. Heifer
Project International has developed a successful methodology in which loans of goats, cattle,
and other livestock are repaid with offspring, which are passed to other members of the
group to continue the cycle. Another successful model involves loans of young cows, which
are fattened by group members and then sold by the group, with the increased value shared
between the farmers and producer organization. For dairy producer organizations, loans to
construct milk-collection and chilling facilities can improve quality by reducing transport time
and cooling the fresh milk more quickly.

When producer organizations receive loans as a group, it is a good practice to require a
cash contribution, usually 10 percent of the loan amount. Typically, these funds come from
previous business activities or members’ savings. This co-guarantee can be required in order
to receive a loan, and it can be use as a guarantee against side-selling.

When producer organization members receive production loans, good practice includes
providing a combination of cash and inputs to ensure that the correct inputs are used and
to provide living expenses during the growing season. Loans should follow standard good
practices for micro-finance rules, such as using a smaller peer group to validate the need for
the inputs/loans and to ensure their utilization.




                                                                                                        37
                                         CONSIDERATIONS WHEN DECIDING ON ENGAGEMENT STRATEGIES
                                         Determine Firm Requirements for Aggregation

                                         Not all firms have the same requirements for smallholder aggregation. Depending on the
                                         firm’s presence in a region, the sector in which it works, and the quality requirements it
                                         seeks, firms may wish to work more or less closely with smallholder suppliers. During a supply
                                         chain analysis, as discussed in chapter 2, most agribusinesses discover that aggregating
                                         smallholders will reduce costs and provide other benefits. By taking that analysis one step
                                         further and specifying the class of producer organization the firm should work with, firms
                                         can then identify potential partners in the field.



                                            FARMER TRAINING AND PRODUCER ORGANIZATION CAPACITY BUILDING
                                            REQUIRE SIMILAR INVESTMENTS

                                            The opportunities and costs of increasing the capacity of producer organizations are similar to those
                                            encountered when improving communication with smallholder farmers. For both activities, firms must
                                            identify and manage extension agents, work with farmer leaders, and leverage print and ICT media to
                                            disseminate a message. The two activities are also interrelated in that producer organization capacity can
                                            strengthen the impact of messaging to farmers. Given the overlapping structures and outcomes, firms
                                            may choose to develop the capacity of farmers and farmer groups at the same time. Chapter 4 provides
                                            an in-depth exploration of farmer training and other communication channels.



                                         For example, analysis of an Indonesian cocoa supply chain revealed that productivity was
                                         extremely low due to limited and incorrect fertilizer use. To resolve these problems, the cocoa
                                         firm partnered with a bank and a fertilizer manufacturer to increase cocoa farmer productivity.
                                         As the initiative was designed, a number of requirements for producer organizations were
                                         identified. These requirements are summarized in table 3.2.


                                         Table 3.2. An outgrower scheme for cocoa that relies on producer organizations.

                                             FERTILIZER MANUFACTURER                          FINANCIAL INSTITUTION            COCOA EXPORTER

                                           ABC                                                                           •	 Hold monthly meetings on
                                                                                              •	 Hold meetings for GAP
                                                                                                                            financial literacy
     The top row represents firm
                                                      • PO has a written membership list
                                                      • PO has evidence of regular meetings




                                                                                                 training
                                                                                                                         •	 Hold meetings for
     requirements that any class                                                                                            certification
     of producer organization can
     satisfy because they only involve
     information collection and
     dissemination. The second row
     represents activities involving
                                            AB                     •	 Distribute fertilizer   •	 Do not sell to other    •	   Receive payment as a group
     group management of cash,                                        to members from a          buyers                  •	   Deliver cocoa to buying unit
     fertilizer, and cocoa, which                                     central point                                      •	   Do not sell to other buyers
     require the group cohesion and                                                                                      •	   Grade cocoa before sale
     trust of a Class B organization.


                                             A




38
                                   A second example illustrated in Table 3.3 shows the requirements of three firms in two sesame
                                   supply chains in Mozambique. One supply chain is for certified sesame, and the other is for
                                   non-certified sesame.


                                   Table 3.3. Using producer organizations to procure sesame.

                                                                    FINANCIAL INSTITUTION        NON-CERTIFIED                  CERTIFIED SESAME
                                                                                               SESAME EXPORTER                     IMPORTER

                                                 •	 Develop business plans and
                                       ABC
                                                    loan applications                                                       •	 Obtain and hold fair trade
                                                 •	 Be legally registered and open          •	 Determine locations of          and organic certification
                                                 • PO has a written membership list
                                                 • PO has evidence of regular meetings




In this example, the
groups needed to be more                            bank account                               sesame to purchase           •	 Hold meetings on
sophisticated because they                       •	 Hold meetings to understand                                                certification requirements
are managing bank loans                             loan provisions
and advances for crop
purchases. The last row                AB                                                                                   •	 Receive second payment
represents needs that only                                                                                                     after delivery
Class A organizations can                        •	 Provide 10 percent loan                 •	 Receive payment as a group
                                                                                                                            •	 Grade and bag sesame
fulfill.                                            guarantee                               •	 Grade and bag sesame
                                                                                                                            •	 Hire a manager for logistics
                                                                                                                               and export



                                        A        •	 Manage loans of up to
                                                                                            •	 Manage cash advances
                                                                                               to purchase sesame from
                                                    $5,000 for crop purchases
                                                                                               farmers outside group




                                   Assess the Capacity of Producer Organizations

                                   Once a firm has determined its requirements, the next step is to assess, or benchmark, the
Firms interested in benchmarking   capacity of existing groups to fulfill those requirements. The most practical way to do this is
producer organizations can visit   to interview groups in the potential catchment area about their past activities and examine
www.farms2firms.org for terms      any documentation they possess.
of reference that can be adapted
to collect information on
producer organization capacity     For firms interested in engaging outside expertise to evaluate producer organization capacity,
and improve supply chain           organizations that have developed systems to evaluate producer organizations are listed in
efficiency.                        the “Useful Resources” section of this chapter. The cost of the evaluation may be covered by
                                   the producer organization itself, partner agribusinesses, or external organizations.




         IN PRACTICE               AN APPROACH TO ANALYZING PRODUCER ORGANIZATION CAPACITY

                                   Scopeinsight, a Netherlands-based firm, has developed an innovative system for independent assessment of
                                   producer organization capacity. The assessment creates rating profiles for agricultural producer organizations
                                   based on internal management, operation, financial administration, supply, market, sustainability, external
                                   risks, enablers, and financial performance. Producer organizations, financial institutions, and off-takers have
                                   commissioned assessments. Self-assessment tools are under development for less complex producer organizations.




                                                                                                                                                              39
     USEFUL RESOURCES
     ACDI/VOCA, www.acdivoca.org
     Technical expertise with producer organizations.

     Agriterra, www.agriterra.org/en
     Technical expertise with producer organizations.

     Communication Cooperative International, www.cci.coop/home.html
     Expertise in communication with producer organizations.

     Contract Farming Resource Center, www.fao.org/ag/ags/contract-farming/en/
     FAO-sponsored source of information on contract farming.

     Esoko, www.esoko.com
     Tools for communicating with producer organizations, such as scouting polling via SMS.

     Farmer Organization Support Center for Africa (FOSCA), www.agra-alliance.org/section/work/fosca_
     prog
     Information and expertise with producer organizations. Initiative of the Alliance for a Green Revolution
     in Africa (AGRA).

     Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), www.fao.org
     Information on producer organizations.

         Annual report on FAO activities in support of producers’ organizations and agricultural
         cooperatives, 2011, http://www.copac.coop/FAO%20annual%20reportfinalFeb2012.pdf

         Building Networks for Market Access: Lessons Learned from the Rural Knowledge Network Pilot for
         East Africa, 2011, www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2088e/i2088e00.pdf

     Frontline SMS, www.frontlinesms.com
     Tools for communicating with producer organizations.

     Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services, www.g-fras.org
     Source of expertise on producer organization training.

     International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), www.ifpri.org
     Economic and technical research on producer organizations.

         Contracting Out of Poverty: Experimental Approaches to Innovation in Agricultural Markets with
         Small Farmers, http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/mtidspotlight_contracting.pdf

     International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), www.ifad.org
     Information on producer organizations.

         IFAD and Farmers’ Organizations Partnership on Progress: 2008 to 2009, www.ifad.org/
         farmer/2010/doc/prgrep_e.pdf

     INADES Formation, www.inadesfo.net/Notre-approche-d-intervention.html?Lang=en
     Organization active with producer organizations in West Africa.

     Land O’Lakes, http://www.idd.landolakes.com/
     Technical expertise with dairy producer organizations.

     Mobile Transactions Zambia Limited, www.mtzl.net
     E-money technologies linking firms and producer organizations.

     National Cooperative Business Association (NCBA) and Cooperative League of USA (CLUSA), www.ncba.
     coop
     Technical expertise with producer organizations.




40
Oiko Credit, www.oikocredit.org
Financial institution providing credit to small and medium enterprises and cooperatives

Overseas Cooperative Development Council.
A group of nine U.S.-based organizations active in producer organization and cooperative development.

    Measuring Cooperative Success: Measurements for Tracking Indicators of Cooperative Success
    (METRICS), 2009, www.ocdc.coop/metrics.html

    Cooperatives: Pathways to Economic, Democratic and Social Development in the Global Economy,
    2007, www.ocdc.coop/pdf/coop_pathways_report.pdf

    Enabling Cooperative Development: Principles for Legal Reform, 2006, www.ocdc.coop/pdf/
    enabling_coop_dev_english.pdf

Oxfam. www.oxfam.org
Nongovernmental organization providing producer organization training.

Responsability, www.responsability.com
Financial institution providing credit to producer organizations.

Root Capital, www.rootcapital.org
Financial institution providing credit to producer organizations.

Scope Insight, www.scopeinsight.com
Benchmarking system for producer organizations.

Shared Interest, www.sharedinterest.org
Financial institution providing credit to producer organizations.

Solidaridad, www.solidaridadnetwork.org
Dutch organization and network providing producer organization training.

Triodos, www.triodos.com
Financial institution providing credit to producer organizations and intermediaries.



NOTES
1. Anthony Yeow, Committing to Being World-Class Smallholders, Case Study 1: PT Hindoli
Smallholders’ Relentless Pursuit of World-Class Achievements (PT Hindoli and Cargill Tropical Palm
Holdings, 2012). Accessed via Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil website: Http://rt10.rspo.org/
ckfinder/userfiles/files/P5_4%20Anthony%20Yeow%20Presentation.pdf




                                                                                                        41
42
CHAPTER 4
Effective Training
and Communication
Strategies
for Changing
Smallholder Behavior




                       K
    Why read this chapter?


    When firms work effectively with smallholders,
    information flows in both directions. Information
    channels include field staff, written training
    materials, and information and communication
    technologies. Selecting the right channel, or
    combination of channels, can achieve the desired
    results at an acceptable cost.




L
Effective Training and Communication Strategies
for Changing Smallholder Behavior
THE BUSINESS CASE FOR FARMER TRAINING AND OTHER FORMS OF
COMMUNICATION
Businesses seeking to improve quality, traceability, and scale along their supply chain can do
so by strengthening their communication channels with farmer suppliers. In traditional supply
chains, off-takers purchase crops from independent middlemen and collectors, who can be
two or more links removed from the farm gate. Although this supply chain strategy requires
little investment, it poses four problems:

•	 Off-takers have little leverage to improve crop quality, especially when problems originate
   on the farm. Because they are not interacting directly with farmers, off-takers cannot
   incentivize suppliers to improve farming and post-harvest techniques or to resolve disputes.

•	 Off-takers have limited means to comply with traceability standards. Many firms in the
   food industry demand full traceability to ensure environmental and social sustainability
   standards.

•	 In traditional supply chains, high-quality output is mixed with low-quality output from
   thousands of farms, often with minimal tracking. By the time crops reach middlemen and
   off-takers, the product requires expensive sorting to meet quality standards.

•	 With layers of collectors between themselves and smallholders, off-takers face difficulties
   in providing inputs and technical advice to increase productivity.

Each of these problems emerges because traditional supply chains lack essential communication
channels between off-takers and farmers.




                                                                                                  43
                                         SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES IN FARMER TRAINING
                                         The types of communication that supply chain managers use to transmit and collect
                                         information affects the frequency of communication, its quality, and its reach among farmer
                                         suppliers. These communication channels can be broadly grouped into three categories:

                                         •	 Face-to-face interactions between firm or partner staff and farmers
                                         •	 Written materials such as manuals, brochures, and product labels
                                         •	 Information and communication technologies such as radio, Internet kiosks, tablet
                                            computers, video, and cell phones

                                         Effective communication strategies will likely use a combination of channels, with one
                                         reinforcing the other, as seen in figure 4.1.


     Figure 4.1. One-way and two-way communication channels between firms and farmers.

     Communication methods
     that relay information from                                                      Face-to-face interactions
     firm to farmer and back to                                                                                                         Off-takers
     firm may be more useful than                                                         Written materials                               Input
     communication that goes just               Farmers           SMS texting and mobile applications, Internet, call-in facilities.    suppliers
     one way. Combining several                                                                                                         Financial
     communication channels can                                                           Radio, TV, videos                            institutions
     reinforce messaging while also
     ensuring that there is a feedback
     loop between firm and farmer.


                                         The amount and complexity of communication increases as supply chains become stronger
                                         and more developed. Basic supply chains may transmit delivery and payment information,
                                         while complex supply chains communicate information on crop prices, traceability, training
                                         on improved agricultural practices, certification data, product specifications, finance
                                         opportunities, and the weather. Communication along complex supply chains may also flow
                                         in both directions, from firms to farmers and from farmers to firms. Figure 4.2 maps types of
                                         information that firms may wish to convey according to their complexity and impact.



     Figure 4.2. Types of information disseminated or collected through training and other communication channels.


                              Longer-term
                                   impact     •	 Agricultural practices to                 •	 Increasing capacity of farmer
                                                 improve productivity or                      organizations
                                                 quality                                   •	 Diagnosis of pests and diseases
                                              •	 Post-harvest practices to                    and analysis of soil nutrients
                                                 improve quality                           •	 Training in farm management
                                                                                              practices

                                              •	 Crop purchase price                       •	 Sources and prices of inputs
                                              •	 Location and quantity of crops to         •	 Terms and conditions for loans
                                                 pick up                                   •	 Measuring productivity to
                                              •	 Quality requirements such as                 assess side-selling
                                                 moisture content and purity
                                Short-term
                                   impact
                                             Less complex                         Information                        More complex



44
                                      Field Staff—Effective but Costly

                                      Agricultural extension workers, also known as field staff, are often the first tool that firms
                                      think of when implementing a training or outreach program to farmers. While face-to-face
                                      communication can enable comprehensive and detailed messaging to farmers, it is a costly
                                      approach. The cost of face-to-face training typically ranges from $50 to more than $100 per
                                      farmer per year. Various factors influence the cost, such as prevailing salaries, farmer density,
                                      number of interactions per year, whether training materials are developed or adapted, and
                                      to what extent administrative and managerial overheads are included. Written materials and
                                      information and communication technologies, addressed below, can reduce the need for
                                      extension workers and, in some cases, replace them altogether.

                                      Firms employ field staff with a range of profiles and experience. At the upper end, in terms of
                                      cost and competence, are university-trained agronomists specializing in crop production. At the
                                      other end, are people with some practical experience but no formal schooling in agriculture.
                                      This includes farmers and sales staff for agricultural inputs who are trained to provide advice on
                                      a limited range of topics. Figure 4.3 details the various roles field staff may take on.

                                      To deploy field staff, firms have generally followed one or a combination of two models:

                                      Model 1: Place staff at a central location, such as crop buying stations, farmer training
                                      centers, or (in the case of input firms) agro-retailers, and let farmers come to them.
                                      Model 2: Send field staff to work with farmers on their farms. This traditional extension
                                      model is more expensive since field staff are required to travel.




Figure 4.3. Firms usually give field staff multiple roles.



Tasks can be complementary,                                      Collecting
but managers can improve                                                                  Training on
                                                              information for
staff members’ effectiveness by                                                           productivity
                                                                certification
carefully reviewing logistics, time                              programs
requirements, and staff training
schedules.




                                                  Providing                                              Purchasing crops
                                              technical advice to
                                                  customers
                                                                              FIELD STAFF                 and analyzing
                                                                                                              quality




                                                                                             Marketing
                                                                     Leading field          inputs and
                                                                    visits by buyers       taking orders




                                                                                                                                           45
                                       Establishing decentralized buying stations shortens the chain between farmers and off-takers
                                       and enables communication between the two. Farmers bring their crops directly to the station,
                                       where field staff conduct simple quality tests, including moisture and defect testing. The test results
                                       determine the price paid to farmers, creating incentives for farmers to improve crop quality. Training
                                       on quality and other topics can be held at the station to reinforce key messaging. Since the firm is
                                       directly involved in the crop’s purchase, field staff can track and segregate products by quality.

                                       While buying stations can improve crop quality, they have limited ability to improve traceability
                                       because interactions with farmers occur at the stations rather than at the farms. Furthermore,
                                       for most certification programs, firms must collect information on field locations and
                                       agricultural practices with farmers at their farms. Similarly, field staff placed at farm training
                                       centers and agro-retailers are limited because they do not regularly visit farms to provide on-
                                       site coaching directly to farmers.

                                       When field staff work with farmers directly, or through a network of farmers, training can
                                       take place in farmers’ own fields and address their specific concerns. This model is especially
                                       useful for building trust and goodwill among farmers, which can in turn reduce side-selling.
                                       Disputes between farmers and the firm can be resolved quickly. In other cases, a hybrid
                                       strategy makes sense. For example, a farmer training center could have fixed trainers for
                                       farmers attending center-based sessions and could also serve as a base for mobile staff. For
                                       input suppliers, staff based at agro-retailers could visit customers to diagnose problems as
                                       well as explain products to farmers who visit the shop.




     Figure 4.4. Develop a management plan for field staff before staff are hired.


       Develop the outreach                       Evaluate and train field staff
       plan and determine the                     Training will increase staff confi-            Provide ongoing
       number of staff needed                     dence and help ensure that they                performance supports
       An experienced labor lawyer                can respond accurately and ap-                 Coaching and mentoring
       can help design employment                 propriately to farmers’ questions.             will build confidence among
       policies and staff contracts.              Training should cover agronomy                 staff and help them vary their
       Minimum wages, probationary                for the crop in question, including            teaching methodologies. Op-
       periods, disciplinary action,              the “why” behind the message. In               portunities for advancement
       performance evaluation, and                addition, training in communica-               encourage staff retention and
       retirement payments should be              tion skills and meeting facilitation           succession strategies when
       considered.                                are very useful.                               staff leave.




                             Advertise for and hire                        Send staff to the field                      Request farmer feedback
                             field staff                                   Establish clear workplans                    on staff performance
                             Extension staff with a mix of                 and supervision.                             Identify high and low perform-
                             technical knowledge, teaching                                                              ers among staff and under-
                             skills, and an understanding                                                               score the farmers’ role as a
                             of the local farming context                                                               stakeholder in the program’s
                             will be able to respond to                                                                 success.
                             farmers’ questions and relate
                             to farmers’ concerns.



46
                                Managing Field Staff

                                Managing field staff cost-effectively is critical for a program’s success. Field staff for an off-
                                taker may be responsible for crop procurement, certification, productivity training, and results
                                measurement. Similarly, the field staff of an input company may be sales agents as well as
                                technical resources. These multiple roles can be challenging to juggle. Clear messaging to
                                staff on their expectations, schedules, and responsibilities can increase their effectiveness.
                                Figure 4.4 describes a management plan to increase field staff effectiveness.

                                Using female extension staff tends to increase the number of female farmers and leads in the
                                program. In certain communities, female field staff may need additional training to perform
                                traditionally male tasks.




                                    USEFUL SKILL SETS FOR EXTENSION WORKERS

                                    Desirable qualifications for extension staff include:

                                    •	 A degree in agronomy, although this is unlikely in many regions (particularly Africa). Consider
                                       recruitment strategies through agricultural schools and internships.
                                    •	 Practical experience with crop being produced.
                                    •	 Experience working on a smallholder farm.
                                    •	 Ability to speak the native language and/or dialect of target farmers.
                                    •	 Dynamic personality with a positive attitude.
                                    •	 Willingness to live and work in rural areas.




                                Extending the Reach of Field Staff: The Role of Lead Farmers

                                Working through lead farmers: In most cases, field staff are unable to interact directly with all
                                of the farmers in a supply chain, given the number of staff (and cost) that would be required.
                                Firms can extend the reach of field staff without significantly increasing costs by identifying
                                lead farmers to transmit training messages to 20 to 30 farmers. An effective network of lead
Lead farmers are community      farmers (also called lead contact farmers or volunteer leaders) can dramatically extend an
leaders who can extend the      extension program’s reach by multiplying paid field staffs’ effort 20 to 30 times.
reach of an extension system
and create a sustainable
                                Lead farmers are typically community members with leadership ability who volunteer to convey
reservoir of knowledge at the
community level.                information from field staff to individual farmers. Effective lead farmers are literate, dynamic
                                community members who earn their peers’ respect and are willing to try new techniques.
                                Well-organized farmer groups typically have someone who assumes the role of lead farmer.

                                Well-managed lead farmers will represent the firm in the community. It is therefore essential
                                that lead farmers have the knowledge, resources, and capacity to train farmers when
                                extension workers are absent. Best practices for increasing lead farmer effectiveness include:

                                •	 Inclusion of members of the farmer group in the decision making to select lead farmers can
                                   ensure community support for the program and increase farmers’ investment in its success.
                                •	 Careful consideration of community dynamics when identifying the right profile for a
                                   lead farmer. For example, younger farmers tend to be energetic, but in some cultures it is
                                   preferable to select older farmers because they are more respected.
                                •	 Written contracts between firm, lead farmer, and farmer groups can clarify roles, responsibilities,
                                   and expectations before a program starts. Local labor laws should be consulted to clarify the
                                   firm’s potential obligations to provide lead farmers with salaries and/or benefits.



                                                                                                                                         47
          AN EXTENSION SYSTEM LEVERAGING LEAD FARMERS

          In the sample design shown below, five paid staff train and                       and vehicle maintenance. The fifth day might also include training
          oversee the output of 800 farmers, transmitting a new message                     from a contracted agronomist who develops the messages and
          each week according to the crop production calendar. A field                      training materials used by field staff.
          supervisor coordinates the work of four field staff who deliver
          messages and training to lead farmers and farmer groups in an                     Firms often employ a “rolling design” that maximizes the number
          assigned territory. As described in chapter 3, the farmer groups                  of trained farmers. If one crop cycle of intensive training is enough
          could be pre-existing producer organizations or formed for the                    to reach a critical mass of trained farmers in a given area, the
          purpose of receiving agricultural training.                                       extension team will move on to a new location. The network of
                                                                                            lead contact farmers and farmers’ groups will then support the
          Depending on travel time between farmer groups, an extension                      learning of late adopters in the first area. The extension program
          agent can typically meet with two farmer groups daily. This                       may periodically provide additional performance support through
          enables an agent to visit eight farmer groups in four days,                       less intensive refresher trainings to reinforce important messages.
          reserving the fifth workday for meetings, planning, report writing,

          Sample organizational chart of an extension program.




                                                                                                                                          LF Lead Farmer
                          Agronomist


                                                                              Field
                                                                            supervisor




             Extension                                        Extension                                           Extension                        Extension
     LF        agent            LF         25          LF       agent              LF               25     LF       agent             LF    LF       agent             LF
      LF                       LF       farmers         LF                        LF             farmers    LF                       LF      LF                       LF
           LF             LF                                 LF              LF                                  LF             LF                LF             LF
                LF   LF                                           LF   LF                                             LF   LF                          LF   LF
                                       25                                                                25
                                                     25                                   25
                                    farmers                                                           farmers
                                                  farmers                              farmers


                                                         25                    25
                                                      farmers               farmers




48
IN PRACTICE   In East Africa, the Grameen Foundation is experimenting with strategies to reduce field staff costs and increase
              motivation among lead farmers.1 In addition to supporting farmer training, the Grameen Foundation provides
              lead farmers with data-capable cell phones that can be used to conduct surveys for private firms or other
              NGOs. The lead farmers are paid for this service, helping to compensate for their voluntary role as community
              knowledge workers.




              •	 Off-site meetings and training sessions with groups of lead farmers can reinforce the
                 training messages and improve facilitation skills. They also provide opportunities for lead
                 farmers to share experiences and learn from each other.
              •	 Weekly schedules detailing each lead farmer’s tasks will help the firm, farmer, and farmer
                 group track the lead farmer’s progress and achievements.

              Lead farmers do not usually receive a salary but their role may require significant time
              investment. Firms can motivate them and maintain their commitment with incentives such as:

              •	 Fertilizer and other inputs to create demonstration plots
              •	 Tools to facilitate training such as fuel for motorbikes, bicycles, hats, shirts, rain gear,
                 backpacks, scales, notebooks, and calculators
              •	 Opportunities to be the first in their community to learn new techniques
              •	 Opportunities to travel for meetings or visit other successful programs
              •	 Community recognition during meetings or on radio programs
              •	 Opportunities to win prizes based on the results of farmers in their groups

              Of these incentives, providing inputs is both the most expensive and most effective measure. This
              is because the lead farmer gets a tangible benefit from higher yields, and there is a demonstration
              effect for neighbors, even if the lead farmer does no other training. Whatever incentive is chosen,
              it should motivate the lead farmer without negatively affecting other farmers.

              Good Performance Depends on Effective Logistics and Strong Monitoring

              Strategic scheduling, transportation, and staff management increase the effectiveness of an
              extension program. Best practices include:


IN PRACTICE   JK Paper, an IFC client in India, provided their field staff and selected community leaders with a two-day
              training of trainers (ToT) focused on meeting facilitation and communication skills. The goal of this training
              was to help field staff and influential community members explain JK Paper’s forestry outgrower program
              more effectively. Once the target of 5,000 potential outgrowers has been approached, the cost per farmer for
              the ToT will be about $4.



              Locate field staff as close to farmers as possible. Field staff and supervisors may prefer to
              live in larger towns rather than villages, but locations further away from farming communities
              increase commuting time and reduce work time. Living in close proximity to farmers increases
              trust and knowledge about farming practices and problems. Basing staff at the village level
              may require special provisions, such as four-day-on, three-day-off schedules and allowances
              to furnish and improve village housing.




                                                                                                                                 49
                                        Closely monitor the daily activities of field staff. Extension staff work on their own most
                                        of the time. However, even with good planning and scheduling, field staff may not be working
                                        in the location where they are expected on a particular day. This could be due to constraints
                                        beyond their control, such as weather or road conditions, or it could be due to poor work
                                        habits. Given the expense of placing staff in the field, firms must know that the planned
                                        training is taking place or run the risk that objectives will not be realized. Unannounced visits
                                        by supervisors to observe training sessions, depending on the schedule, are the best way to
                                        monitor field staff performance and assess the effectiveness of extension messages.

                                        Stand-alone GPS units mounted on motorbikes and vehicles and the use of 3G phones
                                        are also useful ways to monitor field staff on location. The cost of these technologies has
                                        decreased significantly, and software packages exist that can display the locations of the
                                        entire extension force remotely. Most countries have several firms that offer systems for
                                        remote vehicle monitoring.

                                        Purchase high-quality motorbikes and develop clear policies about their use. Firms
                                        generally provide their field staff with 125 cc off-road motorbikes so staff can manage back roads
                                        between farms. It is a good policy to provide training for staff who are not experienced riders
                                        and to have a skills test that all staff need to pass before receiving their motorbikes. Even the
                                        best motorbikes will experience excessive repair costs after about three years of heavy use. Close
                                        monitoring of spare parts and fuel consumption will ensure proper service intervals and indicate
                                        when a bike has reached the end of its service life. Qualified shops are typically more capable of
                                        handling major repairs than village mechanics. A policy of giving (or selling) motorbikes to field
                                        staff at the end of their service life may encourage staff to take better care of them. Policies that
                                        prohibit riding without a helmet, limit the number of riders, restrict use of motorbikes after work,
                                        and establish procedures for notification of accidents can improve safety.

                                        Develop clear expense policies for staff, farmers, and lead farmers. Per diems, meals, and
                                        transport costs are all areas of potential contention. Programs with clear policies that are
                                        communicated to participants up-front avoid extended negotiations and perceived favoritism.

                                        Determine the Messages and How They are Conveyed

                                        When developing messages for farmers, it is useful to begin with an agricultural calendar for
                                        the crop or crops on which the training will focus. The calendar should detail all necessary
                                        activities on a weekly or bi-weekly basis throughout the year. With climate change affecting
                                        rainfall patterns in many regions, traditional agricultural calendars may need to be adjusted
                                        for new conditions.

                                        Extension messages should accompany each activity listed on the calendar. Depending on the
                                        roles of the field staff, this could include crop prices, agricultural productivity messages, or
                                        practices required for certification.

                                        Information that staff need to collect should also be included in the calendar. Again, depending
                                        on the roles of the field staff, this could include crop volumes, production information, and
                                        data (such as farm practices) needed for certification.

     The demonstration and train and    There are three main training methodologies used to transmit information to smallholder
     visit models can be summarized     farmers: demonstration and innovation, farmer field school, and farmer training centers.
     by the saying: “First I do, then
     we do together, then you do.”
                                        Demonstration and Innovation
                                        In this training method, field staff instruct contact farmers to create demonstration plots, also
                                        called dem plots, using best management practices and the recommended types and levels of
                                        inputs. Firms may provide the inputs both as a training tool and as an incentive for the lead
                                        contact farmers.




50
Field staff then hold training sessions at the demonstration plots and on the farms of other
group members. The training sessions consist of instruction reinforced by hands-on practice.
Community field days can be held at the plots throughout the production cycle to present
best practices and offer farmers an opportunity to practice their learning. These events can
also serve as a tool to recruit new producers into the supply chain.

A related methodology, called train and visit, is an older system that has been used by many
government extension systems. This approach offers group training sessions at central
locations followed by visits to individual farms to coach and mentor farmers. Although it is
effective at transmitting messages, it is often too expensive for smallholders given the time
needed to visit individual farms. However, demonstration and innovation can be combined
with train and visit if a farmer has encountered a particular problem that can be resolved
with a visit. By rotating the training location between the farmers in a group, some individual
assistance can be provided while still training the whole group.

Farmer Field School
In this methodology, farmers discover improved techniques themselves through facilitated
research and discussion, as seen in figure 4.5. For example, farmers might look at pest control
techniques across several farms and determine which practices led to higher yields and at
what cost. While the process is always guided by a trained extension agent, his or her role
is not to instruct, but rather to facilitate experimentation and discussion. This participatory
philosophy is an effective approach that leads to deeper learning and understanding. The
farmer field school approach may be too time-consuming for firms trying to maximize the
reach of their training, but extension programs can incorporate elements of the methodology
throughout the production cycle. For example, farmers can analyze the productivity of a
dem plot by comparing it to neighboring fields. Dem plots can also be designed with several
treatments, such as low, medium, and high levels of fertilizer application, which can facilitate
an analysis and discussion about the optimal fertilizer amount.



   DEMONSTRATION PLOTS—AN EFFECTIVE TRAINING TOOL

   A demonstration plot, often called a dem plot, is a smallholder plot that uses best practices for inputs and
   agricultural practices. Dem plots serve three purposes:

   •	 Show the effect of best practices on yields
   •	 Provide a site for hands-on training sessions
   •	 Provide a site for farmer-led research

   Dem plots should adhere to several principles to maximize their effectiveness:

   •	 Beginning with farmer-led research to identify best practices is a proven approach (farmer field
      school), but it requires more time than simple demonstration.
   •	 Demonstrated practices should be economically and technically feasible for the majority of
      surrounding farmers.
   •	 Farmers, not extension staff, should do work on the plots.
   •	 Field days involving neighboring farmers are an effective way to increase reach.




                                                                                                                  51
     Figure 4.5. Farmer field schools train farmers in the scientific method.




                                                                      Farmers identify
                                                                     problems in fields.

                                                   Farmers
                                                     apply
                                                                                              Farmers research
                                                 conclusions
                                                                                               problems with
                                                 to problems
                                                                                                 guidance.
                                                 in their own
                                                     field.




                                                                                         Farmers
                                                        Farmers evaluate                   test
                                                           outcomes.                   hypotheses.




                                       Farmer Training Centers
                                       These centers provide classrooms and associated plots where improved techniques are
                                       demonstrated and practiced. The demonstration plots can be used as nurseries to produce
                                       improved planting materials for sale or distribution. However, since farmers learn techniques
                                       on model plots that may not mirror their own fields, they may have difficulty transferring
                                       their learning. Centers tend to be located near the communities that are targeted by the
                                       extension program, but some farmer training centers have dormitories to host farmers for
                                       multi-day trainings. A farmer training center can also serve as a base for the field staff in both
                                       demonstration and farmer field school systems.

                                       A related strategy is to work with local schools to incorporate agricultural themes into existing
                                       curricula. For example, math can be taught using agricultural examples and accounting
                                       principles for farm management. Similarly, biology classes can include discussions of plant
                                       nutrition. According to the 4H Foundation, when children learn good agricultural practices,
                                       they transmit these messages to their parents. Any initiatives involving children must avoid
                                       encouragement of child labor. However, developing a new generation of more professional
                                       smallholders is an important long-term approach for increasing productivity.

                                       Support Field Staff with Written Materials and Other Tools

                                       Written and electronic training materials, such as manuals, posters, calendars, and videos, are
     Extension manuals, farmer         often used to support face-to-face training. Effective training tools are tailored to the needs and
     flips charts, videos, and other   preferences of the target audience by adjusting the balance of text and artwork to the literacy
     training tools are available at   level of the audience, using a local language if it is taught in schools and appears in other print
     www.farms2firms.org.              media, and using a sturdy format that will withstand frequent use. For example, weatherproofing
                                       reference cards will increase their durability and practicality in the field. Drawings done by a skilled
                                       artist are usually preferable to photographs, because photographs do not reproduce as well as
                                       drawings. Figure 4.6 provides guidance on developing effective training materials.



52
    EXAMPLES OF EFFECTIVE TRAINING TOOLS

    Reference guides for field staff: These manuals provide both                  practices guides. With more graphics, these tools can be especially
    the theory behind the recommendations and a more detailed list of             helpful when farmers’ literacy is low. Consider weather-proofing
    diagnoses for nutritional deficiencies, pests, and diseases.                  these materials to last longer and promote their use in the field.

    Manuals for farmers: Integrating simple, feasible messages                    Video: Video, which is often in the form of DVDs, is an increasingly
    into training materials for farmers will increase the likelihood that         popular and effective training tool for farmers, who can watch
    those messages are understood and adopted. Farmer manuals do                  individually or in groups with field staff. Some firms are also
    not need to go into the detail of the reference guides for field staff.       experimenting with digital tablets provided to field staff to show
    They should be developed in the local language, use pictures and              training videos and collect data. Anecdotal evidence on this
    graphics, and reflect the local context. Adult learning methodology           approach is positive, suggesting that the use of ICTs increases
    and interactive practice exercises can promote learning more than             farmers’ loyalty to the firm and trust in their learning. However, the
    rote memorization.                                                            cost effectiveness of this approach
                                                                                  remains to be determined. Videos
    Flip charts and posters: Hung in common meeting areas or used                 can be produced professionally or
    during trainings, these can be useful tools to supplement the trainer’s       done by farmers themselves after
    presentation with pictures and diagrams.                                      some training. A USAID project,
                                                                                  ICT for Ag, has produced a toolkit
    Quick reference cards, pictorial guides, and crop-cycle                       that includes best practices for
    calendars: These are shorter, less dense versions of the farmer best          training videos.




Figure 4.6. Checklist for designing training materials.
The letters in the word “ACTIONS” form a checklist for designing effective training materials.


       A                      C                     T                         I                    O                     N                      S
   Accessibility:     Cost:                  Teaching style:        Interactivity:          Organizational        Novelty:               Sustainability:
                                                                                            support:
   The material       Consider the           Training               Training                                      It is important        Training by
   must be            various costs of       materials that         materials               Trainers require      to make training       private sector
   accessible to      development,           encourage active       that promote            logistical            interesting.           firms must pay
   the target         field testing,         participation          interactivity           (transportation       This can involve       for itself to be
   audience. This     revision,              by students is         between trainer         and                   mixing media,          sustainable.
   means using        layout, and            more effective.        and trainee             communication),       such as videos         In some
   the visual         dissemination.         Elements such          reinforce               administrative        with face-to-          cases, fees for
   information        Some studies           as role playing,       learning.               (salary,              face training,         training may
   for low-           estimate that          problems               The farmer              reimbursement         and using new          defray costs.
   literacy           40 hours of            solving, and           field school            of expenses, and      communication          However, with
   audiences          advance work           participatory          methodology             record keeping)       technologies           smallholder
   and ensuring       are needed for         field exercises        is based on             and managerial        such as SMS.           farmers, this
   that examples      one hour of            make learning          interactivity,          support so they                              is rare. More
   are culturally     instruction time.      active. Radio          using examples          can concentrate                              likely, increased
   appropriate.                              programs that          from farmers’           on preparing for                             revenue from
                                             allow listener         fields and              training.                                    productivity
                                             participation are      eliciting                                                            and quality
                                             more effective         solutions from                                                       needs to cover
                                             than passive           farmers, rather                                                      training costs.
                                             broadcasts.            than providing
                                                                    prescriptive
                                                                    approaches.




                                                                                                                                                             53
                                           Mass Media and Information and Communication Technologies Can Reduce
                                           Costs and Increase Reach

     With the field of ICT evolving        Mass media is a powerful tool for communicating with many farmers across broad distances.
     so rapidly, print media often         Newspapers, pamphlets, instructional labels, and inserts are some examples of print media,
     cannot keep pace. For current         and firms can use an increasing variety of information and communication technologies to
     information on ICTs, please visit     communicate with farmers. While the reach of mass media is an advantage over extension
     www.farms2firms.org.
                                           programs, the lack of opportunities to reinforce learning and monitor impact reduces the
                                           usefulness of mass media.

                                           Recently, ICTs have garnered much interest because they are less costly per farmer than face-
                                           to-face communications, can reach large numbers of farmers, and present opportunities for
                                           overcoming problems of reinforcement and impact assessment. According to the International
                                           Telecommunication Union, in 2011, there were 5.9 billion cellular telephone subscriptions with
                                           85.7 percent of the population having access. Ninety percent of the world is now covered by
                                           2G networks, and 45 percent is covered by 3G networks. Thirty-four percent of the world’s
                                           population uses the Internet, with 20 percent of the population in developing countries using
                                           the service. Many firms and organizations are developing systems to help farmers access and
                                           transmit information through the Internet, which may be a substitute for data collection within
                                           an extension program. Systems that rely on ICTs usually cost less than $50 per farmer annually,
                                           but the depth and complexity of information that can be collected or disseminated via ICTs
                                           remains limited. However, the limitations of ICTs are decreasing as 3G networks expand. Best
                                           practices for leveraging ICT tools for farmer training are illustrated in figure 4.7.




     Figure 4.7. Best practices for communicating through ICTs.

     A long history of farm radio programs has generated a set of best practices, including:




     Base program                   Follow a set                  Feature real farmers.          Keep messages                  Evaluate impact.
     development in field           schedule. Shows               Whenever possible,             simple. Simple                 Assessing knowledge,
     research. Use field            should air at times           include real farmers           messages that are              attitudes, and practices
     research to identify           convenient to farmers,        speaking in the                repeated multiple times        are a good methodology
     the percentage and             such as in the evening        predominate language           in different ways are          to evaluate the impact
     profile of radio owners,       or early in the morning.      of farmers in the              particularly effective.        of radio training
     which stations farmers                                       coverage area.                 Using various formats          programs.
     listen to, the extent of                                                                    such as drama, phone-in
     coverage areas, and                                                                         programs, and field
     when farmers tend to                                                                        interviews maintains
     listen.                                                                                     audience interest and
                                                                                                 reinforces learning.


     Additional links to best practice guides and other ICT resources are provided in the “Useful Resources” section at the end of this chapter. The
     practice groups are a good source of the latest information.




54
              The following are types of mass media that firms can incorporate into their communication
              strategies with farmers:

              Print media, such as agricultural newspapers, can update farmers on market developments
              and provide timely reminders about good agricultural practices throughout the production
              calendar. In India and other populous countries, locally produced print media advertise
              agricultural inputs and opportunities for crop marketing.

              Radio and television can be a cost-effective way to reach large numbers of farmers. A wide
              variety of formats have been used, including advertising, discussion programs about crops or
              products, farmer interviews, and call-in programs. A combination of face-to-face training and
              radio, during which farmers listen to radio programs with field staff and then practice the
              skills together, is also an effective strategy.




IN PRACTICE   USING RADIO TO REACH LARGE NUMBERS OF FARMERS2

              Farm Radio International, a Canadian non-profit organization, has partnered with the Gates Foundation to study
              the impact of radio programming on farmer practices in Africa. The initial report from this five-country study found
              that 39 percent of farmers who listened to interactive radio programs changed their agricultural practices, and 25
              percent changed their practices after listening passively (compared to only 4 percent in the control group). The
              cost of this program was less than $0.50 per farmer reached. Further research examined methods of combining
              radio with ICT approaches to increase effectiveness.

              In Cambodia, IFC is using radio to educate aromatic rice farmers about the benefits of improved planting
              seed, which include higher yields and greater uniformity. This initiative supports client mills that are multiplying
              improved seed for sale or distribution in their supply chains. The radio programs, which were broadcast in five
              provinces, included music, drama, interviews with successful farmers and advice from rice agronomists. A sample
              survey revealed that 101,000 households had heard the broadcasts and 22 percent of those gained a medium
              to large amount of information from the programs. The cost of development and air time for 17 programs was
              $0.49 per listening household and $2.21 per household that gained knowledge.




              2G (non-data) cellular telephones can be used to collect and disseminate small amounts
              of information via short message system or text messages. Firms and nongovernmental
              organizations have developed systems that use 2G platforms to disseminate prices and collect
              data on crop volumes and locations in a process known as “scout polling.” There are also
              firms that deliver fee-based weather and crop price data via SMS. Similar systems can be used
              to collect farm data, organize meetings, and solicit and respond to farmers’ questions. These
              systems often support the work of field staff.




IN PRACTICE   USING SMS FOR TWO-WAY COMMUNICATION

              The Ghanaian firm Esoko develops systems for firms to efficiently communicate with large numbers of smallholders
              via SMS. Esoko client Chitsosa Trading is a mid-sized firm that purchases grain from 3,000 farmers. This firm is
              using Esoko’s SMS Push! to notify farmers of prices, buying locations, pick-up dates, and quality requirements.
              This system enables Chitsosa to purchase larger volumes of grain on each trip, reducing transportation costs.




                                                                                                                                     55
                   2G phones are also used in mobile payment systems to purchase crops and pay for inputs.
                   Funds are transferred directly into farmers’ bank accounts, reducing the risk of holding cash
                   for both farmers and firms. Mobile payment systems also allow farmers to repay loans via SMS.

                   Video can be a powerful tool for conveying information when it is well executed and conveys
                   a clear message. The costs of professional video production can mount quickly, but low-cost
                   production efforts can often be just as effective. USAID has developed a toolkit for practitioners
                   interested in integrating low-cost video into agricultural projects. More information on their
                   step-by-step guide and recommendations can be found in the “Useful Resources” section at
                   the end of this chapter.




     IN PRACTICE   FARMERS CREATE TRAINING VIDEOS FOR OTHER FARMERS

                   India-based Digital Green has developed a cost-effective system for recording and disseminating agricultural
                   training videos. Farmers are provided with basic cameras and training to shoot short films. Domain experts review
                   the videos to ensure that the content follows best practices, and the films are made available to other farmers via
                   communal video showings and DVDs. The more than 2,500 videos that have been produced have been viewed
                   150,000 times. Firms and organizations using the system combine the videos with training by field staff. The
                   combination of video and face-to-face training has succeeded in influencing behavior change.




                   3G (data) cellular telephones are becoming more prevalent and affordable in some rural
                   areas. With access to the Internet and the ability to download videos, self-directed learning
                   through phones is possible. Organizations in India and elsewhere are experimenting with
                   this technology by providing downloadable videos available for purchase, which has already
                   demonstrated improved practices. As 3G networks expand and the cost of 3G phones
                   decreases, this tool will become more prevalent. In areas without sufficient 3G penetration,
                   videos may be shown on digital tablets or by vehicles with portable video screens.



     IN PRACTICE   CONNECTING SMALLHOLDERS TO MARKETS AND THE INTERNET

                   India’s ITC Limited employs a strategy for communicating directly with farmers that does not require the establishment
                   of buying stations. Since 2000, ITC’s eChoupal program has placed 6,500 computer kiosks in villages throughout
                   India. The computers are housed with village leaders and linked to ITC and the Internet through telephone lines or
                   very small aperture terminals in more remote areas. The kiosks provide four million farmers with ITC, national, and
                   international crop prices, as well as other agricultural information and Internet access.



                   Remote sensing using satellite data and digital analysis can identify plant diseases, water
                   stress, and other production problems. Large farmers are purchasing this data to manage
                   their farms more effectively, and remote sensing firms are researching ways to provide this
                   data to smallholders as well.




56
Figure 4.8. Factors Impacting the Cost Per Farmer of Extension Systems.
Typically, a firm or NGO might spend between $50 and $150 per farmer annually.


                                                         Staff roles may include crop      It is less expensive to
                                                    buying, certification, productivity    train well-organized
                                                    training, and results monitoring.      farmers.


                                                                           Staff           Degree of                        Literacy, age of farmers, income
                Combining field staff with ICT
                                                                      responsibilities    aggregation                       level, and farm conditions affect
           approaches may increase costs, but
                it will also increase efficiency.                                                                           training design.
                                                            Use                                              Farmer
                                                           of ICTs                                        characteristics


             Low population density                                                                                                     Other projects and
              will increase staff and                                                                                                   organizations working in the
                         travel costs.      Population                                                               Presence
                                                                                                                                        same area can either raise or
                                             density                                                                 of NGOs
                                                                                                                                        lower costs.


      BUDGET                                                                                                                            FARMERS REACHED
                                                                                    COST PER
                                                                                    FARMER




                                          CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECIDING ON AN ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY
                                          Designing an effective extension system involves balancing multiple competing factors that
                                          influence budget and farmer reach. Figure 4.8 describes the balance firms should seek
                                          between an affordable extension budget and reaching farmers. The following list of questions
                                          and activities, though not exhaustive, provides a guide for determining the form and function
                                          of an extension system:

                                          Farmer density: How many farmers need to be trained at each location or village? What is
                                          the distance between villages? How many farmer meetings can an extension hold per day?
Many factors can inform a firm’s          If farmers are widely dispersed, only one meeting per day may be possible. In higher-density
extension strategy, including             areas, up to four meetings per day may be possible.
geography, level of farmer
organization, availability of ICTs,
                                          Degree of aggregation: It is less expensive to train well-organized farmers because some
and NGO presence in the region.
                                          groups can transmit information among members without outside assistance. If farmers are not
                                          aggregated, field staff may need to form simple groups before beginning technical training.

                                          Farmer characteristics: Training must be tailored to farmers’ socioeconomic characteristics,
                                          including literacy levels and income. In addition, farms’ physical characteristics, including farm
                                          size, and conditions, such as slope, age of tree crops, and soil fertility, affect farmers’ ability to
                                          utilize inputs and training. Firms should analyze and, if necessary, segment farm populations
                                          to ensure effective training.

                                          Presence of nongovernmental organizations: The presence of local or international NGOs
                                          can be either an opportunity or a challenge. Costs may be reduced if the firm’s objectives can
                                          be met by other organizations. However, the firm will likely have to match the NGO’s salaries
                                          or risk having its staff poached. In either case, close coordination between the NGO and firm
                                          is essential. A written memorandum of understanding may be useful to document the roles
                                          and responsibilities of each side.




                                                                                                                                                                        57
     Figure 4.9. Indicative Comparison of Cost and Capacity for Various Information Delivery Methods.




                                       HIGH
                                                                                                                        Mobile field staff    $50



                                                                                                                                     Lead farmers




                                       Cost per farmer per Year
                                                                                                                                  supported by firm
                                                                                                                   $5      Rural buying stations
                                                                                         Information kiosks
                                                                              Training videos on DVDs
                                                                              Written materials
                                                                             Smart phone

                                                                                 <$1
                                                                     Radio
                                                                   SMS
                                       LOW




                                                                  LOW                      Capacity to transmit information                    HIGH




                                     ICT approaches: While combining field staff with ICTs will increase costs, it can also increase
                                     staff efficiency and effectiveness. For example, although digital tablets increase costs, they
                                     allow staff to use training videos and collect data.

                                     Budget: The costs, capacity, and intensity of various communication options vary widely. As figure
                                     4.9 shows, increases in the amount of information and the intensity of the channel correlate with
                                     an increase in the cost per farmer. Information delivered by field staff via farm visits can transmit a
                                     large amount of detailed information, but the intervention may cost more than $100 per farmer
                                     annually. Radio messages may cost less than $1 per farmer but transmit a limited amount of
                                     information with minimal interaction with message recipients. As a result, the impact of the
                                     message may be minimized, and the percentage of farmers adopting new behaviors will be lower.

                                     If the firm’s objectives require mobile field staff to interact with farmers, then it is important to
                                     design an extension system that meets these objectives while minimizing the cost per farmer.
                                     Wide variations in regional labor costs make it difficult to benchmark the cost per farmer
                                     of interventions that deploy mobile field staff. For example, hiring field staff in South Asia
                                     is significantly less expensive than in Africa where competition with NGO programs elevates
                                     costs. In general, however, a system that costs less than $50 per farmer per year is relatively
                                     inexpensive, while a system that costs more than $150 per farmer per year is relatively expensive.

                                     Expected return on investment: In order to effectively assess the benefits of various
                                     communication tools, clear training goals and a reasonable timeframe for obtaining a positive
                                     return on investment should be established. This can help manage expectations among
                                     farmers, field staff, and the firm. For annual crops, measurable productivity gains may be
                                     seen within two seasons. In contrast, a program renovating tree crops may not see increased
                                     productivity until five years after seedlings were planted.

                                     Cost metrics such as cost per farmer trained and number of farmers per extension agent can
                                     measure the return on investment. Tracking training’s impact is more complex because short-term,
                                     tangible benefits, such as crop quality, productivity, and certification are more easily measured
                                     than less-tangible, longer-term benefits, such as increased goodwill among suppliers. Chapter 9,
                                     on results measurement, provides more detail on how to measure return on investment.



58
USEFUL RESOURCES
aWhere, www.awhere.com
Firm specializing in ICT solutions for the management and monitoring of development programs.

4-H Youth Development Organization, www.4-h.org
Information on involving youth in agriculture.

Communication Cooperative International, www.cci.coop/home.html
A U.S.-based NGO implementing ICT projects.

Development Art, www.developmentart.com
A website with a wide variety of copyright-free images of smallholders engaged in various farming
activities. These drawings can be downloaded for use in training materials.

Digital Green, www.digitalgreen.org
India-based organization developing systems for farmers to produce and view training videos.

Eiligmann, A and M. Gerster-Bentaya. “Assessment of the Effectiveness of Farmer Business Schools and
Prospects for Rolling Out,” Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) (September
30, 2011).

Esoko, www.esoko.com
Communication systems using SMS.

e-Agriculture, www.e-agriculture.org
Online practice group for ICT applications in agriculture with many references.

FACET, http://kdid.org/projects/field-support/facet
Fostering agricultural competitiveness employing communication technologies. Fact sheets on various
ICT programs.
	
    Integrating Low-Cost Video Into Agricultural Development Projects, FACET, http://ictforag.org/video/
    index.html

Farm Radio International, www.farmradio.org

    Partner in African Farm Radio Research Initiative, http://www.farmradio.org/publications/our-research/
    Research results and best practices manual.

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), www.fao.org
Information on agricultural extension, particularly national extension systems.

    Improving Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual, 1998,
    www.fao.org/docrep/W5830E/w5830e00.htm

    Office for Research and Extension, www.fao.org/oek/research-extension-systems/res-home/en/
    Numerous reports and technical briefs.

Frontline SMS, www.frontlinesms.com
Using SMS to communicate with farmers.

Global Alliance for ICTs and Development, www.un-gaid.org
United Nations organization working in ICTs development with various resources.

Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services, www.g-fras.org
Source of expertise on farmer training.




                                                                                                             59
     ICT in Agriculture, Agricultural and Rural Development Unit of the World Bank, www.ictinagriculture.org

     ICT to enhance Impact of Agricultural Development, USAID, www.communities.usaidallnet.gov/ictforag

     ICT Update by CTA, Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Development, www.ictupdate.cta.int/en
     Information and Communication Technologies for Development (ict4d), www.ic4d.org.uk
     A center for ICTs in development based at the University of London.

     International Association of Agricultural Information Specialists, www.iaaid.org
     Organization and discussion group with 400 members from 80 countries.

     International Centre for Communication and Development, www.iicd.org
     Organization implementing ICT projects.

     International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), www.ifpri.org
     Economic and technical research on extension systems.

         Impact of Farmer Field Schools on Agricultural Productivity and Poverty in East Africa, 2010, www.
         ifpri.org/publication/impact-farmer-field-schools-agricultural-productivity-and-poverty-east-africa

         Farmers Information Needs and Search Behaviours, 2012,
         www.ifpri.org/publication/farmers-information-needs-and-search-behaviors

     ITC eChoupal Program, http://www.itcportal.com/sustainability/lets-put-india-first/echoupal.aspx

         What Works: ITC’s eChoupal and Profitable Rural Transformation, 2003, http://pdf.wri.org/dd_
         echoupal.pdf

     Grameen Foundation, www.grameenfoundation.org/what-we-do/mobile-phone-solutions/agriculture
     Implementing community knowledge worker program.

     Mobile Active, www.mobileactive.org
     A global network of 20,000 people using mobile technologies. Information on various ICT tools.

     Mobile Transactions Zambia Limited, www.mtzl.net
     eMoney technologies linking firms and POs.

     Next Billion, www.nextbillion.net/
     Case studies on the use of ICTs.

     Smallholder Acceleration and REDD+ Programmed, www.sharp-partnership.org
     Consortium of firms and organizations working to increase smallholder production of oil palm and
     other crops in the context of reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.

     USAID, FHI 360 and World Vision. Integrating Very Poor Producers into Value Chains, October 2012,
     www.microlinks.kdid.org/library/integrating-very-poor-producers-value-chains-field-guide

     Value Chains 4 Poor, www.valuechains4poor.org/
     Resources and best practices for training smallholder farmers.

     Wider Net at the University of Iowa, www.widernet.org/egranary/
     This organization has developed a system called eGranary, which is a digital library pre-loaded with
     more than 14 million indexed documents from all fields, including agriculture.

         Including Coaching and Mentoring in Training Programs, www.valuechains4poor.org/file/
         ToTCoachingguide.pdf

     WorldAgInfo, worldaginfo.org/files/WorldAgInfo Final Report Web.pdf
     A survey of best practices for agricultural information systems implemented by Cornell University.




60
NOTES
1. “Agriculture, Helping Rural Farmers Thrive,” Grameen Foundation,
http://www.grameenfoundation.org/what-we-do/mobile-phone-solutions/agriculture

2. African Farm Radio Research Initiative, series of three reports resulting from 42-month action
research project implemented by Farm Radio International, in partnership with World University
Service of Canada and with the support of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Accessed via Farm
Radio International website: http://www.farmradio.org/publications/our-research/




                                                                                                    61
62
CHAPTER 5
Standards and
Certification of
Smallholders
Supply Chains




                   M
    Why read this chapter?


    Using standards to frame good agricultural,
    environmental, and social practices can be a useful
    approach for firms to manage their impact, increase
    security of supply, and respond to market demands.
    The choice to implement standards requires careful
    consideration of which standard scheme to use, the
    steps and timeline to full implementation, and the
    common incentives for smallholder farmers.




N
                                   Standards and Certification of Smallholders
                                   Supply Chains
                                   THE BUSINESS CASE FOR IMPLEMENTING STANDARDS ALONG
                                   SMALLHOLDER SUPPLY CHAINS
                                   Large agricultural commodity buyers, such as branded manufacturers, retailers, national
                                   governments, and downstream industries, increasingly require evidence of good social and
                                   environmental practices in primary production. Standards help firms ensure good agricultural and
                                   forestry practices and avoid potential social and environmental impacts. A firm’s decision to adopt
                                   and comply with standards along a smallholder supply chain weighs expected benefits against
                                   the costs associated with meeting the requirements of a standard and verification of compliance.

A standard is an norm or           Standards benefit firms sourcing from smallholders by:
requirement that establishes a
threshold of good practice.        •	 Identifying and managing social and environmental impacts
                                   •	 Improving productivity, efficiency, and security of supply
Certification is the mechanism
for communicating that a firm
                                   •	 Expanding market access through certification
has verified compliance with an
established standard.              Identifying and Managing Social and Environmental Impacts

Verification is the process for    Standards can help firms ensure good agricultural and forestry practices and manage social
confirming compliance with a       and environmental impacts. Standards can highlight potential problems in smallholder supply
standard.                          chains, such as transparency in pricing, land rights, soil fertility, erosion and degradation,
                                   water quality, pests and disease management, and health and safety. Firms sourcing directly
Types of verification
First party – A firm verifies
                                   from farmers or from local intermediaries can use standards as a framework for diagnosing
compliance with standards          which components of a supply chain need targeted capacity building and resources.
using in-house staff.
                                   Improving Productivity, Efficiency, and Security of Supply
Second party – Buyers or
other interested parties conduct   Implementing standards may require training farmers in the supply chain on practices that
verification of standards.         improve farm productivity and quality. These improved practices have the potential to increase
                                   farm income and to channel additional supply to sourcing firms. Better farmer organization,
Third party- An external,
independent auditor checks
                                   leveraged through group certification, can also help establish shared labor pools, micro credit
compliance.                        unions, and other economies of scale. Investing in farmers in the context of implementing a
                                   standard can increase farmer loyalty to a firm.




                                                                                                                                         63
                                            Expanding Market Access

                                            Verifying compliance with standards and communicating compliance through certification is
                                            an important market access tool. In European markets and increasingly in U.S. markets, there
                                            is a significant consumer demand for goods that are certified for good social, environmental,
                                            and agricultural practices. Certification is a tool for communicating that a product originates
                                            from a farm that has verified its compliance with an established standard.

                                            In some cases, complying with standards may not increase market access. There may not be
                                            clear market direction, perhaps because the firm is a first mover or is getting mixed market
                                            signals. In these cases, firms should assess the other benefits of implementing standards,
                                            including reducing risk and increasing efficiency. A careful assessment of the available standards
                                            will identify the set of standards that best meets firms’ needs. Firms may find it helpful to
                                            participate in sector or industry roundtable discussions to understand and anticipate what will
                                            be required and to share best practices and lessons learned with others.



                                               CERTIFICATION REDUCES THE NEED FOR TRACEABILITY ALONG A SUPPLY CHAIN
     Traceability is the ability to
     identify a product’s origin
                                               Most certification programs use third-party verification, the most rigorous form of verification. In third-
     and subsequent movements                  party verification, an external auditor checks compliance with a standard. Industry-accepted standards,
     throughout a supply chain.                used in combination with certification, allow the firm to communicate a large quantity of information
                                               about good practices in a simple way to their buyers.

                                               Buyers selling to markets demanding good production practices may prefer purchasing certified product
                                               because it can eliminate the need for costly tracking systems, also known as traceability. When buyers
                                               purchase product that has obtained certification, they have an assurance that the scheme’s control
                                               mechanisms ensure that producers maintain good practices. Full traceability is no longer necessary, even
                                               for product that has passed through a number of aggregators along the supply chain.




     Figure 5.1. Comparing the costs and benefits of standards and certification.



     Certification is a communication
     tool that can increase access to         STANDARDS                                            CERTIFICATION
     markets that demand verification
                                              LOWER COSTS, AS IT IS AN                             HIGHER COSTS DUE TO
     of a firm’s good practices. If
     the market doesn’t demand
                                              INTERNAL PROCESS                                     EXTERNAL CERTIFIERS
     compliance with standards, firms
     may find that implementation is
     cost-effective, but certification of      +    Improve productivity                             +     Increase market access

     standards is not.
                                               +    Reduce inefficiencies                            +     Independent verification of supply
                                                                                                           chain practices
                                               +    Support better business practices

                                               +    Increase sustainability




64
                                      Obtaining Price Premiums from Standards: The Exception but Not the Rule

                                      Complying with standards can increase a firm’s market access, but increased market access does
                                      not always ensure access to price premiums. In complex supply chains, premiums paid by the
                                      consumer may be absorbed by downstream retailers, manufacturers, and other middlemen. In
                                      other cases, retailers may determine that the market does not allow for price premiums. For
                                      example, large retailers in the U.S. and Europe have expanded their offering of certified products,
                                      but they are unwilling to pay premium prices that would have to be passed on their customers.
                                      Many consumers are willing to pay a premium for certified products, but the additional amount
                                      they are willing to pay is relatively narrow. A study of U.S. consumers found that 67 percent would
                                      pay a 5 percent premium for certified forest products, but only 13 percent would pay more than
                                      a 10 percent premium. In markets where certification has moved from the exception to the norm,
                                      increased supply of certified product may dilute past price premiums or eliminate them altogether.

                                      Even without price premiums, firms may find value from adopting standards and seeking
                                      certification, including those discussed above.

                                      Three Costs for Implementing Standards
A link to the Committee on
Sustainability Assessment, which      As with any supply chain investment, firms should weigh the expected value of adopting a
gathers data on the costs and         standard and verification approach against the costs. The net value to a firm implementing a
benefits of standards, is available   standard can vary. While efforts are underway to evaluate the costs and benefits of standards
at www.farms2firms.org.               and certification across regions and sectors, firms should analyze the costs and benefits of
                                      their specific situation (see figure 5.1). This includes assessing the costs of:

                                      •	 Compliance: Consider how the baseline practices of smallholder suppliers; the existing
                                         degree of smallholder organization; the number of smallholders supplying the firm and the
                                         country in which they operate; market demands; and the level of performance required by
                                         the standard can all affect compliance costs.
Firms that have already invested
                                      •	 Certification: Third-party verification as part of certification can add significant costs and may not
in strengthening smallholders
through training and other               be needed. Other costs, such as membership fees, may also be associated with certification.
supports may find the cost
of compliance less because            •	 Cost mitigation for suppliers: The value for the smallholders should also be considered.
outreach infrastructure and              Firms should ensure that additional costs, such as additional labor or working hours, are
relationships already exists.            fully understood and included in the cost-benefit analysis for farmers.

                                      The remainder of this chapter presents strategies for reducing costs when implementing
                                      standards along a smallholder supply chain.




          IN PRACTICE                 SMALLHOLDER CERTIFICATION IN PALM OIL

                                      Thailand’s oil palm sector is dominated by smallholders, representing more than 70 percent of production. In
                                      2012, the first independent smallholder certification for the Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil was achieved
                                      for smallholders after more than two years of work on the program. Around 400 smallholders were included
                                      in the first certification round with additional groups working towards compliance. While the Roundtable for
                                      Sustainable Palm Oil standard does not focus on productivity, farmers reported productivity increases attributed
                                      to better coordination and organization. The result of increased productivity meant additional income for farmers.
                                      Using the Roundtable for Sustainable Palm Oil certificate trading platform, the smallholders’ sustainable “credits”
                                      were purchased by a large multi-national personal-care and cosmetics company.




                                                                                                                                                            65
     EXAMPLES OF STANDARDS

     For primary production, standards can focus on social and                  Fair trade standards aim to ensure that producers are fairly paid.
     environmental practices, including the following: in forestry,             There are 25 national fair trade organizations that are members of
     the Forest Stewardship Council Principles and Criteria; for soy, the       Fairtrade International. These organizations use a standard that
     Roundtable on Responsible Soy Standard and the Proterra Standard;          requires buyers to pay a price to producers that aims to cover the costs
     for oil palm, the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil; for coffee, cocoa,   of sustainable production and to pay an additional sum that producers
     bananas, flowers, pineapple, and tea, the Sustainable Agriculture          can invest in development. Advance payments and signed contracts
     Network Standard; and also for coffee, cocoa, and tea, the UTZ             are also included in the approach. The World Fairtrade Organization,
     Certified standards. These standards also typically include traceability   the Network of European Worldshops, and the European Fair Trade
     and control systems for the supply chain.                                  Association are other examples.

     Primary producers may also apply standards that focus on good              Organic certification is also used in primary production. Organic
     agricultural practices and traceability. These are particularly            certification includes avoidance of synthetic chemical inputs
     relevant for products directly consumed, in which case these types         not on the National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances
     of standards are legally required for market access. These standards       (fertilizer, pesticides, antibiotics, food additives), genetically
     may also include elements of food safety. For example, GlobalGAP           modified organisms, irradiation, and the use of sewage sludge.
     is applied to fruits and vegetables, combinable crops, coffee, tea,        The International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements
     flowers, and ornamental plants.                                            unites 750 member organizations in 116 countries. Non-genetically
                                                                                modified organisms standards are also available.
     The following are examples of key standards:
                                                                                Management system standards provide a framework for setting
     Food safety standards include the Global Food Safety Initiative,           policy and developing and implementing policy and procedures but
     Safe Quality Food, British Retail Consortium, International Food           do not define what these should be. For example, the International
     Safety, and Food Safety System Certification 22000. These include          Organization for Standardization’s 9000 series is for quality
     practices in the supply chain and traceability back to source.             management, and their 14000 series is for environmental management.




66
                                   SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES
                                   FOR IMPLEMENTING STANDARDS
                                   Strategies for firms interested in adopting standards along smallholder supply chains include:

                                   •	 Leveraging existing structures and relationships
                                   •	 Planning a step-wise approach
                                   •	 Using group certification

                                   Leveraging Existing Structures and Relationships

                                   Firms implementing good practices in their smallholder suppliers will benefit from integrating
                                   implementation into core business activities. As much as possible, firms should build on
                                   existing systems and programs within the organization. For example, traceability systems that
                                   are used for food safety, monitoring farmer productivity, quality, or payments can be extended
                                   to include additional social and environmental verification elements. Existing management
                                   systems, such as the Environmental and Social Management System, the International
                                   Organization for Standardization (ISO 14001 and ISO 2200), and Hazard Analysis and Critical
                                   Control Points can be valuable platforms for implementation.

                                   Building on existing external programs and groups that smallholders may be involved in is another
                                   efficient pathway for implementation. Existing farmer field schools and other farmer development
                                   programs operated by government, development agencies, or other nongovernmental
                                   organizations may provide useful synergies and partnerships. Building on existing farmer
                                   organizations, such as those described in chapter 3, can save time and money. Firms should also
                                   look beyond the more traditional farmer-based groups to villages, families and clans, schools,
                                   churches, and even sports groups to leverage existing relationships and trust between farmers.
                                   Working with these groups may require building capacity to implement traceability or to oversee
                                   group certification programs, which is discussed further below.

                                   It can be useful for firms to engage with others in the sector as partners for implementation,
                                   particularly in cases where there are potentially pre-competitive challenges, such as child labor,
                                   that would benefit from sector or national approaches. Partnerships and pooling of resources
                                   may be valuable when firms have limited leverage, such as cases in which smallholders have
                                   the flexibility of selling to multiple firms.

                                   Planning a Step-Wise Approach

                                   A step-wise approach to standards compliance may be a cost-effective strategy for responding to
                                   buyers’ demands for good environmental and social practices. When production practices among
                                   smallholder farmers are significantly out of compliance with the preferred standard scheme, a
Implementing standards in
                                   step-wise approach can lay out a roadmap for the firms, farmers, and buyers. Adopting this
stages, known as a step-wise
approach, reduces the up front     approach may require firms to negotiate with their buyers on the timescale of compliance.
costs to firms and farmers while
communicating to consumers a       The first step should be to create a baseline understanding of the smallholders’ current status
firm’s commitment to standards.    with respect to performance against the standard and the organizational status of farmers. Firms
                                   should also understand what the biggest challenges for compliance will be. It is also important to
                                   define the end goal of the program. End goals may include third-party certification of 100 percent
                                   of the smallholder supply base or measured improvements in specific smallholder practices.

                                   Interim goals may include setting up an internal verification system for the smallholder supply
                                   base, annual numerical targets for the number of farmers reached through training, or targets
                                   for the number of farmers included in the verification program. Benchmarking continuous
                                   improvement and targets for closing out non-compliances may also be used as an approach.




                                                                                                                                        67
                                        Firms may also start implementation with a handful of farmer groups and extend the program
                                        to the full smallholder supply base over time. This approach may allow firms to fulfill compliance/
                                        certification requirements earlier with a smaller portion of supply. Alternatively, firms may stagger
                                        the roll-out of their smallholder program based on key issues. For example, training and verification
                                        may focus first on easy wins and proceed to more challenging implementation topics later.




               IN PRACTICE              CREATING A STEPWISE APPROACH TO STANDARDS COMPLIANCE

                                        India is one of the largest and lowest cost producers of fruits and vegetables, but little of that production reaches
                                        global markets because supply chains fail to comply with stringent food-safety standards demanded by major importing
                                        countries. Indian firm Jain Irrigation System Ltd. is the largest mango puree producer in the world and the second-
                                        largest dehydrated onion producer. Jain determined that it would like to provide buyers with assurances on the use of
                                        good agricultural practices at the farm level, specifically around pesticide use and worker health and safety, without
                                        significantly increasing costs to farmers or the firm.

                                        With support from IFC, Jain developed and piloted a private “JAIN GAP” standard to apply to farmers in the
                                        supply chain. The JAIN GAP standard is a modified/simplified version of GLOBALGAP as a means to bring some
                                        measure of food safety and GAP standards to the JAIN supply base while minimizing the costs of compliance
                                        to both farmers and JAIN. The JAIN GAP standard is comprised of 74 compliance criteria of the total 256
                                        GLOBALGAP criteria.

                                        The firm trained 79 JAIN extensionists on the standard, who subsequently supported 1,340 farmers to achieve
                                        compliance with the standard, bringing 5,573 acres of land under the JAIN GAP system. Jain is now scaling up the
                                        standard to the rest of its direct farm suppliers.

                                        In addition to the direct impacts of the JAIN GAP, the project has also impacted the sector level. GLOBALGAP
                                        recognizes the JAIN GAP standard as a “primary farm assurance” standard. A basic requirement IndiaGAP
                                        standard was developed based on the JAIN GAP standard with significant input from IFC. Farmers will now have
                                        a two-step approach for compliance with IndiaGAP.




                                        Using Group Certification

                                        Group certification models issue one certificate to a number of smallholders complying with
                                        a standard. Depending on the buying relationship between the firm and the smallholders
                                        and the capacity of the producer organization, either the firm or the producer organization
                                        maintains an internal control system that manages compliance with the standard and
                                        facilitates certification. The internal control system documents each farmer in the group
     Group certification consolidates   and coordinates an internal verification program (first or second party) that measures each
     verification efforts at the        farmer’s performance. The system also tracks non-compliances and remedial actions taken
     producer organization level. It    in response. In doing so, internal control systems provide full traceability of suppliers to the
     can reduce costs, but requires a
                                        producer organization. Some systems include mechanisms to exclude non-performing farmers
     fairly well-established producer
     organization.
                                        or farmer groups. Third-party verifiers inspect the functioning of the system and spot-check
                                        the practices of a sample of individual farmers.

                                        If smallholders sell to multiple firms or have a strong existing group organization, it may be more
                                        appropriate for the group to maintain and manage an internal control system for group verification.
                                        However, if the smallholders are effectively tied to the firm due to geography, land-lease and input
                                        agreements, or other contracts, it may be more appropriate for the firm to manage certification
                                        initially and build the group capacity to deploy some of the elements of the system.




68
IN PRACTICE   IFC worked with Unifrutti, Rainforest Alliance, and farmers’ cooperatives on a standards initiative in Mindanao,
              Philippines. The program had two goals: 1) to certify banana growers so their production could reach high-value
              markets in Japan, and 2) to establish a local capacity for third-party inspection and certification.

              Rainforest certified banana farmers increased their revenue by more than $300 per hectare, while reducing their
              costs by $50 per hectare. In addition, the certified farmers noted that it became easier for them to access bank
              financing and, because of the business training, they felt more confident to engage with banks. Since the end of
              the IFC program, the presence of three local inspectors has benefited firms and farmers in other sectors to obtain
              Rainforest Alliance certification.




              The internal control system may be tiered, in which groups of farmers are trained and verified,
              feeding results into a central system (much like a plantation might manage blocks or a large
              farm manages fields), or all farmers can feed directly into a single internal control system.
              When large numbers of smallholders exist, a sub-group approach is recommended. In many
              cases, standards systems require homogeneity of members in terms of geographical locations,
              production system, size of holding, and common marketing systems.




                  BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR GROUP CERTIFICATION

                  Group certification generally requires:

                  •	   A central body such as a producer organization
                  •	   A defined group of smallholders
                  •	   Files on all members
                  •	   At least annual internal inspection
                  •	   Set procedures and sanctions to address non-compliance




IN PRACTICE   BUILDING CAPACITY OF PRODUCER GROUPS CAN LEAD TO GROUP CERTIFICATION

              In Eastern Ghana, the Christian Impact Mission group organized farmers into small groupings of up to 15 farmers,
              teaching different methods of adaptation to climate change, selection of appropriate crops, rain water storage,
              and other farming methods. While the group primarily aims to mobilize communities to develop home-grown
              transformation initiatives, the organization of farmers has allowed them to access high-value export markets that
              they would not have been able to do as individuals. These types of existing groups can be developed to act as
              focal points for implementing group certification.




                                                                                                                                   69
     CONSIDERATIONS WHEN DECIDING ON ENGAGEMENT STRATEGIES
     Identify the Resources Needed for Implementation

     When considering the approach to standards and certification, firms should budget for both
     the costs of compliance and the costs of certification.

     Within the firm, time for managing the implementation should be planned. Responsibility
     may sit within the function of a quality manager or a smallholder sourcing manager, and it
     is important to include additional staff time for planning and monitoring implementation,
     in addition to field activities. Firms working with smallholders should budget for activities
     such as strengthening farmer organization, gap assessment of current smallholder practices,
     training and other materials and resources to improve practice, and ongoing first-party
     verification of smallholders. Depending on the number of smallholders and the status of
     their current practices, these costs may vary significantly. However, if a firm is investing
     in strengthening smallholder supply chains, these may not be costs that are exclusive to
     standards implementation.

     Firms should budget for audits when third-party verification is used as part of a certification
     system. Full audits are typically undertaken every three to five years, with annual surveillance
     visits. Certification may include membership fees for the firm to join the national or global
     organization that administers the standards system and may also include a certification fee
     levied by the auditor. Budgeting for certification is straightforward. Price quotes can be
     obtained from certification bodies, or, using the guidance provided by the standards systems
     on auditing, firms can calculate the number of days it will take to audit their smallholder
     operators and estimate a day rate for auditing.

     Even in situations where certification is not sought, it can be useful to use third parties to
     provide an independent assessment of compliance as both a tool for managing the program
     internally and for risk management. Third-party auditors may also be used for pre-assessment,
     before undertaking a certification audit, to identify any final outstanding issues.

     Ensure That the Approach Is Sustainable for Smallholders

     As with any smallholder investment, it is important to ensure that smallholders’ incentives are
     aligned with the firm’s incentives when implementing a standards system. When determining
     an engagement strategy for standards and certification of smallholders, firms should consider
     not only the costs and benefits to their own organization, but also to the smallholders
     themselves. If farmers do not perceive benefits to changing their practices or are asked to
     incur additional costs, they may be unwilling to adopt and implement the practices required
     to comply with the standard.




70
                  IMPROVED AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES ARE OFTEN LABOR INTENSIVE

                  Pruning tree crops increases yields but requires labor with the technical knowledge and skills to prune
                  effectively. When pruning has been neglected for a long time, the amount of labor needed may be
                  beyond the capacity of farming households.

                  Farmers can control weeds at the base of tree crops with herbicides, such as paraquat, motorized
                  weed trimmers, or through hand cutting. However, since many certification programs ban paraquat, and
                  smallholders might not have access to motorized weed trimmers, smallholders often use machetes to
                  hand cut weeds. Hand cutting is a labor intensive and arduous task.




              For example, smallholder organic yields tend to be lower than farmers who use chemical
              fertilizer. Farmers who are certified organic may see a lower income if there is no price
              premium or if the premium does not recover the productivity loss. In certification programs
              like Rainforest Alliance and UTZ Certified, which permit judicious use of agricultural
              chemicals, farmers must purchase protective gear for spraying and construct secure storage
              for the chemicals. If these additional costs are more than the premium farmers receive from
              certification, they will likely discontinue the practices, and the firm will lose the investment.
              Some firms purchase these additional investments for farmer suppliers in order to mitigate
              farmers’ costs. In other cases, providing training to farmers on benefits to farmer health and
              groundwater protection may help farmers identify the non-financial benefits to compliance.

              Even if the firm is proposing to pay a higher price, the firm should calculate the likely
              costs of compliance and any additional costs that might be borne by the smallholders for
              certification. The firm should ensure that the farmer has a net positive outcome. The costs of
              compliance may include additional recordkeeping and maintaining an internal control system
              with first-party verification. If the benefits are too small or accrued only in the long-run,
              firms may propose a cost-sharing mechanism with farmers during the first few years of the
              program. The firm should ensure that part of the implementation program includes showing
              smallholders and groups of smallholders how to calculate cost-benefits for themselves, as
              well as encouraging smallholders to consider other benefits, such as health, drinking water,
              and other ecosystem values.




IN PRACTICE   COCOA TRADERS TAKE A PROACTIVE APPROACH TO ADDRESSING SOCIAL RISKS

              Some issues may be so endemic to a country or sector that partnerships are needed to transform the sector.
              For example, in Côte d’Ivoire, where 40 percent of the world’s cocoa is grown, it is estimated that hundreds
              of thousands of children, some as slaves, are working in the sector. The International Cocoa Initiative, with
              members such as Mars, Nestle, Hershey, Ferrero, and Mondelez (Kraft), has partnered with the International
              Labour Organization to combat child labor in 80 cocoa-growing communities (5,000 farmers) with funding
              from the U.S. Department of Labor. Transforming the sector will enable compliance by smallholders with cocoa
              standards such as the Sustainable Agriculture Network and UTZ .




                                                                                                                              71
     USEFUL RESOURCES
     Buying Green? Field Experimental Tests of Consumer Support for Environmentalism, Massachusetts
     Institute of Technology Political Science Department: Working Paper No. 2012-14, http://polisci2.ucsd.
     edu/pelg/hiscox_hainmueller_buying_green.pdf

     Certification and Roundtables: Do They Work?, World Wildlife Fund, 2010, http://assets.wwf.org.uk/
     downloads/wwf_certification_and_roundtables_briefing.pdf

     The Committee on Sustainability Assessment (COSA), www.thecosa.org
     Collects data across regions and sectors to evaluate the costs and benefits of standards.

     Food and Agriculture: The Future of Sustainability, United Nations Division of Economic and Social
     Affairs. http://thecosa.org/future-of-sustainability.html

     ISEAL Common Requirements for Certification of Producer Groups, http://www.isealalliance.org/online-
     community/resources/common-requirements-for-certification-of-producer-groups
     Focuses on requirements for the credible structure and functioning of a group. It applies primarily to
     agricultural producers but is intended to be generic enough for application to other sectors.

     Oil Palm Smallholder Certification

     Palm Oil Producer Support Initiative (POPSI), http://solidaridadnetwork.org/palmoil

     RSPO Principles and Criteria for Sustainable, Palm Oil Production, Guidance on Scheme Smallholders
     (2009), RSPO Guidance for Independent Smallholders under Group Certification and RSPO Standard for
     Group Certification (2010), http://www.rspo.org/en/document_smallholders_group_certification
     RSPO Smallholders Working Group, http://www.rspo.org/en/smallholders_working_group

     Soy Smallholder Certification

     Soy Producer Support Initiative (SOYPSI), http://solidaridadnetwork.org/soy-producer-support-initiative
     Helps owners of small- and medium-sized farms improve production and prepare for RTRS certification. In
     2011, more than 20,000 smallholders in India, Brazil, and Bolivia participated in SOYPSI projects. Thousands
     of smallholders in India, Brazil, Bolivia, and China are projected to get certified in the years after.

     Roundtable on Sustainable Soy Association (RTRS), www.responsiblesoy.org
     An international multi-stakeholder initiative founded in 2006 that promotes the use and growth of
     responsible production of soy. RTRS has developed a global standard for responsible soy production.

     Agriculture Smallholder Certification

     4C Association for Coffee. http://www.4c-coffeeassociation.org/
     The 4C Association is a multi-stakeholder organization committed to addressing the sustainability issues
     of the coffee sector in a pre-competitive manner. The 4C Association defines and maintains the 4C
     Code of Conduct, the baseline standard for sustainability in the coffee sector

     Fairtrade International (FLO), The Fairtrade Foundation, the Fairtrade Federation and others,
     www.fairtrade.net, www.fairtrade.org.uk, www.fairtradefederation.org and others
     These organizations support and certify improved terms of trade between producers and consumers.
     Each organization focuses on consumers in a different part of the world, and they have varying
     standards and certification processes.

     FSC Smallholders Portal, https://ic.fsc.org/smallholder-support.152.htm
     The Forestry Stewardship Council provides guidance, resources, and communications directly from FSC
     on small, low-intensity, and community certificate holders.

     Generic Manual on Quality Management System for Smallholder Horticultural Farmer Groups in Kenya
     for Certification to EURGAP Option 2, (GTZ 2006). http://www1.globalgap.org/cms/upload/Documents/
     QMS_Manual-Final-1.pdf




72
GlobalGAP, http://www1.globalgap.org/cms/front_content.php?idcat=70
Smallholder Implementation guidelines, practical tools, and global best practice guidelines to facilitate
implementation of the standard by smallholders worldwide.

The PEFC Group Forest Management Certification (PEFC ST 1002:2010). http://www.pefc.org/standards/
technical-documentation

Sustainable Agriculture Network (SAN) standard and policy for group certification, http://sanstandards.org/
userfiles/SAN-S-3-1%20SAN%20Group%20Certification%20Standard%20March%202011%20v2.pdf
Applies to producer groups, such as associations, cooperatives, and federations.

Rainforest Alliance, www.rainforest-alliance.org
Develops social and environmental standards in a variety of fields. The auditing division of Rainforest
Alliance, RA-Cert, provides independent verification services based on these standards.

Smithsonian Bird Friendly Certification, www.nationalzoo.si.edu/scbi/migratorybirds/coffee/roaster.cfm
A program implemented by the Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center. It certifies coffee production that
preserves bird habitats.

UTZ Certified, www.utzcertified.org
Develops social and environmental standards in the coffee, cocoa and tea sectors and provides
independent verification services based on their standard.

Organic Smallholder Certification

IFOAM Smallholder Group Certification, Guidance Manual for Producer Organizations, http://www.imo.
ch/portal/pics/documents/ics_guidance_manual.pdf

Smallholder Group Certification—Training Curriculum for Producer Organizations, www.ifoam.org
Provides trainers with the information and the training materials necessary to organize training on ICS
for smallholder groups. Available from IFOAM, free for members.




                                                                                                              73
74
CHAPTER 6
Increasing Access
to Inputs




                    O
    Why read this chapter?


    Expanding smallholders’ use of inputs is an
    effective mechanism for increasing quality and
    productivity and usually costs less per farmer than
    training. Partnerships between off-takers, input
    suppliers, and financial institutions, known as
    outgrower schemes, can address the barriers to
    input of adoption and increase the likelihood of a
    project’s success.




P
                                     Increasing Access to Inputs
                                     THE BUSINESS CASE FOR INCREASING ACCESS TO INPUTS AMONG
Inputs can be                        SMALLHOLDER FARMERS
broadly defined to
                                     Low quality and productivity among smallholders results in part from their inefficient use of
include: planting                    inputs such as planting seed, fertilizer, and crop protection products (see figure 6.1). Even
seed, tree seedlings,                when farmers employ inputs, they are often of poor quality and applied ineffectively. Farmers
                                     may lack irrigation and planting and post-harvest technology, relying instead on hand tools
fertilizer, chemical                 and labor-intensive methods that produce inferior results. The primary reasons for limited
and non-chemical                     input use among smallholders are:
crop protection                      •	   Lack of opportunities to purchase inputs due to physical distance, affordability, and financing
products, agricultural               •	   Lack of knowledge about the benefits and proper use of inputs
                                     •	   An unwillingness to take risks due to the tenuous and traditional nature of smallholder farming
hand tools,                          •	   A fear of counterfeit products with low efficacy
irrigation products
                                     For these reasons, firms that manufacture and distribute agricultural inputs may view smallholder
(like drip systems),                 farmers as a market that is difficult to serve and one that provides narrow profit margins.
and mechanized
                                     Addressing inefficient input use among smallholder farmers is a significant concern, not just
equipment for                        for input firms, but for the agricultural industry as a whole. As global food demand rises, more
production or                        effective input use among smallholders will allow for the intensification of production on marginal
                                     lands. Climate change also increases the need for inputs because farmers must adopt new crop
processing.                          varieties that are adapted to new and intensified weather patterns. Changing rainfall patterns and




Figure 6.1. Symptoms of inefficient use of inputs.

Low quality of smallholder supply can often be attributed to poor use of inputs.




                                                                                       PEST                       DIFFICULT TO
                                                                                       DAMAGE                     PROCESS

                                                                                       Example:                    Example:
                                TOO MUCH                      LOW OIL                  Coffee yields reduced       Dura variety oil palm
                                VARIABILITY                   CONTENT                  and trees dying             with hard shell
  SMALL
  SEEDS                         Example:                      Example:                 Cause:                      Cause:
  	                             Aromatic rice with            Oilseeds and cocoa       Coffee rust virus           Outdated variety
  Example:                      mixed grain length                                     (Hemileia vastatrix),       often grown by
  High-bean-count                                             Cause:                   possibly exacerbated        smallholders
  cocoa                         Cause:                        Poor plant nutrition     by climate change
                                Recycled seed that            and/or variety                                       Input needed:
  Cause:                        has become too                                         Input needed:               Input needed:
  Poor plant nutrition          variable                      Input needed:            Seedlings for rust-         Seedlings of the
                                                              Improved planting        resistant varieties         hybrid Tenera variety
  Input needed:                 Input needed:                 material and/or          and financing for           and financing for
  Fertilizer                    Improved seed                 fertilizer               replanting                  replanting




                                                                                                                                            75
                                      groundwater depletion increases the need for irrigation. The rising price of chemical fertilizers and
                                      pesticides highlights the need to use petroleum-based inputs efficiently and effectively.

                                      Smallholders who produce cash crops are usually willing to purchase inputs if they have access
                                      to quality products and if they are convinced that the investment will increase their income. The
                                      right mechanisms for supplying smallholders with inputs have the potential to raise farm incomes,
                                      improve sustainability, and generate revenue for businesses. Smallholders who primarily grow food
                                      crops for family consumption have difficulty affording inputs. However, firms can create a market
                                      for inputs among subsistence farmers through strategies, such as conservation farming (described
                                      later in the chapter), that bridge the gap between subsistence and more commercial farming.


                                      SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES
                                      FOR INCREASING ACCESS TO INPUTS
                                      This section addresses strategies and techniques for increasing demand for inputs among
                                      smallholder farmers and ensuring that farmers use inputs effectively. The uses and
                                      characteristics of each input is explored, followed by a discussion of strategies and best
                                      practices for marketing, distributing, and training farmers in the input’s use.

                                      Planting Material

                                      Planting material—seeds, seedlings, cuttings, and grafts—is the most basic input for any
                                      farmer, affecting both crop yield and quality. In most of Africa and isolated regions of Asia,
                                      farmers of staple crops such as maize, oilseeds, and rice use open-pollinated or inbred
                                      varieties and save their seed to replant year after year. Elsewhere in the developing world,
                                      where the “green revolution” has occurred, farmers tend to opt for more expensive hybrid
                                      seed because it is significantly more productive. In areas where farming is most advanced,
                                      genetically modified seed is available to smallholders. Seedlings and grafts to produce or
                                      improve tree crops can come from existing trees, seed, or cloned plant material.

                                      Even though improved planting material is a critical input for smallholders, it is difficult for
                                      agribusinesses to develop profitable business models around open-pollinated seed and tree
                                      seedlings produced from grafts or seeds. The margins for these products are low, and once
                                      farmers have acquired them, there is little repeat business. Many seed companies prefer to
                                      focus on hybrid and GMO seeds, but these seeds require significant investment costs, as
                                      described in figure 6.2. The costs of research and development raise the price of hybrid and
                                      GMO seeds, moving them beyond the range of affordability for many smallholders. This poses
                                      a problem for agribusinesses that work with smallholders who are still using poor-quality,
                                      open-pollinated seeds because improved, open-pollinated seeds are an affordable stepping
                                      stone to more productive hybrids. The Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa and other
                                      organizations are developing innovative approaches to address this problem.



     Figure 6.2. Process to bring new varieties of seed to market.

                                                     On-farm testing
                                                                                                 Production of          Bulking by seed
                                                     to determine
       Selection and           On-station                                  Variety release       breeders’ seed         companies,
                                                     suitability for
       breeding at             testing under                               by government         and foundation         POs, and other
                                                     agro-climate,
       research institutes     controlled                                  seed regulators       seed by research       entitites for sale
                                                     yield, pest
       or seed companies       conditions                                                        institutes or seed     or distribution to
                                                     resistance, and
                                                                                                 companies              farmers
                                                     crop quality




76
                                    Increasing access to open-pollinated seed is an effective way to increase productivity, particularly
                                    if farmers have been recycling their seed for many years. As open-pollinated varieties are reused,
                                    the range of each attribute of the crop widens. For example, the number of days to crop
                                    maturity may be 60 to 65 days when the seed is three generations old and may expand to
                                    55 to 70 days when the seed is 10 generations old. Because there is no longer an optimum
                                    harvest date, most of the crop is either under-ripe or lost on the ground at harvest, and yield is
                                    significantly reduced. This is a typical situation in Africa and less developed parts of Asia.
Improved, open-pollinated seeds
are an affordable stepping stone    While low cost and ability to reuse the seed are advantages for farmers, these characteristics
for smallholders to transition to   limit the profitability of open-pollinated seeds for seed companies. Open-pollinated seeds
more productive hybrids.            are usually produced by smallholder seed farmers who are under contract to a firm. They are
                                    typically paid 1.2 to two times the crop price to compensate for the extra labor that is required
                                    to grow planting seed. After processing, packaging, and distribution, open-pollinated seeds
                                    usually retail for two to three times the crop price.

                                    In contrast, hybrid seed is a more attractive product for seed companies. Hybrid seeds are developed
                                    under more complicated production techniques and at higher labor costs. The higher development
                                    cost is reflected in the price—hybrid seed retails for up to 10 times the price of the same crop. Most
                                    hybrid varieties are selected to make effective use of fertilizer, and they underperform when grown
                                    without enough fertilizer, reducing their cost-effectiveness. Therefore, hybrid seed and fertilizer
                                    should be thought of as a package. Farmers often lack the cash to purchase new seed at planting
                                    time. Lacking fresh seed, they may attempt to replant the crop as seed, reducing productivity. The
                                    higher cost and need for fertilizer makes hybrid seed riskier for off-takers to provide to suppliers on
                                    credit, especially in loose supply chains with significant side-selling.




          IN PRACTICE               CAMBODIAN RICE MILLS PRODUCE PLANTING SEED TO IMPROVE MILLING QUALITY

                                    The green revolution that brought hybrid seeds to most of Asia never reached the rice sector in Cambodia.
                                    Consequently, smallholders have recycled their rice seed for many years. As a result, the grain length and color of
                                    the rice has become highly variable. This variation limits the quality of aromatic rice from Cambodia. Working with
                                    IFC, several mills have begun multiplying improved, aromatic rice seed for sale or distribution on credit to farmers
                                    in their supply chains. The improved seed has uniform grain length and color, resulting in 4 percent higher head
                                    rice recovery for the partner mills. For farmers, the improved inbred seed yields 20 percent more than recycled
                                    seed, and it can be reused for up to four seasons.




                                    Firms may also market tree seedlings to smallholders. Quality seedlings are critical for farmers
                                    of tree crops because the tree may produce fruit for 20 or 30 years. Tree seedlings are a
                                    relatively low-cost input when amortized over the crop’s life span. However, smallholders may
                                    have difficulty financing seedlings because the first crop isn’t harvested until several years after
                                    planting. Grafting can reduce the time between the investment in planting material and the
                                    first harvest by making use of existing rootstock. Under the right conditions and with the proper
                                    facilities and training, off-takers and smallholders can produce quality scions and graft their
                                    own trees. Input suppliers must compete with these “in-house” techniques when marketing
                                    seedlings and scions, creating similar challenges to marketing open-pollinated seed varieties.

                                    Firms that produce crops on plantations have traditionally conducted basic research on the
                                    crops they produce. The agronomic research and variety development done by firms in the oil
                                    palm sector is a good example. More recently, firms that procure and utilize crops produced
                                    by smallholders have begun to support basic research. Notable examples are the collaborative
                                    efforts initiated by Mars and General Mills to map the genomes of cocoa and vanilla to
                                    accelerate the development of new varieties.



                                                                                                                                                           77
         INCREASING PRODUCTIVITY THROUGH COFFEE SEEDLINGS

         In East Timor, the Cooperativa Café Timor has established a network of 420 farmer-owned seedling
         nurseries, which produce more than 1 million coffee seedlings per year. CCT provides training and poly
         bags to hold the seedlings, while the farmers produce compost and provide labor. CCT then purchases
         the seedlings at $0.10 each and distributes them to farmers in their supply chain to fill in gaps in their
         fields. This effort is supported by CCT’s partners, Cooperative Business International and the National
         Cooperative Business Association, with funding from USAID and New Zealand AID.




     For poultry, dairy, and livestock farmers, the analogous inputs are breeding stock or young
     animals selected for favorable attributes, such as size, milk production, or ability to efficiently
     convert feed into meat. For example, chicks that reach market size in six weeks have been bred
     to use feed far more efficiently than village chickens and are more profitable for smallholders.

     Marketing and Distribution Strategies for Supplying Planting Material

     Off-Takers
     Off-takers may reduce the cost of providing planting material if they grow planting seed or
     seedlings in-house. Firms that produce some crops on plantations and purchase the balance
     from smallholders may already have facilities to grow high-quality seedlings. For some tree
     crops, such as cocoa, disease-resistant clones for grafting are the recommended option. Seed
     for open-pollinated vegetables, such as paprika, can be collected during processing and
     cleaned for redistribution.

     Production of open-pollinated planting seed is not technically complex, as long as high-quality
     foundation seed is available. Winnowing, cleaning, and packing can be done by hand using
     temporary labor. Motorized seed-cleaning equipment is also available in a range of capacities.

     Seed Suppliers
     Seed companies or off-takers may also contract producer organizations to produce seed or
     seedlings. Producer organizations with the right foundational material and training can earn
     additional revenue through these activities. The organizations may also market fertilizer and
     other inputs.

     Sample packs accompanied by simple directions for sowing and production are a good way
     to allow farmers to experiment with a new crop or variety.

     Fertilizer

     Fertilizer replaces the nitrogen and other nutrients that crops absorb from a field and that
     are naturally lacking in many tropical soils. This section will focus primarily on the use of
     inorganic fertilizer by smallholders. However, effective farmers will use a combination or
     organic and inorganic nutrition sources. Other resources for working with smallholders on
     organic fertilizer and nitrogen-fixing crops may be found in the “Useful Resources” section
     at the end of this chapter.




78
                                  Table 6.1. Types of fertilizers and their roles in maintaining soil health.
                                   Inorganic fertilizer
                                   -- Soil testing is critical to understand soil defficiencies.
                                   -- Should be the correct blend of nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus (NPK) and other elements for the soil
                                      and crop in question.
                                   -- Needs to be applied in the right location at the correct time.
                                   Organic fertilizer
                                   --   Compost can be made from manure, crop waste, or vegetation.
                                   --   Can be difficult to move from production areas to fields if farmers lack transport.
                                   --   Organic mulch reduces weeds and retains soil moisture.
                                   --   Necessary in organic production to avoid low yields.
                                   Nitrogen-fixing cover
                                   --   There are numerous leguminous cover crops that can be used in every situation.
                                   --   Some of these crops, like groundnuts, produce a food crop as well as improve the soil.
                                   --    Cover crops also reduce weed growth.
                                   --   Leguminous tree crops can provide shade for coffee and cocoa.


                                  The International Fertilizer Development Center developed a number of techniques and
                                  technologies to enable smallholders to utilize fertilizer more effectively. These include:
A link to the International
Fertilizer Development Center’s   •	 Banding—placing the fertilizer in proximity to the crop
website can be found at           •	 Controlled-release pellets
www.farms2firms.org.              •	 Deep-placement fertilizer for rice production to prevent losses during irrigation




          IN PRACTICE             SOIL TESTING IMPROVES FERTILIZER APPLICATION AMONG RWANDAN COFFEE FARMERS

                                  TechnoServe worked with the Rwandan Coffee Authority to conduct a national soil and leaf survey to determine
                                  the existing levels of key soil nutrients in all coffee production areas. This study found that highly acidic soils in
                                  many parts of Rwanda require application of lime to increase soil pH. The survey also found low levels of zinc,
                                  boron, and sulfur, which can have a deleterious effect on yields and coffee quality. The survey resulted in the
                                  development of two new fertilizer blends, which are now available for purchase, designed for Rwandan coffee
                                  farmers. The results of the survey were also used to develop fertilizer blend recommendations, based on location
                                  and application instructions, that have been disseminated to 30,000 farmers via demonstration plots.




                                                                                                                                                           79
                                        Smallholders may reduce the effectiveness of fertilizer through poor practices. Due to lack
                                        of knowledge or in an attempt to stretch their limited incomes, smallholders might apply an
                                        inappropriate amount of fertilizers or apply it at the wrong time. They might also choose the
                                        incorrect type or apply it incorrectly. Finally, they might resell fertilizer to pay for other expenses.

                                        Inadequate Amount:

                                        •	 Hybrid seeds or “heavy feeders,” like oil palm, will significantly under-produce without
                                           sufficient fertilizer. Smallholders may use less fertilizer than required if they lack financing
                                           to buy the appropriate amount.

                                        •	 An exacerbating factor is that farmers tend to have cash after the harvest, but not at
                                           planting time. Fertilizer prices tend to be lower at harvest, so simply shifting the time of
                                           purchace can provide benefits to farmers

                                        Wrong Timing:
     Ensuring the right blend and
     proper application will increase
     the fertilizer’s effectiveness     •	 Smallholders may not know the correct time to apply fertilizer, or they may lack the funds
     on the plant and on farmers’          to purchase and apply it at the right time. Fertilizer that is applied at the wrong time,
     incomes.                              either in relation to rainfall patterns or crop stage, can have significantly reduced effect.

                                        Incorrect Application:

                                        •	 Farmers may lack the knowledge, equipment, or labor to properly apply fertilizer. Fertilizer
                                           that is not applied at the correct depth or location may wash away or fail to reach the crop’s
                                           roots. A related problem occurs when fields are not properly weeded, and the fertilizer
                                           nourishes the weeds instead of the crop.

                                        Inappropriate Type:

                                        •	 Farmers may use the wrong blend of nutrients for the particular crop and soil characteristics.
                                           Most crops and soil types require precise fertilizer formulations, but these may not be
                                           available to farmers. Soil and leaf-testing services can determine the correct blend but
                                           these too may be expensive or unavailable.

                                        Diversion:

                                        •	 When farmers receive fertilizer from off-takers or NGO programs for a particular crop,
                                           they may sell it to raise cash or apply it to other crops. Diversion to vegetables, which
                                           produce rapid returns, is common.


                                        Marketing and Distribution Strategies for Fertilizers

                                        Off-Takers
                                        If storage facilities are available in rural areas, it may be cost-effective to move fertilizer and other
                                        inputs in on the same trucks that take crops out. Such systems have functioned in southern
                                        Africa where many villages have under-utilized warehouses. The system can be beneficial for
                                        farmers because they can purchase fertilizer when they receive payment for crops. The system
                                        maximizes the likelihood that farmers will have cash on-hand for investing in fertilizer. Later in
                                        the year, when it is time to plant, farmers often lack cash to purchase inputs.

                                        Input Supply Companies
                                        Demonstration is the most effective way to market new products to smallholders. For
                                        production inputs, such as seed and fertilizer, demonstration plots managed by lead contact
                                        farmers are a good option. As discussed in chapter 4, lead contact farmers are community



80
    CONVEYING INFORMATION WITH INPUTS

    All inputs require some information to be used effectively. In some cases, this information can be
    conveyed on a label or brochure accompanying the product. However, in other cases, the information
    may be complex enough to require training. Sometimes, training and inputs work together synergistically.
    For example, training on correct pruning of tree crops has a number of benefits, one of which is more
    efficient fertilizer use.

    Even when farmers are knowledgeable about the proper use of inputs, they may lack the incentives to
    apply them appropriately. Certification programs such as Rainforest Alliance, UTZ Certified, and Global
    GAP are designed to ensure the correct use of inputs while increasing productivity. The programs create
    incentives for farmers and businesses at all points in the value chain to use optimum levels of good-quality
    inputs in a safe and effective manner. Chapter 5 provides more information on certification programs.




members given specific duties and leadership in an extension program because they are
interested in new ideas, have dynamic personalities, and are respected by other farmers. Their
authority makes them well-positioned to demonstrate new inputs.

Aligning the package sizes of fertilizer and crop protection products with average farm size
can make the products both more affordable and safer for smallholder farmers. These farmers
typically lack cash to purchase larger quantities, as well as secure storage facilities for partially
used containers.


CROP PROTECTION PRODUCTS
Crop protection products, such as pesticides and herbicides, are available in a wide variety of
chemical and non-chemical solutions. Most of these products can be used within sustainable
production systems if they are correctly applied. However, there are approximately 20
chemicals that are banned in many countries and which farmers in environmental certification
programs are not allowed to use due to high toxicity and environmental persistence.

The capacity of smallholders to effectively use crop protection products varies. A farmer
with limited opportunities to educate him or herself on proper application techniques may
misapply and waste crop protection products. If the farmer lacks protective gear and basic
application equipment, such as backpack sprayers, application efforts may cause health risks
to the farmer and the farmer’s family. Farmers with access to proper equipment and the
ability to correctly diagnose pests and diseases can properly apply product, but they may face
challenges distinguishing between genuine brands of product, good-quality generic products,
poor-quality generic products, and counterfeits.

Marketing and Distribution Strategies for Crop Protection Products

Fertilizer and crop protection products are often sold in generic form or diluted and/or
completely ineffective counterfeits. Government enforcement of copyright infringement may
be weak, and the only way for farmers to tell whether products are effective is to try them.
One strategy that has been developed for the same problem in the health sector is the use
of codes hidden by scratch-off material that enables the consumer to verify the product’s
authenticity by sending the firm a text message. An added benefit is that the firm collects
contact information from its customers.




                                                                                                                   81
     IN PRACTICE   NON-CHEMICAL ALTERNATIVES FOR CROP PROTECTION

                   Researchers have developed non-chemical pest control technologies for a variety of crops. For example, the
                   French research institute La Recharche Agronomique pour le Dévelopment has developed a trap for the coffee
                   berry borer called the Brocap Trap. This trap uses red color and a sweet smelling attractant to attract the coffee
                   berry borer pest. Another method to combat coffee berry borers is multiplication and application of a naturally
                   occurring soil fungus called Beauveria bassiana. In some cases, off-takers can produce these technologies in-
                   house, reducing their cost. Plastic row covers are another non-chemical control method for protecting vegetables
                   from climate extremes and pests.




                   IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT
                   A variety of relatively affordable technologies can irrigate using surface water and sub-surface
                   groundwater. Smallholders working lands with no accessible surface water and groundwater
                   deep below the surface have fewer options and face greater financing difficulties.

                   Irrigation may be a cost-effective investment for a farmer, but because it is relatively more
                   expensive than other inputs, off-takers generally do not provide this equipment on credit. An
                   exception might occur when the supply chain is tight and the crop is valuable.



                       AFFORDABLE IRRIGATION TECHNOLOGIES FOR SMALLHOLDERS

                       Small farm reservoirs and check dams: These small-scale civil works trap rainwater run-off for
                       irrigation or livestock. They can be constructed by hand or using basic equipment.

                       Well-auguring and jetting systems: These systems use hand augurs or small, motorized pumps to insert
                       low-cost tube wells into shallow water tables. They are often used in combination with treadle pumps.

                       Treadle pumps: These low-cost, foot-operated pumps draw water from up to seven meters and irrigate
                       up to 0.5 hectares of land. They are ideal for vegetable and small-scale rice production. The price of
                       treadle pumps ranges from $20 in Asia to $100 in Africa. Small, motorized pumps are also popular, but
                       cost several hundred dollars for equivalent capacity.

                       Drip irrigation: Low-cost drip systems increase productivity and conserve water by delivering the
                       optimal amount of water to crop roots. They are typically used with tree crops and vegetables. The least
                       expensive systems cost less than $500 per hectare. A very basic form of drip irrigation uses clay water
                       containers buried next to plants.




                   Marketing and Distribution Strategies for Irrigation Equipment

                   Given the relatively larger investment that irrigation and other technologies represent for
                   smallholders, adoption may be a challenge. Some extension programs begin with a rent-to-
                   own policy on technology. This reduces the risk for initial adopters while getting products into
                   the field for demonstration purposes. Another strategy is to demonstrate products at market
                   days, when farmers are gathered together and have cash. Yet another strategy is a road
                   show, during which a truck drives through villages conducting demonstrations, screening
                   promotional videos, and selling the product.




82
                                   Vendors of irrigation pumps and other mechanical equipment should ensure the availability of
                                   spare parts and after-sales service. Agro-input agents, discussed below, may offer this service,
                                   but many small shops do not have qualified technicians on staff. Another option is to train the
                                   most dynamic customers to make simple repairs, as these farmers understand the technology
                                   and are accessible to other farmers.


                                   PRODUCTION AND POST-HARVEST PROCESSING EQUIPMENT
                                   Technologies that support farmers during planting, cultivating, and post-harvest processing
                                   can improve efficiency and productivity, as well as increase and maintain quality after harvest.
                                   They can also improve farmers’ welfare by reducing manual labor.



EXAMPLES OF PRODUCTION AND POST-HARVEST PROCESSING EQUIPMENT

There are a wide variety of technologies that are suitable for           Pollination: Insect pollinators are a crucial input for certain crops.
smallholders, and they tend to be crop-specific, so the following        For example, sunflower yields are improved if farmers keep bees
examples are not exhaustive.                                             nearby, so bee hives can be an important input.

Conservation farming packages: These packages include                    Manual and motorized equipment for harvesting, threshing,
techniques and tools for producing field crops, such as soy,             and winnowing: There are a wide variety of technologies for
groundnuts, maize, and cotton, in low-rainfall conditions. They          different crops, at varying levels of sophistication, that reduce labor
originated in southern Africa and have been developed for manual,        costs, protect crop quality, and reduce the time from harvest to market
animal-traction, and motorized farming. At each technology level, the    during harvest. In many cases, small rural businesses use these
packages are designed to use inputs efficiently, while conserving soil   technologies to provide services to smallholders.
moisture, nutrients, and structure. One interesting technology is the
“weed wipe,” which allows smallholders to apply contact herbicide        U.V.-resistant plastic film for crop drying: Firms provide plastic
directly to weeds rapidly and safely.                                    film to their suppliers to enable them to build low-cost bamboo drying
                                                                         racks for coffee and cocoa. The use of covered racks speeds drying
Seeding tools: These tools reduce labor by automating the planting       and protects quality.
process and help farmers grow the optimum number of plants per
hectare. Examples include the International Rice Research Institute’s    Large grain bags: These are hermetic or open grain bags that hold
manual drum seeder for rice and the affordable seed drill for zero       up to one ton. Providing farmers with grain bags may reduce handling
tillage agriculture, both of which are popular in India.                 costs and pest infestations.




      IN PRACTICE                  INCREASING ACCESS TO INPUTS THROUGH AGRO-RETAILERS1

                                   CNFA and its Kenyan affiliate AGMARK provided training to more than 3,000 agro-retailer dealers in 64 districts
                                   across Kenya. Dealers were trained in safe handling and the use of plant protection products, crop husbandry
                                   practices, and business management. The dealers were also linked to input-supply companies to increase
                                   the range of products they carried. More than 7.1 million Kenyans have access to the dealer network. After
                                   completing the program, agro-retailers began to offer farmers a range of services, in addition to marketing an
                                   expanded range of inputs. They also created demonstration plots, held field days, and contacted village-based
                                   savings programs interested in purchasing inputs.




                                                                                                                                                     83
                                          OUTGROWER PROGRAMS MAY INCREASE CERTAINTY
                                          IN A SUPPLY CHAIN
                                          If an off-taker determines that activities in the input space may significantly improve
                                          productivity or crop quality, the next step is to determine how to provide inputs at minimal
                                          cost and risk. For the input supplier, the question is how to market and distribute inputs
                                          efficiently.

     Partnerships among off-takers,       Outgrower programs—partnerships between farmers, input suppliers, financial institutions,
     input suppliers, and financial       and off-takers—can create synergies and reduce risks. These arrangements are also called
     institutions can reduce risks for    “contract farming.”
     firms and reduce barriers to input
     adoption among farmers.
                                          In these programs, financial institutions and/or off-takers typically purchase inputs in bulk and
                                          loan them to farmers at the beginning of the season. In return, farmers agree to sell their
                                          crops to the off-taker. The loan is then recovered from the crop sales. The model ensures
                                          that farmers have access to inputs that stimulate productivity gains. Larger harvests generate
                                          enough revenue to repay the interest on the input loan. However, outgrower schemes present
                                          a number of risks, as detailed in figure 6.3.

                                          There are three main models for outgrower schemes. In the simplest form, an off-taker
                                          provides inputs to farmers and receives payment in the form of crops at the harvest.
                                          More complicated designs have intermediaries between the off-taker and farmers. These
                                          intermediaries may be private-sector collectors or middlemen, financial institutions, input
                                          providers, nongovernmental organizations, or a combination. Typically, these organizations
                                          bear part of the credit risk and/or can communicate more effectively with farmers than the
                                          off-taker. The third model, known as nucleus plasma, occurs when outgrowers surround a
                                          central plantation and processing facility. This model was developed for oil palm in Indonesia,
                                          but it has been successfully used in the tea, sugar, and cashew sectors.




               IN PRACTICE                OUT-OF-THE-BOX INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY TOOLS FOR
                                          OUTGROWER MANAGEMENT EMERGE

                                          The right management software that can coordinate outgrower schemes in real time is key for scaling up. Many
                                          companies that aim to go beyond pen, paper, and excel have tried adapting systems for large farms or developing
                                          their own solution. Farmforce, an innovation of Syngenta Foundation, offers a third option—a “Software as
                                          a Service” solution that focuses on smallholder farmer management and allows companies to focus on their
                                          core business. Farmforce is a cloud-based, integrated mobile technology platform that simplifies outgrower
                                          management. The platform offers a suite of tools to manage outgrower schemes by organizing farmers, farmer
                                          groups, and field staff to manage production and harvest in compliance with a selected standard scheme and
                                          by providing full traceability starting from the farmer’s field. Expansion apps allow users to communicate with
                                          farmers through SMS, track input loans, oversee movements of goods in storage facilities, monitor the quality
                                          of farmer trainings, and perform surveys and assessments. As a cloud-based platform, Farmforce can be used
                                          in any geography and users don’t have to install a program on their own servers. Field officers working with
                                          farmers use the mobile phone with the Farmforce client and synchronize data with the cloud-based server.
                                          The management has access to real-time information through their web browser. This reduces start-up efforts
                                          and improves service. In addition, Farmforce offers on-site implementation support and training and on-going
                                          support service. Farmforce started productive roll-out in 2013 and is currently introduced in a number of value
                                          chain projects such as vegetables, rice, cotton, cocoa, and potato in Kenya, Ghana, Zimbabwe, Burkina Faso, and
                                          Nigeria. Syngenta plans to spin off Farmforce as an independent IT enterprise in 2014.




84
Figure 6.3. Good practices to reduce risk in channeling fertilizer to smallholders.



  RISK                                                                                 Mitigating Strategies

  Farmers divert fertilizer to other crops or sell it to raise cash. Because the       Loans that combine cash and physical inputs alleviate farmers’ cash
  fertilizer was not used as anticipated, yields do not rise.                          needs at planting time. The combination loan increases the likelihood
                                                                                       that fertilizer will be applied as intended.

  Productivity does not increase as expected, so farmers’ net income                   Test input packages among smallholders to ensure their efficacy.
  declines after paying the loan’s principal and interest.

  Weather or disease reduces yields, again affecting farmers’ ability to pay.          Facilitate farmers’ efforts to obtain crop insurance.

  Crop prices rise and off-takers are unable to pay competitive prices.                Create written agreements between all parties, specifying harvest price
                                                                                       relative to prevailing prices, quality, and penalties for side-selling.

  Farmers side-sell to other firms that offer higher prices and are not                Perform field surveys during the production cycle to estimate harvests
  collecting loan repayments.                                                          so that side-selling can be detected.
                                                                                       Schedule rapid pick-up of harvested crops, settlement of loans, and
                                                                                       payment. Provide empty grain bags to speed marketing and reduce
                                                                                       side-selling.




           IN PRACTICE                     OUTGROWER PRODUCTION OF BARLEY2

                                           SABMiller India set a goal to produce all of its malting barley locally within five years. To accomplish this goal, they
                                           developed an outgrower scheme for barley production. In 2001, 7,400 farmers received technical assistance from
                                           30 SABMIller extension officers. The program cooperates closely with local government. For example, outgrowers
                                           were connected to sources of credit and subsidized planting seed. Yields have increased from 1.1 tons per hectare
                                           to 1.6 tons, and SABMiller was able to purchase 27,426 tons of malting barley in 2011.




                                           Producer organizations present an opportunity to reduce transaction costs for input delivery,
                                           marketing, and payment in an outgrower scheme. They can also help reduce side-selling.
                                           For example, if the producer organization contributes 10 percent of the loan, the group is
                                           more likely to prevent its members from side-selling in order to repay the loan and not lose
                                           the guarantee. Another incentive is to provide bonuses for producer organizations that reach
                                           volume targets. Chapter 3 provides additional details on working with producer organizations.


                                           CONSIDERATIONS WHEN DECIDING ON AN ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY
                                           An off-taker interested in providing inputs to suppliers will want to confirm that the
                                           investment is cost-effective. Most farmers will benefit from improved input use, but some
                                           farmers will benefit less than others, either because they are already using an efficient mix of
                                           inputs or because the land or climate is not appropriate for their crop. Comparative analysis
                                           will determine whether producers of a particular crop are significantly less productive than
                                           producers of the same crop in other, similar locations. Farmland that is less productive than
                                           comparable locations would likely benefit from improved inputs. Input producers may also
                                           consider a similar analysis to identify marketing opportunities. The following step-by-step
                                           guide offers recommendations for conducting the analysis:



                                                                                                                                                                      85
                                         1.	 Identify productivity gaps: As a first step, use crop statistics compiled by the Food and
                                             Agriculture Organization’s online database, FAOSTAT, to compare yields in the target country
                                             with global and regional yields and with yields in competitor countries that have a similar climate.
     A link to FAOSTAT can be found          The data set also includes the volume of commercial seed produced for each crop, while the
     at www.farms2firms.org                  “resources” section contains information about fertilizer and pesticide use by country.

                                            •	 Data from a decade ago or longer may help identify trends and seasonal variability.
                                            •	 Crosscheck FAO data with country-specific yield and production data that is often
                                               available from government sources. It should be noted that FAO data is usually more
                                               reliable and comparable across regions.
                                            •	 Ultimately, recommendations to farmers on fertilizer use should be based on agronomic
                                               measurements because aggregate statistics from governments or the FAO may not be
                                               accurate enough.

                                         2.	 Determine the extent to which productivity or quality gaps can be addressed through
                                             input: Low productivity almost always results from a combination of limited input use and poor
     Input suppliers that target             agricultural practices. In many cases, a combination of inputs and training will be necessary.
     farmland that is less productive        However, in some cases, training to improve production and post-harvest practices may be
     than neighboring farmland
                                             as effective as the introduction of new inputs. In other cases, neither training nor inputs will
     will find a stronger market and
     generate larger improvements to         improve production because, for example, farmers lack sufficient labor during planting and
     farmer welfare.                         harvest. Sometimes, the climate and terrain is not suited for the crop, in which case any
                                             investment in improved input supply or administration will bring marginal results.

                                         3.	 Determine the type and quantity of inputs farmers use: Farmer surveys, fieldwork,
                                             and interviews with agro-retailers can contribute data to identify the input packages already
                                             being used by farmers. Firms may conduct a survey of randomly selected farmers to research
                                             their use of inputs and crop-protection products. Surveys may be supplemented by fieldwork
                                             of trained agronomists to observe crop varieties and agricultural practices. Fieldwork allows
                                             agronomists to take physical measurements of farms by pacing or GPS in order to check the
                                             accuracy of recall data about input application rates. Agro-retailers in the catchment area
                                             also provide insight about popular products and sales volumes.




                                             FARMER SURVEYS GENERATE LOCALIZED DATA ON INPUT USE.

                                             A farmer survey, described further in chapter 9, is a good first step towards understanding the causes of
                                             low productivity. Sample survey questions include:

     More in-depth examples of               Do you use fertilizer?	           * Yes	            * No
     field surveys available online at
     www.farms2firms.org.                    What form is the fertilizer? 	    * Chemical 	      * Manure	           * Compost

                                             Where do you obtain fertilizer?	 * Shop	            * Other farmer	     * Other

                                             How often do you purchase?	       * Annually	       * Other frequency _______

                                             Specify quantity and type?____________________________(Choices will depend on what is available.)

                                             Which crops are fertilized?___________________________(Choices will depend on what is being grown.)

                                             How is fertilizer applied?_____________________________(Choices will depend on what is being grown.)




86
              4.	 Consider losses to side-selling and consumption: An apparent productivity gap may be
                  the result of side-selling to other off-takers or a farmer’s consumption of the food crop.
                  Comparing reported yields with the quantities sold to an off-taker provides an indication
                  of the amount lost to side-selling or consumption. When a large proportion of a potential
                  crop is diverted for other uses, off-takers may have fewer incentives to invest in the
                  provision of improved inputs.

              5.	 Determine production and post-harvest best practices for the crop in question: The
                  results of fieldwork can be compared with global best practices for the crop being studied.
                  FAO, the CGIAR centers, and other national and international research institutions are a
                  good source of this information. It is also useful to determine the production practices
                  in countries with a similar climate, but higher yields and quality. Unfortunately, the
                  new varieties and knowledge that are available at these centers is rarely accessible to
                  smallholders, especially those that rely on government extension services. Firms and
                  nongovernmental organizations can be an ideal conduit for widespread dissemination.

              6.	 Design a package of technical advice and inputs. An agronomist should design the
                  package and test it with a carefully monitored group of farmers to determine its efficacy
                  before widespread dissemination. Best practice involves implementing the proposed
                  package of inputs and/or training with a pilot group of farmers under normal conditions.
                  Using a “quasi-experimental design” technique, described in chapter 9, firms can measure
                  the impact and cost-effectiveness of the intervention.




IN PRACTICE   PROXIMITY AND INTEGRATED INPUT PACKAGES COMBINE TO INCREASE FARMER
              INCOME

              One Acre Fund supports efforts of more than 135,000 farmers in Kenya, Rwanda, and Burundi to increase
              their incorporation into agricultural value chains. With the motto of “farmers first,” the nonprofit organization’s
              operation is geared to treat smallholder farmers as customers and to offer them private-sector style services. This
              has led to the development of a bundle of agricultural services that many smallholder farmers need implemented
              through a deep rural distribution chain. The service bundle includes farm inputs, financing, training, and market
              facilitation. The inputs (seed and fertilizer) are delivered within 1.5 miles of where clients live. Those inputs are
              provided on credit so farmers do not have to pay cash up front before planting. Farmers repay the in-kind loan
              in cash over the course of the agriculture season. Meanwhile, they receive training sessions on topics such as
              planting, composting, and harvest techniques. Finally, One Acre Fund staff provide training and materials for safe
              post-harvest storage and training on how to connect to traders. This service bundle forms a complete value chain
              for a small farmer, enabling the farmer’s income-per-planted-acre to double.

              One Acre’s harvest measurement program verifies that farmers working with the organization double their
              income-per-planted-acre. The organization plans to expand to serve 1.5 million farm families by 2020 with
              operations in five to eight countries and more than 7,000 staff. This expansion would make OneAcre the largest
              network of smallholder farmers in Africa.




                                                                                                                                      87
     USEFUL RESOURCES
     African Insect Science for Food and Health (ICIPE), www.icipe.org
     Kenya-based institution conducting research on insects and insect control strategies, including
     integrated pest management.

     Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), www.agra-alliance.org
     Kenya-based organization that has three programs related to inputs – Seed Production for Africa, which
     finances local seed companies, the Agro Dealer Development Program and the Soil Health Program.

     Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), www.aciar.gov.au
     Research on production and processing of cocoa, coffee, groundnuts, and other crops grown in the
     pacific region.

     Agricultural Research for Development (CIRAD), www.cirad.fr/en/
     French institution conducting research on coffee, cocoa, and other tropical crops. Developer of the
     Brocap Trap for the coffee berry borer.

     Back Pack Farm, www.backpackfarm.com
     Kenyan firm marketing input and technical assistance packages at various levels for a range of crops.

     Catalyzing Smallholder Agricultural Finance, Dahlberg Global Development Advisors, 2012, http://
     dalberg.com/documents/Catalyzing_Smallholder_Ag_Finance.pdf

     CGIAR centers, www.cgiar.org
     Global research institutions specializing in a wide variety of crops, including rice, wheat, maize,
     legumes, tubers, agroforestry, irrigation, livestock, and aquaculture. These centers are the source for
     many new crop varieties and agricultural technologies.

     Conservation Farming Unit, www.conservationagriculture.org
     Zambian organization working in East and Southern Africa on smallholder technology packages for
     conservation farming.

     Contract Farming in Developing Countries: A Review, Prowse, M.,
     Institute of Development Policy and Management, University of Antwerp, February 2012. http://www.
     afd.fr/webdav/site/afd/shared/PUBLICATIONS/RECHERCHE/Scientifiques/A-savoir/12-VA-A-Savoir.pdf

     Experience With Outgrower Models: Key Success Factors and Best Practices in Outgrower Schemes,
     Holmes, S., TechnoServe at the Agribusiness Forum, 2012, http://www.emrc.be/documents/
     document/20111107141531-agri11-workshop_v-technoserve.pdf

     eLeaf, www.eleaf.com
     Netherlands-based firm that uses satellite images to analyze farms for nutrition, irrigation, and disease
     problems. Currently used commercially by large farms, but eLeaf interested in smallholder market.

     Enterprise Works/VITA, www.enterpriseworks.org
     U.S-based, private voluntary organization promoting small-scale production and processing
     technologies and providing support to SMEs.

     FarmForce, www.farmforce.com
     ICT solutions to support outgrower schemes and provide traceability, developed by the Syngenta
     Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture.

     Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), www.fao.org
     Multi-lateral institution providing technical information on the use of inputs of all kinds. For example:

         Fertilizers and Their Use: ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/agll/docs/fertuse.pdf and

         Conservation Agriculture: http://www.fao.org/knowledge/goodpractices/bp-crop-systems/bp-
         conservation-agriculture/en/

         Treadle Pumps for Irrigation in Africa. http://www.fao.org/docrep/005/X8293E/X8293E00.HTM




88
International Development Enterprises (IDE), www.ideorg.org
U.S.-based, private voluntary organization promoting small-scale irrigation technologies and supporting SMEs.

International Fertilizer Development Center (IFDC), www.ifdc.org
U.S.-based institution conducting research on plant nutrition and fertilizer use. Developing fertilizer
technologies for smallholders.

KickStart, www.kickstart.org
Kenya-based, private voluntary organization promoting small-scale production and processing
technologies and providing support to SMEs.

One Acre Fund, www.oneacrefund.org
Africa-based NGO promoting integrated package of inputs and technical assistance.

Pedaling Out of Poverty: Social Impact of a Manual Irrigation Technology in South Asia, Shah, T., Alam,
M., Kumar, M., Nagar, R.K., and Mahendra Singh, International Water Management Institute (IWMI),
2000. http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/IWMI_Research_Reports/PDF/Pub045/RR45.aspx

Plantwise program of CABI. www.cabi.org/?site=170&page=2912
CABI is a U.K.-based research institution. Plantwise is a system to collect and disseminate information
about plant health. The program is setting up community-based plant clinics, where smallholder
farmers can diagnose problems with their crops. Information on crop disease outbreaks, derived from
the clinics, is then made available for public use.

Rainforest Alliance, www.rainforestalliance.org
This U.S.-based, private voluntary organization has established principles for safe and sustainable use of
agricultural inputs and a system for independent third-party verification.

Sasakawa Africa Association. Japan-based private voluntary organization working in Africa to introduce
low cost input packages for smallholders. www.saa-safe.org

Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture, www.syngenta.org
Developing and introducing input packages for smallholders.

USAID’s Lending to Agricultural Sector: A Toolkit, Agriculture Finance Support Facility, United States
Agency for International Development, www.agrifinfacility.org/usaid%E2%80%99s-lending-
agriculture-sector-toolkit

UTZ Certified, www.utzcertified.org
This Netherlands-based private voluntary organization has established principles for safe and sustainable
use of agricultural inputs and a system for independent third-party verification.

World Bank, numerous resources, including:

    Fertilizer Use if Africa: Lessons Learned and Good Practice Guidelines,
    http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2007/03/15/0003106
    07_20070315153201/Rendered/PDF/390370AFR0Fert101OFFICIAL0USE0ONLY1.pdf

    Selection and Procurement of Pesticides
    http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTARD/EXTPESTMGMT/0,,contentMDK:2029
    8585~menuPK:586874~pagePK:64168445~piPK:64168309~theSitePK:584320,00.html#3Selection

World Economic Forum, Achieving the New Vision for Agriculture: New Models for Action, http://www.
sabmiller.com/files/pdf/new_models_for_action_report.pdf

NOTES
1. Bell Okello et al., Agrodealerships in Western Kenya: How Promising for Agricultural Development and
Women Farmers? (International Center for Research on Women). Accessed via International Center for
Research on Women website: http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/Kenya%20Agrodealers%20FINAL.pdf

2. “Progress Through Partnership—Barley Farmers in India,” SABMiller India, http://www.sabmiller.com/
index.asp?pageid=2362




                                                                                                                89
90
CHAPTER 7
Improving Farm
Management Skills




                    Q
    Why read this chapter?


    Farm management skills improve smallholders’
    capacity to invest in inputs, adopt improved
    agricultural practices, and strengthen their finances.
    Firms may use the data collected by farmers to
    manage their farms in order to measure program
    results and to gauge creditworthiness. Farm
    management skills can be useful to both farmers
    and firms interested in adopting standards or
    certifications.




R
Improving Farm Management Skills
THE BUSINESS CASE FOR IMPROVING FARM MANAGEMENT SKILLS
Most smallholders do not keep written records, which reduces their ability to accurately
evaluate the benefits of new agricultural practices. Even if yields increase, most improved
practices require additional inputs or labor, increasing costs. Without the ability to compare
costs and revenues, farmers may not be able to confidently assess whether their increased
profitability is a result of the improved practices. Without written records showing the
profitability of the enterprise, farmers also face greater difficulty obtaining bank financing.
This problem is compounded by a lack of formal land titles or other collateral.

Low rates of literacy and numeracy among smallholder farmers limits their ability to effectively
and adequately manage their farm’s resources through quantitative analysis. A basic level of
numeracy is required to calculate farm areas, yields, costs, and revenues. Financial literacy is
a prerequisite for conducting these analyses, especially when farmers access financial inputs
such as loans and weather insurance.

Improving farm management skills may not be the first intervention firms consider when
assessing a supply chain investment. What benefit might a firm gain from improved farm
management skills among suppliers? Moreover, smoothly functioning supply chains require
attention in many areas. Do field staff already charged with crop purchasing, certification,
aggregation, and productivity training have time to provide farm management training?

While the incentives to improve farm management skills may not be as obvious as improving
quality and productivity, training smallholders to run their farms as businesses establishes the
foundation for improved agricultural practices in the field.


A Variety of Firms Can Benefit from Improved Farm Management

Banks and Other Financial Service Providers
Smallholder farmers are an untapped financial market due in part to the difficulty of assessing
their creditworthiness. Most farmers do not have records of past performance, input
purchases, and crop sales. Farm management training for farmers would improve their ability
to maintain records, demonstrate cash flow, and identify available funds to invest in a savings
product. Banks may use data obtained from training to design more effective loan products
and to reduce their risk. Once farmers obtain loans, basic financial literacy will increase their
ability to plan for repayment.

Off-Takers
Off-takers know how much crop they are purchasing in each area. However, they often do
not know how much their competitors are purchasing from the same farmers. In “tight”
supply chains, where the percentage of side-selling is low, firms can invest more in farmers
knowing that they will receive the majority of the benefits from increased production or quality.
Comparing farm production records to crop purchases is the best way to determine the degree
of side-selling to competitors and subsequently, the justifiable degree of investment. Training
in farm management and recordkeeping can improve the reliability of farmers’ records.

A second incentive for off-takers is that farmers who understand how to manage their
finances and plan for upcoming expenses are better prepared to adopt inputs and costly
production practices. Finally, the skills obtained through farm management training can be
applied to data collection for most certification programs.




                                                                                                    91
                   Input Providers
                   Smallholders often lack the financial resources needed to purchase inputs at the right time
                   and fail to plan for long-term investments in machinery or improved tree stock, which
                   would improve their productivity. Recordkeeping can help farmers understand and plan for
                   upcoming expenses. Financial literacy can help them identify and save excess income. Farm
                   records make them more attractive financial clients. Fostering these skills in farmer clients
                   increases their ability to purchase inputs and their loyalty to the input supply firm that invested
                   in them. Moreover, farm records are an opportunity for supply firms to better understand the
                   type and amount of fertilizer and plant protection products that farmers use.


                   SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES FOR IMPROVING
                   FARM MANAGEMENT SKILLS
                   Farm management skills can be subdivided into two topics: financial literacy and business
                   management skills, and agronomic skills.

                   Firms should identify which aspects of farm management support their core business.
                   Financial institutions are more likely to concentrate training on financial literacy and business
                   management skills because financial literacy training increases loan repayment rates. Input
                   providers and off-takers will likely concentrate on agronomic skills since soil analysis increases
                   fertilizer sales and on-farm research accelerates the uptake of productivity training. Programs
                   that involve several types of agribusinesses, such as outgrower arrangements in which off-
                   takers, input providers, and financial institutions work together, can combine the financial
                   and agronomic aspects of farm management into an integrated training program and share
                   the costs. To date, there are few “off-the-shelf” training manuals that combine both aspects
                   of farm management into a single curriculum.

                   Each of these topics is discussed in detail below.	




     IN PRACTICE   ROLE-PLAYING IS AN EFFECTIVE WAY TO TEACH FARM MANAGEMENT1

                   Making Cents, a U.S.-based organization, has developed an interactive simulation to develop agricultural
                   enterprise management skills. In this simulation, smallholder clients play the roles of input suppliers, producers,
                   and processors as they navigate through an agricultural cycle. This simulation allows clients to practice
                   the outcomes of planning, timed sales of products and purchases of inputs, recordkeeping, savings, and
                   working in groups. In Nigeria, this training tool is part of the Nigerian Agricultural Enterprise Curriculum—a
                   curriculum that highlights agricultural enterprise management skills through applied learning methods. After
                   participating in the curriculum, the prevalence of smallholder producers’ recordkeeping went from 21 percent
                   to 100 percent, and formal written records rose from 3 to 35 percent. Smallholder producers who changed
                   their input purchasing practices of fertilizer to right after harvest, when it is least expensive, increased from 49
                   percent to 100 percent. These practices led to a 55 percent increase in monthly profitability for farmers who
                   received the training over a three-year period.




92
                                     Increasing Financial Literacy and Business Management Skills

                                     A number of firms, nongovernmental organizations, and multi-lateral institutions have
The section “Useful Resources”       developed training materials designed to increase farm management skills and financial
at the end of this chapter           literacy among rural households and smallholder farmers. Using these open-source materials
cites financial literacy esources    or partnering with other organizations are cost-effective ways of providing financial literacy
and training materials
                                     training. Some of the topics covered in these training materials include:
that can be found online at
www.farms2firms.org.
                                     Financial literacy content

                                         •	 Definition of financial literacy
                                         •	 Financial concepts such as budgeting, savings, credit, investment, expenses, and profit
                                         •	 Working with financial service providers
                                         •	 Savings tools, including rotating savings groups, savings and credit cooperatives,
                                            banks, cash, and purchasing assets
                                         •	 Procedures and requirements when applying for credit

                                     Farming as a business content

Farmers who are financially              •	   Assessing farm productivity and finances and understanding break-even points
literate are able to calculate the       •	   Advantages and disadvantages of family, hired, and communal labor
costs and potential revenue              •	   Advantages and disadvantages of contract farming
gains from adopting improved             •	   Marketing strategies, including adding value and group versus individual marketing
agricultural practices.                  •	   Financial and business planning for upcoming seasons
                                         •	   Recordkeeping and simple accounting
                                         •	   Risk management and mitigation

                                     Training methodologies

                                         •	 Strategies for adult learning
                                         •	 Group learning dynamics

                                     The topics are primarily related to developing basic financial literacy and teaching the
                                     economic aspects of farm management. Therefore, teaching these topics is probably most
                                     useful for firms offering financial products to smallholders. For off-takers and input providers,
                                     financial topics are less directly related to increased productivity and crop quality than technical
                                     training, so training costs may not be justified.




           IN PRACTICE               PROVIDING LOW-COST FINANCIAL LITERACY TRAINING

                                     Opportunity International, a nongovernmental organization in Malawi, provides training on savings, credit
                                     management, budgeting, basic business skills, and insurance products to 250,000 savings clients. This training is
                                     provided inexpensively, through a set of videos that is shown while clients are waiting to conduct their transactions.




                                     Improving Agronomic Skills

                                     Input providers and off-takers may prefer to focus on the agronomic aspects of farm
                                     management because they are more directly related to their core businesses. Some aspects
                                     of farm management, such as soil analysis and weather forecasting, may not be realistic for
                                     smallholder farmers to handle on their own. By assisting smallholders in these areas, firms can
                                     build goodwill among their suppliers and support firm goals, such as increasing productivity.



                                                                                                                                                              93
                                            Six farm management topics that can be woven into technical training sessions on improved
                                            practices are:

                                            •	 Agronomic calculations: Measuring production area, yield, and moisture content
     Improving farmers’ ability to          •	 Soil analysis: Identifying soil attributes to improve crop and input use
     run their farms as they would          •	 Water analysis: Understanding surface and groundwater resources for irrigation
     a business can improve the             •	 Land use planning: Using techniques such as intercropping, fallow periods, and rationing
     consistency of harvests.                  to rejuvenate tree crops
                                            •	 Forecasting: Assessing weather to improve crop or variety selection, as well as production
                                               and post-harvest practices
                                            •	 On-farm research: Testing new crops or production techniques on the farm

                                            These topics are explored further below.

                                            Agronomic Calculations

                                            All farmers need to know the size of their production area. Surprisingly, many smallholder
                                            farmers do not know how much land they are farming. This makes it impossible for them to
                                            calculate yields or produce useful farm records. Even when farmers have an idea of their farm
                                            size, it may include the house or other non-productive areas, such as steep hillsides. Precision is
                                            important in area measurement because errors make it difficult to track typical yield gains of 10
                                            to 20 percent per year. Because most certification programs require farm maps and production
                                            areas, this is an ideal aspect of farm management for off-takers to include in training programs.

                                            Smallholders can be taught to measure and map the productive area of their farms by pacing,
                                            using a string with a measured length, or using the GPS function on more advanced cell
                                            phones. Formulas for calculating the area of rectangles and triangles may also be taught.

                                            Once farmers know the area they are farming, other basic agricultural calculations, such as
                                            yield and moisture content, can be taught in conjunction with technical training. For example,
                                            a training held at a demonstration plot during harvest time may include training on methods
                                            for yield calculation. Methods for estimating the moisture content of harvested crops may
                                            be discussed at training sessions on crop quality. Low-cost moisture meters, including one
                                            developed by the International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines, are becoming available.




        LOGBOOKS—A SIMPLE, EFFECTIVE TOOL TO SUPPORT GOOD FARM-MANAGEMENT SKILLS

        Farmers should be encouraged to keep logbooks, which provide a              benefits, farmers may soon neglect the logbooks. Farmers will need
        convenient place for farmers to record farm data, costs, and revenues.      training on how to fill out the books properly and how to analyze the
        Logbooks are a useful tool for firms and farmers, helping both to           data to obtain metrics such as profitability and yield. Ensuring that
        better understand and professionalize smallholder farming. Off-takers       the books are filled out and subsequently collecting, digitizing, and
        and financial institutions usually find this data useful for identifying    analyzing the data may involve significant costs.
        productivity and side-selling issues. For farmers of tree crops, logbooks
        are particularly useful for calculating yields because tree crops are       When designing a logbook, careful consideration should be given to
        harvested in small amounts over weeks or months. Without a written          properly recording labor, and family labor should be distinguished
        record, it is next to impossible for a farmer to recall the exact weights   from paid labor. However, keeping track of the intermittent hours
        sold and prices received during the course of a year.                       worked by each family member is difficult. Therefore, it is usually
                                                                                    better to track only paid labor, which is usually paid by the day and
        However, without financial literacy and adequate training in data           often an important component of costs.
        analysis, farmers may not benefit from logbooks. Without tangible




94
              Analysis of Soil and Water Resources

              Understanding soil characteristics and deficiencies is an important management tool for
              selecting crops and planning input use. Fertilizer companies or remote sensing firms can assist
              smallholders’ understanding of the soil conditions on their farms. Off-takers may build loyalty
              by providing this information to their suppliers. Input providers can provide soil testing as a
              tool to recruit new customers.

              Many smallholder farmers are not aware of the ground or surface water resources they can
              access. A farm management plan that does not consider these resources may not reach its full
              productivity. Construction of small farm reservoirs or check dams can increase access to water
              on a seasonal basis. Minimum tillage systems, such as conservation farming furrows or pits,
              can maximize rainwater infiltration. Various technologies, such as drip irrigation and low-lift
              pumps, may be options for some farmers, especially when combined with access to finance.
              Irrigation equipment firms may benefit from helping smallholders understand and plan for
              the use of their water resources. Farmers with wells and pumps also need information to plan
              their water use in order to prevent depletion of aquifers.




IN PRACTICE   INCREASING FERTILIZER SALES THROUGH SOIL TESTING

              IFC investment client Fertial is the largest fertilizer manufacturer in Algeria. To increase fertilizer use by small- and
              medium-scale farmers, Fertial provided training and equipment to six public soil-testing laboratories. The firm
              also provided training on the importance of soil testing for good farm management to 45 staff members at agro-
              retailers and 1,000 farmers. Farmers who followed the fertilizer application recommendations reported higher
              yields, and the firm found that fertilizer sales to small-scale and medium-scale farmers increased after the training.




              Land-Use Planning

              Using agronomic principles, such as crop rotation, planting nitrogen-fixing intercrops, creating
              windbreaks, and incorporating integrated pest management techniques in farm planning,
              can increase the profitability of smallholder farmers by increasing productivity and reducing
              costs. Off-takers have demonstrated that assisting smallholders with this type of land-use
              planning can benefit their suppliers, as well as their own businesses. For example:

              •	 Recommending that coffee farmers plant nitrogen-fixing shade trees and providing
                 seedlings. This increases soil fertility and improves coffee quality.

              •	 Recommending that flower seed outgrowers plant Jatropha curcas as a border around
                 their fields. This creates a windbreak and provides farmers with household energy or a
                 second marketable crop.

              •	 Recommending that cashew tree farmers plant groundnuts as a cover crop while waiting
                 for cashew seedlings to mature. This increases soil fertility and provides the firm and new
                 farmers with an interim income source.

              •	 Recommending that paprika farmers plant marigolds as a border crop. This reduces pests
                 in the paprika and provides the firm and farmers with another marketable crop (marigold
                 flowers used as a colorant).




                                                                                                                                          95
     Weather Forecasting

     Understanding current weather trends and having access to reliable weather forecasts is
     a critical part of farm management. Mitigating weather risks through crop insurance is an
     important part of commercial farm management. Weather index insurance products have
     been developed for smallholders. These products rely on independent data from a network of
     weather stations to trigger policy payout.

     Unfortunately, both current weather data and reliable forecasts are difficult for smallholders to
     obtain because accurately measuring temperature and rainfall requires equipment, and local
     governments often do not produce reliable data. Firms can assist smallholders by collecting
     basic weather data, such as temperature and rainfall, within the catchment areas of their
     supply chains. Often, this information is also critical for firm decision making.

     Firms can also assist in farm planning by identifying reliable weather forecasts and disseminating
     the information, along with recommendations. National weather services, the Famine Early
     Warning System, and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change are good sources for
     forecast data. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s fourth assessment contains
     maps showing projected changes in rainfall and temperature in the coming decades. These
     projections will be updated in the fifth assessment.



        CLIMATE CHANGE INTENSIFIES THE NEED FOR ADEQUATE FARM PLANNING

        Recently, weather forecasting has become both more difficult and more important. Climate change is
        causing shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns. These shifts may require new agricultural practices,
        new varieties, and even new crops. For example:

        •	   Extended rainy seasons in south Asia are altering cocoa and coffee drying practices.
        •	   Drought in southern Africa is accelerating a shift toward minimum tillage maize farming.
        •	   Saltwater intrusion in coastal areas of Asia is causing a shift toward salt-tolerant rice varieties.
        •	   Flooding in Asia is increasing demand for immersion-tolerant rice varieties.




     On-Farm Research

     To manage their farms effectively, farmers should conduct their own research on new varieties
     and agricultural practices. This simply involves trying the new variety or practice on a small,
     measured area of land and monitoring the results. Skills such as land area and yield measurement
     are the basis of this management tool. By encouraging participatory training approaches,
     such as farmer field schools, firms can develop the capacity for on-farm research among their
     suppliers. This will accelerate the uptake of new ideas and ultimately increase productivity.




96
USEFUL RESOURCES
Agro Pro Focus, http://api.ning.com/files/NjIsozTZFFeIMh7JvqhbpqLfituf8msJ1k5692QEWUUcSK9eZ-
zVuEt8uH4kkFpFCAXZrLIu3j2mbHNRCcsftcVQGnq*4Tkle/ManualFinancialLiterancy.pdf
Financial literacy curriculum for farmers.

CARE International Pathways Program, http://southasia.oneworld.net/todaysheadlines/care-launches-
program-to-empower-women-farmers-in-south-asia-and-africa/
Financial literacy training for women farmers.

Famine Early Warning System (FEWS), www.fews.net/Pages/default.aspx
Provides historical weather data, long range forecasts, and agricultural production forecasts

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), www.fao.org
Information on farm management.

    Farm Management Extension Systems: A Global Review
    http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a1494e/a1494e00.htm

    Farm Business School Manual: Training of Facilitators Programme for South Asia
    www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2133e/i2133e00.htm

    Enhancing Farmers’ Financial Management Skills
    http://www.fao.org/ag/ags/ags-division/publications/publication/en/?dyna_fef%5Buid%5D=38394

Farm Accounting, Agromisa Foundation, 2006,
www.ruralfinance.org/fileadmin/templates/rflc/documents/1163528274908_Farm_accounting.pdf

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), www.ipcc.ch
Source of long-range weather forecasts and information on adaptation to climate change.

    Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation,
    www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.shtml - SREX

    IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (2007), (fifth assessment will be published in 2013/2014), www.
    ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/contents.html

International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/focus18.pdf
Research on best practice in rural finance.

International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), www.knowledgebank.irri.org/rkb/index.php/faq-
measurements/33-moisture-content-irri-moisture-tester and www.grainpro.com/grainpro-lowcost-
moisture-meter.php
Low-cost moisture meters and other tools for rice farmers.

Making Cents International, www.makingcents.com/products_services/curriculum.php
Farm management curriculum.

Opportunity International, www.opportunity.org/blog/program-update-transformation-training-mozam-
bique-smallholder-farmers/ - .UCLZE2lWrEU
Financial literacy curriculum for farmers.

Pro Poor Sourcing Models that Enable Smallholder Entrepreneurship, Wageningen University, www.
lucsus.lu.se/ist2011/A10-2Becx_IST2011.pdf

Pride Africa, www.prideafrica.com/ourwork.php
Micro-finance institution linking agribusiness with financial services and training in DrumNet initiative.

Rural Finance Learning Center, www.ruralfinance.org
Implementing Improving Capacity Building in Rural Finance program. Financial literacy curriculum for
trainers and farmers.




                                                                                                             97
     TechnoServe, www.technoserve.org
     Financial-literacy curriculum for farmers.

     Zambia National Farmers Union, www.sccportal.org/Files/Filer/Africa/Study Circles/Financial_Literacy.pdf
     Financial literacy training for farmers.

     NOTES
     1. Report on the results of implementing the National Agricultural Enterprise Curriculum in Nigeria from
     Making Cents (www.makingcents.com).




98
99
100
CHAPTER 8
Incorporating Gender
Into Supply Chain
Interventions




                       S
    Why read this chapter?


    Increasing women’s participation in supply chains
    can lead to significant improvements in crop
    productivity, quality, and environmental and social
    sustainability. Female farmers can also deepen a
    firm’s supplier networks in a catchment area. By
    understanding the role of gender in the supply
    chain, firms can increase the cost-effectiveness of
    smallholder engagement strategies.




T
                         Increasing the Participation of Women in Supply
                         Chains
                         THE BUSINESS CASE FOR INCREASING WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN
                         SMALLHOLDER SUPPLY CHAINS
                         Supply chains in which both women and men participate tend to see stronger growth than
                         those in which women have low participation. Agricultural supply chains are no exception.
                         Productivity rises and supply chains are strengthened when women participate in and benefit
                         from agricultural market opportunities.

                         Women’s underrepresentation in initiatives to strengthen smallholder supply chains is a lost
“Closing the gender      commercial opportunity. Prioritizing women’s participation in smallholder supply chains leads to:
gap in agriculture
                         Improved quality: Women pay more attention to detail at points in the supply chain that
could increase yields    can improve quality, such as post-harvest handling and the identification of pests and disease.
on farms by 20 to
                         Better use of inputs: Women influence household financial decisions, such as spending on
30 percent which         and application of inputs. Training women in the use of inputs will increase the likelihood that
could raise total        a family saves for purchases and correctly applies inputs in an optimal manner.

agricultural output in   Increased productivity: Female family members perform most of the field labor in certain
developing countries     commodities and sectors. Including women in farmer training will strengthen their skills and improve
                         productivity. Ensuring that a household’s resources are shared more equally between women and
by 2.5 to 4 percent      men is likely to increase women’s interest in improving the productivity of family fields.
which could reduce
                         Strengthened number and loyalty of suppliers: Within a household, men and women
the number of            typically have control over the production and marketing of different crops. It is important to
hungry people in the     understand these gender dynamics to ensure that the correct gender is targeted for the crop
                         of interest. Moreover, female-headed households make up a significant percentage of total
world by 12 to 17        farming households in some sectors. In rapidly growing economies, men often migrate to
percent.”1               cities, leaving their wives in charge of the family farm. Targeting female-headed households
                         can expand the number of suppliers in a catchment area.

                         Improved brand image: Highlighting a company’s achievements in improving the role of
                         women in the supply chain can strengthen the brand and increase access to premium markets.

                         Reduced management costs: Female representation in the management of producer
                         organizations can improve the management and efficacy of these organizations. Field research
                         shows that female committee members tend to be more willing to share information, help
                         resolve disputes, and represent the interests of the wider membership. In contrast, male
                         representatives are often unwilling to share too much information.




                                                                                                                                101
      WOMEN REPRESENT AN OPPORTUNITY FOR AGRIBUSINESSES

      Women constitute half of the agricultural workforce in the world’s least developed countries and
      produce more than half of the world’s food but are 20 to 30 percent less productive than men.2 Women
      tend to have lower productivity than men because they have limited access to productive resources,
      including land, financing, inputs, and technology. By addressing their constraints, agribusinesses can tap
      an underutilized source of supply.

      Table 8.1. The role of women in smallholder agriculture.
       Land             Men are usually the formal landowners in both traditional and modern land tenure
                        systems, even when women contribute significantly to agricultural production. For
                        example, less than 2 percent of African women have ownership rights to their land. Lack
                        of official landownership reduces women’s ability to access finance and other resources.
       Supply chain     Women are underrepresented in membership and governance of established
       linkages         producer organizations from which agribusinesses source. They are also less likely
                        to participate in sustainability certification schemes. Fewer women are contract
                        farmers or outgrowers. In addition to being excluded from the income of crop sales,
                        women do not have access to services, such as training, financing, and provision of
                        inputs, that are provided by off-takers.
       Training         Just 5 percent of participants in extension services and capacity-building programs
                        are women. This means that the off-takers may provide training and inputs to a
                        person in the household who is not necessarily responsible for the associated task.
                        Poor transfer of agricultural knowledge within households reduces the likelihood
                        that the information and inputs are shared with those actually doing the work.
       Finance          Women have less access to finance as a result of lower educational levels, cultural
                        restrictions, and collateral requirements.
       Technology       Women tend to use technology less than men, in part because of perceptions that
                        women’s labor is less onerous or important than that of men.
       Attitudes        Because of their limited access to resources and greater household responsibilities,
       toward risk      women tend to be more risk conscious than men.
       Limited          Limited land ownership is one reason that women often contribute much of the
       household        work but have less control over the income received from crop sales. In other cases,
       decision         women may not identify themselves as farmers even though they have access to
       making           farm lands, co-decide with their husband what inputs to use on that land, hold the
                        household income, and decide where to apply household finances.
       Time             Requirements on women’s time at home reduce their ability to participate in
                        training or sourcing programs. Women visit demonstration plots and attend
                        extension services less frequently than men, but the gender gap narrows when
                        extension services are offered at home.
       Mobility         Restrictions on women’s social networks reduce their ability to develop vertical and
                        horizontal value chain linkages.




102
This chapter draws on the tools and strategies identified in previous chapters to provide
recommendations for ensuring that women benefit from a firm’s smallholder engagement
initiatives. The recommendations are not intended to create outreach programs designed
exclusively for women. Rather, they provide gender-inclusive strategies for implementing typical
smallholder engagement programs.


SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES FOR INCREASING
WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION IN SUPLLY CHAINS
Increasing women’s participation in a smallholder engagement strategy requires addressing
women’s needs at each of the four phases of planning, design, implementation, and
monitoring and evaluation. As seen in figure 8.1, a preliminary evaluation of gender roles
and norms in the value chain will identify what interventions can be targeted towards women
and the best way to reach women with those interventions. The design phase incorporates
these findings into programs that provide appropriate and accessible information to women.
At implementation, strategies that include women in a culturally sensitive manner are more
likely to have a positive impact. Finally, monitoring an intervention and evaluating its benefit
to women is an ongoing process that captures gender-related changes in the value chain. This
section details each of these four phases.



   KEY STRATEGIES FOR MAINSTREAMING GENDER INTO SMALLHOLDER
   SOURCING AND SUPPORT PROGRAMS

   •	 Understand the barriers, opportunities, needs, and practices of women in the supply chain and
      associated attitudes, beliefs, and laws.

   •	 Design tools and interventions that address gender constraints and leverage opportunities.

   •	 Sensitize staff and extension workers on how to effectively integrate gender into the program. When
      possible, ensure that gender ratios of program staff are reflective of the program’s gender objectives.

   •	 Ensure women’s participation in relevant decision-making bodies, including program management,
      cooperative boards, and industry bodies.

   •	 Deliver information in a manner and through channels that are convenient and accessible to
      women. For example, information may need to be orally communicated rather than in written form,
      and the local language may need to be used.

   •	 Work with community leaders, husbands, and women themselves to ensure that the community
      accepts and understands why the program wants to engage with women.

   •	 Integrate gender indicators into project design and implementation and use gender disaggregated
      statistical data.




                                                                                                                103
      Figure 8.1. Gender— an important consideration at each step of program design and implementation.




                                                                                                                                     MONITOR &
                     PLAN                                   DESIGN                             IMPLEMENT
                                                                                                                                      EVALUATE




      •	 Research gender roles in the value    •	 Link gender analysis to program   •	 Build staff capacity to recognize   •	 Monitor regularly
         chain                                    objectives                           gender constraints and              •	 Evaluate the project’s outcome
      •	 Identify gender bias or limitations   •	 Choose interventions that take       opportunities                          and impact, segmenting for
      •	 Examine gender issues using              gender into account               •	 Gain support from the local            gender
         a qualitative gender analysis         •	 Create ownership among farmer        community and leaders
         framework                                beneficiaries




                                               PLAN ON ADDRESSING THE ROLE OF FEMALE FARMERS
                                               The planning phase of any outreach program identifies the needs and constraints of the
                                               farmers being targeted by the firm. Incorporating gender into this analysis will help specify
                                               program design and implementation.

                                               Gender mapping is the minimum gender-inclusion activity that all supply chain projects
                                               should employ. Gender mapping can provide insight into women’s roles throughout the
                                               production process and along the supply chain. The gender-mapping process employs the
                                               same tools referenced in chapter 2 for a supply chain analysis. These tools include surveys,
                                               key informant interviews, and producer organization membership analysis. A type of informal
                                               survey, called participatory rural appraisal or rapid rural appraisal can be particularly useful
                                               for understanding the demands on women’s time over the course of a day and their role in
                                               agricultural production and marketing. A participatory rural appraisal uses group discussion
                                               and simple markers, such as pebbles and sticks, to construct visual maps of complex household
                                               dynamics. The “Useful Resources” section at the end of this chapter provides ireferences for
                                               designing an effective participatory rural appraisal. Consulting women and men separately
                                               may ensure that participants feel comfortable sharing their priorities, needs, and motivations.
                                               Figure 8.2 details some of the information a gender-mapping analysis can provide.




104
Figure 8.2. Gender mapping generates a better understanding of women’s roles in supply chains.




  FARM
  RESOURCES
                                                                PRODUCTION            • PO has a written membership list
                                                                                      • PO has evidence of regular meetings




   •	 What are the
      differences betweens
                                                                                                                                                        MARKETING
      men’s and women’s
                                                                 •	 In which areas of
                                                                                                                              POST HARVEST
      access to and control
      over:                                                         production does one
                                      LABOR
      -- Formal and                                                 gender lead or do 80                                                                •	 Do men and women
                                      RESOURCES                     percent of the labor                                      •	 In which aspects
          informal title to                                                                                                                                assume different
          land                                                      (for example, field                                          of post-harvest           roles in product
      -- Use of fertilizers,          •	 What additional            labor, cleaning, farm                                        processing does           marketing?
          technology                     responsibilities do        repairs)?                                                    one gender lead or     •	 Are there women
      -- Household                       men and women           •	 Do women and men                                             do 80 percent of          collectors or
          income (including              have outside               work separately or                                           the labor?                intermediaries in the
          non-agricultural               agricultural               on the same plots                                         •	 Do the information        supply chain?
          income), budget,               production?                of land?                                                     sources women use      •	 What social
          and financial               •	 How do men’s and        •	 Do women and men                                             to learn about post-      limitations exist
          products                       women’s learning           typically grow the                                           harvest techniques        that might limit the
      -- Membership                      preferences differ         same crops and/                                              differ from the           sphere in which men
          in a producer                  (timing, language,         or sell to the same                                          sources men used          and women market
          organization                   location)?                 markets?                                                     by men?                   their products?




                                           Two additional questions to consider when integrating gender components into a supply
                                           chain intervention include:

                                           •	 What impacts could the supply chain strengthening program have on women’s time,
                                              access to resources, financial independence, and relationship with other family members?
                                           •	 What impacts could a supply chain strengthening program have on a family’s decision
                                              making regarding resource allocation, such as women’s and children’s time or the family’s
                                              food and education budget?


                                           DESIGN A SUPPLY CHAIN INTERVENTION THAT INTEGRATES GENDER
                                           The results of gender mapping will help determine the role and importance of women in
                                           terms of participation in and decision-making authority for agricultural practices. These results
                                           inform the design of interventions that take gender into account. The process for designing
                                           a gender-inclusive supply chain intervention is the same as the one described in chapter 2.
A gender-inclusive design
means taking into account the              Some recommendations for incorporating a gender-inclusive model into a supply chain
capabilities and limitations of all        intervention include:
participants and ensuring that
the program meets their needs.             Apply inclusive training and extension methods. All content should be tailored to fit
                                           farmers’ literacy, numeracy, language preferences, and cultural norms. In doing so, note that
                                           women and men may not share the same learning profiles. Women may have higher illiteracy
                                           rates or be monolingual in a traditional language. Segmenting the needs of male and female
                                           farmers will help identify how training content can be tailored to reach both.




                                                                                                                                                                                   105
                    Some methods that promote learning among students with low levels of education include
                    participatory training and facilitated discussions combined with visual tools, such as pictures,
                    videos, and white boards. Using group-based and participatory approaches enables students
                    to articulate their needs for services and provide feedback.

                    Evaluate opportunities to increase women’s access to credit and technology. Entry
                    and guarantee requirements for credit schemes may be too burdensome for women or
                    may require documents and assets that they cannot access. Group-guarantee mechanisms
                    can substitute for collateral requirements on a loan. Similarly, firms should review eligibility
                    requirements to ensure that women will have an equal opportunity to obtain technology,
                    equipment, and protective gear.

                    Consider the benefits and opportunity cost to women. Why would a woman participate?
                    Is the information relevant and useful enough to offset her other responsibilities? Will it
                    provide a time savings, or will it require more of her time? If so, how can the firm offset this
                    increased time investment? How can the program work towards more equitable sharing of
                    benefits between women and men?




      IN PRACTICE   TECHNOSERVE’S OUTREACH STRATEGY PROMOTES WOMEN’S ENGAGEMENT

                    TechnoServe promotes gender inclusiveness during market systems interventions by incorporating women’s
                    needs and barriers into an outreach strategy. For instance, offering childcare is a strong determinant of whether
                    women will join formal labor opportunities. In TechnoServe’s Coffee Initiative, women represent 38 percent of the
                    138 formally employed village-based farmer trainers. A key factor in women’s ability to succeed in this role has
                    been assisting them in dealing with childcare demands. Potential candidates are invited to bring their children to
                    interviews (several breastfeed during the interview), and when a farmer trainer is required to travel overnight for
                    work, she is welcome to bring her baby and a childcare provider whose relatively minor costs of food, lodging,
                    and transport are covered. As a result of these policies, female employee turnover has been extremely low,
                    resulting in minimized human resources costs and high-quality service delivery.

                    Reaching women with targeted messages can also prove difficult, given the gatekeeping role that fathers and
                    husbands frequently play. One way to overcome these barriers is to actively include gatekeepers in the outreach
                    process. For example, in TechnoServe’s women-only entrepreneurship development program in Uganda, more
                    than 50 percent of the application forms are typically collected by husbands, who thereby place themselves as
                    the gatekeeper between the program and their wives. To ensure success, the program reaches out and garners
                    support from husbands for both their wife’s involvement and her increasing economic empowerment.




                    A female farmer trainer with her child at work.




106
Include gender-awareness modules in training content. In some contexts, the perceptions
of farmers and clients may be that a woman’s role is limited to that of an assistant. Increasing
awareness of and appreciation for women’s important roles and contributions can lead to the
recognition of women’s contributions to agricultural production. This can also garner respect
for women’s increased presence at training events and membership meetings and lead to
greater gender equality.




   TAILOR ICT TOOLS TO BE GENDER-INCLUSIVE

   As discussed in chapter 4, the use of information and communication technologies can be a low-
   cost tool that expands the impact of an agricultural extension program. Some ICTs, such as radio, are
   particularly effective at reaching otherwise isolated communities. For this reason, ICTs may increase a
   firm’s communication with women when social or economic considerations reduce women’s ability
   to leave the house. Firms can ensure that women benefit from ICT interventions by undertaking the
   following recommendations:

   Include a gender component when assessing the benefits of an ICT-based intervention.
   Men and women may use technology differently and may access different types of technology. Some
   topics to consider as part of the assessment include: 1) men’s and women’s different reasons for
   using technology, 2) whether they own or borrow that technology, 3) if it is a subscription-based or
   pay-as you-go service, and 4) whether they prefer written or oral communication. Women may prefer
   communication transmitted via radio or other “hands-free” devices so they can listen as they work on
   other tasks.

   Address the ongoing maintenance and costs of the ICT, not just the initial acquisition.
   Like other assets, ICTs require ongoing, costly maintenance. For example, a mobile phone needs to be
   charged both with airtime and electricity. Due to the mobility barriers that women often face, charging a
   mobile phone can be a much greater challenge for women than it is for men. Similarly, women typically
   have less access to disposable income. Their ability to purchase the airtime and phone-charging services
   necessary to productively use a mobile phone may be limited.

   Advocate for a gender balance in staffing at agricultural-related ICT service providers.
   Female extension agents may find it difficult to travel to remote districts, and female farmers may
   feel intimidated asking men questions when they contact an ICT service provider. One solution is
   to hire female agents as call center consultants and operators. Women can also act as information
   intermediaries for other farmers, acting as liaisons between community members and agricultural
   information providers. Through their participation in content development, women will gain skills, earn
   income, and address women’s information needs.

   Combine ICT interventions with face-to-face learning. While mobile services are expanding and
   providing opportunities for reaching large populations, not all women have access to mobile phones
   or text-based information services. Using multiple approaches ensures that services reach a wider base
   of rural women in appropriate channels. For example, CARE’s Kenya Agricultural Commodity Exchange
   uses information kiosks located in local markets, a radio program, a short-message service, and an
   interactive voice-responsive service to provide market information.




                                                                                                               107
                    IMPLEMENT SUPPLY CHAIN INTERVENTIONS THAT ARE ACCESSIBLE
                    TO WOMEN

                    Content delivery is another opportunity to incorporate gender sensitivity into a smallholder
                    sourcing program. Restrictions on women’s time and social activities can make it difficult
                    for potential female participants to attend program events. Norms prohibiting women’s
                    interaction with men may automatically exclude women from a project that aims to include
                    them. Finally, if women were not historically included in outreach programs, firms may
                    need to actively engage them through producer organizations or women-only groups. The
                    observations below offer suggestions on ways to market interventions to meet women’s
                    needs and preferences.

                    Ensure Convenience

                    The location and timing of program events greatly impacts women’s participation rates. An
                    accessible location to which women can travel safely and conveniently will increase their
                    comfort levels. Women can often make recommendations about a suitable place to hold
                    events during the market research phase.

                    Certain times of day and days of the week may be more convenient for women to attend. For
                    example, in some countries, Sunday is the most convenient day of the week for women to
                    participate in training. In other cases, Sunday is an inconvenient time for women if they attend
                    religious services that day. Providing childcare during a session will relieve distractions. The best
                    way to ensure that training is convenient is to ask women directly what suits them best.

                    “Crop calendar” tools can help determine the best dates for arranging event and training
                    schedules, but women’s schedules may need to be compared against the crop calendars to
                    ensure their availability. For example, March may be a free month for cash crop production,
                    but women may be busy harvesting crops for home consumption. Taking women’s schedules
                    into account will improve participation.




      IN PRACTICE   VIDEO VIEWING CLUBS SUPPORT LEARNING AMONG FEMALE COCOA FARMERS

                    In Ghana, the Sustainable Tree Crops Program has developed video viewing clubs for illiterate women who are
                    cocoa smallholders. The program ensures that training is accessible for women by involving women in selecting
                    the training venue, length, and frequency. Trainees can easily capture content conveyed through short films,
                    discussions supported by picture guides, and practical demonstrations at a trainee’s farms.




                    Ensure That Staff Promote Women’s Participation

                    Staff and extension agents are critical for ensuring that women feel safe, welcome, and valued
                    in a supply chain strengthening program. Some strategies to sensitize staff to their role include:

                    •	 Train field staff, staff from producer groups, third-party extension workers, and service
                       providers on women’s constraints and concerns.




108
              •	 Hire female trainers and volunteers. Women in leadership positions are often more
                 effective at reaching and supporting female farmers, especially in contexts where social
                 norms limit women’s interactions with men. A mix of female and male extension agents
                 can reduce barriers for women’s participation in the program.

              Firms may need to adjust selection criteria to recruit female trainers. For example, firms may
              select women whose community leadership roles stand in for educational and professional
              qualifications.

              A strong, gender-balanced team can further promote women’s participation by:

              •	 Ensuring that event invitations are extended directly to women farmers, including female
                 household members of male contract farmers. In some cultures, firms may need to obtain
                 men’s approval before extending invitations directly to women in order to avoid backlash
                 or violence.
              •	 Encouraging women’s participation and respecting women’s opinions during discussions.
              •	 Encouraging women to lead group discussions and present group opinions.
              •	 Increasing the likelihood of program success by designing and implementing it in a way
                 that incorporates the perspectives of women and men for greater program effectiveness.




IN PRACTICE   WOMEN TAKE THE LEAD IN TRAINING IN PAKISTAN

              In Pakistan, male entrepreneurs registered with the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation-funded Farm
              Forestry Support Project are encouraged to allow female family members to participate. The project trains and provides
              technical support for women to become master trainers in nursery entrepreneurship. The project recruits twice as many
              female staff as male staff in conservative areas and uses gender-sensitive operational guidelines and budgeting.3




              Respect Social Norms and Context

              Working with producer organizations and other membership groups is an opportunity for
              firms to model norms and values that respect women’s participation in agriculture.

              However, promoting women’s active engagement in traditionally male environments is not
              always the right strategy. Women and men often operate in different social spheres and
              encouraging engagement across genders may create conflict.

              Working with women-only groups can be an alternative to promoting women’s participation
              and leadership in established producer organizations. Firms can leverage existing women’s
              self-help, savings, or water groups to build capacity and source from women farmers. Table
              8.2 addresses the pros and cons of working with mixed and gender-segregated groups.




                                                                                                                                       109
      Table 8.2. Two strategies for working with women.

                ENGAGE WOMEN IN MIXED-GENDER GROUPS                                        ENGAGE WOMEN IN GENDER-SEGREGATED GROUPS

        +     Improves women’s access
              to producer groups and       -    May not improve women’s
                                                decision-making power                 +      More socially accepted
                                                                                                                             -     Women-only groups
                                                                                                                                   lack vertical supply
              value chains
                                           -    Social norms and                      +      Women are better able to
                                                                                             voice opinions and needs
                                                                                                                                   chain linkages that men
                                                                                                                                   typically control

        +     Provides access to                expectations can limit
              marketing, inputs, credit,
              and information
                                                women’s participation
                                                                                      +      Women can develop
                                                                                             leadership skills               -     Men can feel excluded
                                                                                                                                   and attempt to sabotage

                                           -    Group priorities may not
                                                meet women’s needs
                                                                                                                                   the group




               IN PRACTICE                 STARBUCKS SEES STRONG RETURNS ON INVESTMENT IN WOMEN

                                           In a joint project with Conservation International, Starbucks has worked with women’s groups to cultivate shade-
                                           grown coffee in El Triunfo Biosphere Reserve in Chiapas, Mexico. The project trains women in inter-cropping
                                           coffee with fruit trees and other shade-tolerant, crop-yielding plants. The technique generates income for women
                                           from the sales of the coffee harvest, as well as food for their families from the other crops. Starbucks’ investment
                                           in the women’s groups has also generated returns for the company—the women-produced coffee retails for
                                           one-third more than the company’s main product line.




                                           Ensure Inclusiveness in Producer Organizations

                                           Firms may need to proactively recruit women into outgrower or contract-farming schemes
                                           since women often assume that it will be difficult to join. Firms should assure women that
                                           land ownership is not a prerequisite and that women are encouraged to join. Firms should
      Firms can strengthen a supply        also communicate information about company contract programs and their benefits.
      chain by advocating for women’s
      full and active integration into
                                           In addition to actively reaching out to female farmers, firms may also need to educate
      producer organizations that they
      work with.                           producer organizations on their gender values and priorities. Traditional values or historical
                                           economic structures may create unequal barriers to women’s participation in producer
                                           groups. Businesses can advocate for producer organizations to address underrepresentation
                                           of women in their membership or production by:

                                           •	 Encouraging men to give a share of their land or crops to their wives so women can join
                                              the group or program in their own right.
                                           •	 Ensure that outgrower registration and contracts are completed in the name of the
                                              individual who is the main producer or decision maker. Sometimes a woman will register
                                              under her husband’s name because it is more socially acceptable. As a result, she no
                                              longer has direct control over the resources and decision making at the group level.
                                           •	 Encourage joint contracts that require both the husband and wife to sign the contract and
                                              require that the money earned be distributed to both the husband and wife.
                                           •	 Discourage membership guidelines that effectively exclude women. Examples of guidelines
                                              that discourage the participation of women are:
                                                –	 requiring members to possess legal or traditional land rights,
                                                –	 setting minimum production volumes that make it difficult for women to join given
                                                   the smaller size of their farms, and
                                                –	 registering only heads of household as members.



110
              Underrepresentation of women in leadership or management positions within producer
              groups and contract farming programs can be addressed through:

              •	 Introducing quotas for women’s representation on boards and committees of contract
                 farming programs and producer groups
              •	 Encouraging and supporting women to stand for election to these committees.
              •	 Explaining the importance and benefits of women’s representation to men in order to help
                 overcome likely cultural barriers and resistance to change.



IN PRACTICE   INCREASING INCLUSIVENESS IN OUTGROWER SCHEMES

              The FRICH project supports Finlays’ Kenyan tea outgrowers to establish five new cooperatives. To ensure that female
              outgrowers join the cooperatives, the project based membership eligibility on the ability to demonstrate control over
              the produce harvest from one’s land. The project expressly prohibits women registering under their husband’s names
              if the husband is not involved in farm labor. The cooperatives’ governance structures also reflect the prioritization
              of women’s involvement by incorporating quotas for female and youth participation at various management levels.




              As with any program, a gender-inclusive program will identify many needs among male and
              female farmer suppliers. The costs of addressing the entirety of farmers’ needs can mount
              quickly. Instead, firms must prioritize goals, as discussed in chapter 2, ensuring that program
              goals align with farmer incentives. Firms may be able to identify “quick wins” by empowering
              women through activities that were already planned. For example, if a firm is already planning
              on providing training through extension agents, ensuring that a significant proportion of
              trainers are women can encourage gender inclusiveness without additional cost. Establishing
              and building capacity within women’s producer groups is a strategy that will require a greater
              level of investment and careful consideration of the expected impacts.

              Ensure That Women Capture the Gains from Sustainability Certification
              Programs

              Sustainability standards do not specifically target women, but programs that support compliance
              with standards address areas in which women are particularly disadvantaged. When firms invest
              in upgrading standards compliance, women can benefit disproportionately due to increased
              access to training, markets, and market information. Improved standards compliance may also
              lead to more women registering as farm operators and joining producer organizations.

              However, there is no automatic correlation between women’s participation in sustainability standards
              and improvements to their well-being. Indeed, participation in programs that shift production from
              conventional to fair trade or organic methods appear to increase women’s involvement in both pre-
              and post-harvest labor. Women’s increased workload might reduce their contributions to personal
              income-generating activities, or it might reduce the amount of time they have to rest.

              •	 Assessing additional labor burdens generated for women (and men) as a result of the
                 adoption of the certification standards.
              •	 Addressing these additional burdens at an early stage through informal labor-sharing
                 agreements at the community or household level or through labor-saving recommendations.
              •	 When certification generates a premium paid to the group (such as fair trade premiums),
                 ensuring that funds are spent on projects benefitting women as well as men. Women’s
                 representation on the committees responsible for allocating premium funds increases the
                 likelihood that women will benefit from them.
              •	 Supporting the development of women-driven brands.



                                                                                                                                      111
               IN PRACTICE                 THE CAFÉ FEMENINO LABEL

                                           Café Feminino is a label that markets organically grown coffee and represents an emerging strategy to
                                           promote women’s brands. Originating out of eight Latin American countries—Peru, Brazil, Bolivia, Dominican
                                           Republic, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Mexico, and Colombia— the brand aims to create a niche market within the
                                           specialty coffee market that attributes a higher value to coffee produced entirely by women. In addition to
                                           creating opportunities to increase women’s vertical and horizontal linkages across the value chain, the label has
                                           strengthened women’s self-esteem and leadership skills. Café Feminino members in Peru produce in a “women-
                                           only” space in a mixed-gender producer organization, but as their technical skills improve, more women are
                                           taking on leadership positions within the larger organization. While the label may remain a niche-market player,
                                           it has expanded women’s role and participation in the supply chain.




                                           MONITOR AND EVALUATE
                                           As discussed in chapter 9, employing project monitoring and evaluation techniques throughout
                                           an intervention can ensure that a project stays on track towards its goals. Strong market
                                           research on women’s priorities and constraints can assist in the development of adequate
                                           outcome and impact indicators for gender. Monitoring goals for women’s participation and
                                           roles in the supply chain during project implementation may separate successful activities
                                           from activities that should be eliminated or modified. This allows a firm to ensure that a
                                           project attains its goals while changing women’s behavior and improving their livelihoods.

                                           Gender indicators must meet the same standards as any other indicator (see chapter 9 and
                                           Table 8.3) and should capture changes and evolution in gender-related norms. For example,
                                           an indicator that quantifies how many women joined a producer organization or attended
                                           a training session is less informative than an indicator that captures the percent change in
                                           women’s participation in producer organizations or training.


      Table 8.3. Gender-inclusive indicators track production and welfare outcomes from a gendered perspective.

       Instead of:                                                               Use:
       Hours women spend on farming                                              Percent reduction/increase in women’s time spent farming
       Number of women in leadership positions                                   Percent time that women speak during meetings
       Amount of money that women spend on farming inputs                        Spending on inputs as a percent of the overall household budget
       Number of women who received fertilizer credit                            Women as a percent of total recipients of fertilizer credit
       Number of women who receive farm equipment (typically a resource          Women as a percent of total participants who have access to farm
       allocated to men)                                                         equipment



                                           Just as preliminary research into the smallholder context requires techniques that incorporate
                                           women’s opinions, monitoring and evaluation methods must similarly include women. Surveys that
                                           capture observations at the level of household members will capture more detailed information
                                           than surveys that aggregate responses at the household level. When surveys are too costly,
                                           gender-segregated focus groups may help identify concerns and opinions that men and women
                                           have about a project’s implementation. If a project uses farmer logbooks or other recordkeeping
                                           documents to track progress, the firm should identify whether it is more appropriate for men or
                                           women to be assigned with the task. In some cases, women may control the household budget
                                           and can therefore track spending more precisely. If a woman is assigned with tracking her partner’s
                                           farm labor, she may gain increased accountability over her husband’s actions.



112
IN PRACTICE   UNDERSTANDING WOMEN’S FARM LABOR CONTRIBUTIONS INCREASES THE
              EFFECTIVENESS OF TRAINING

              Female farmers constitute nearly 80 percent of coffee farm labor in North Sumatra, Indonesia, and 50 percent
              of farm labor in Lam Dong, Vietnam. Despite these high female participation rates, female farmers in the region
              are often excluded from extension services and other development activities. A 2010 IFC partnership with the
              Ecom Agroindustrial Corporation included a project promoting sustainable coffee cultivation practices among
              smallholder farmers that prioritized women’s engagement in training.

              The implementation team identified the following barriers to women’s engagement:

              1.	 Limited free time: In addition to farm work, female farmers are in charge of most of the household’s
                  domestic work and rarely have time to attend training/workshops.
              2.	 Few assets: Family assets, especially land, are primarily owned by men.
              3.	 Poor outreach: Farmers’ associations, which organize extension training, mostly work with household
                  heads, more than 90 percent of whom are male.
              4.	 Insufficient gender awareness: Lead firm staff and local extension staff lack the knowledge on gender
                  issues necessary to apply a gender-sensitive approach to extension training activities.

              The implementation team’s approach aimed to increase women’s farming skills and improve overall coffee productivity
              and quality. To do so, the team identified women’s roles in on-farm supply chain work and deployed women trainers,
              volunteers, and the leaders of women’s unions, farmers’ associations, village heads, and extension staff to underscore
              the project’s prioritization of gender. Trainers adjusted training schedules to accommodate women’s needs and used
              gender-specific training materials. More visual aids, such as videos and pictures, accompanied traditional training
              materials in order to reach illiterate women in the audience. Recognizing women’s traditional role in managing
              household income, the team introduced a simple financial management tool to enable female farmers to document
              and analyze household and farm expenditures.

              By the project’s close in 2012, 1,596 Indonesian women received training, increasing women’s participation
              in training from 4 percent to 26 percent. In Vietnam, 2,317 women received training, more than doubling
              female participation in training workshops from less than 12 percent in 2010 to 25 percent in 2012. The project
              improved the adoption rate of improved agricultural practices that are primarily done by female farmers, such as
              pruning and fertilization.

              Two key benefits emerged from integrating women into the farmer training program. First, women’s access to
              technical training, extension services, and productive input has increased the adoption of Good Agricultural Practices.
              Coffee productivity was found to be higher among trained groups that included both men and women as compared
              with trained groups consisting only of men and with a control group that received no training from the project.
              Second, women applied the knowledge and skills they received through training to increase their household
              productivity. This additional knowledge helped farming families use their resources more efficiently, improving their
              livelihoods beyond the project’s expectations.

              Participants also expressed satisfaction with shifts in traditional household responsibilities as a result of the
              program. Men started taking on a greater role in childcare in order to free women’s time to participate in
              the program. Women who normally controlled much of the household budget started to include men in the
              decision-making process.




                                                                                                                                        113
      USEFUL RESOURCES
      Agri-Gender Statistics Toolkit, http://www.fao.org/gender/agrigender/agri-gender-toolkit/en/
      This database was developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in
      support of enhanced production and use of sex-disaggregated agricultural data. It presents examples of
      gender-relevant questions and tables jointly developed by national statisticians and FAO for agricultural
      censuses undertaken in Africa between 1993 and 2006.

      Evaluation Study: Gender and Value Chain Development, Riisgaard, Lone, Fibla, Anna Maria Escobar,
      and Stegano Ponte, The Danish Institute for International Studies, May 2010,
      http://www.oecd.org/derec/denmark/45670567.pdf
      The study examines which gender issues are important in value chains. While acknowledging that men
      are sometimes disadvantages in, or excluded from value chains, this study focuses on issues related to
      the impact of value chain interventions on women.

      Focus Notes: Designing & Marketing Mobile Information & Advisory Services for Women Smallholders,
      GSMA mAgri Programme, http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/
      Focus-Note-Designing-Marketing-Mobile-Information-Advisory-Services-for-Women-Smallholders.pdf
      and (http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/magri)
      One of the focus areas for the mFarmer Initiative, a partnership between the GSMA, the Bill & Melinda
      Gates Foundation, and USAID, is to work with mobile service providers and agricultural organizations to
      ensure that their mobile agricultural information and advisory services are equally accessible to women
      smallholder farmers as they are to men. The purpose of this focus note is to introduce the gender
      theme and share practical, actionable lessons on reaching women (with a focus on service design and
      marketing).

      Gender in Agriculture: A World Bank Learning Module
      http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTGENDER/0,,contentMDK:20193040~pagePK:
      210058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:336868,00.html
      This learning module has been developed to make basic information on gender issues in agriculture
      more accessible to those working in this area.
       
      Gender in Value Chains, http://genderinvaluechains.ning.com/profiles/blogs/agri-profocus-practical-
      toolkit-to-integrate-a-gender-perspective
      Agri-profocus practical toolkit to integrate a gender perspective in agricultural value chain development.

      Improving Opportunities for Women in Smallholder-Based Supply Chains, Chan, Man-Kwun, 2010.
      This guide presents practical, action-focused steps and sets out the business case for action; provides
      practical guidance about what food companies can do to encourage greater participation of, and
      support for, women in their smallholder-based supply chains; and presents over 40 good practice
      examples and seven in-depth case studies.
      http://www.gatesfoundation.org/learning/Documents/gender-value-chain-guide.pdf

      Integrating Gender into Extension Services: A Facilitator’s Guide to Incorporating Gender Awareness
      and Analysis into Extension Training and Programming, Colverson, Kathleen Earl, http://dl.dropbox.
      com/u/15810717/TM%20on%20Gender%20-%20Colverson%202012_06/index.html

      Making the Strongest Links: A Practical Guide to Mainstreaming Gender Analysis In Value Chain
      Development, http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/documents/
      instructionalmaterial/wcms_106538.pdf
      A guide developed by the International Labor Organization as a means to increase women
      entrepreneurs’ capacity to access markets and build sustainable enterprises that create decent work.
      This guide contains a framework and methodology, practical examples, checklists, and diagram tools.

      Rapid Rural Appraisal and Participatory Rural Appraisal: A Manual for CRS Field Workers and Partners.
      Schoonmaker Freundenberger, Karen, http://dmeforpeace.org/learn/rapid-rural-appraisal-and-
      participatory-rural-appraisal-manual-crs-field-workers-and-partners

      The Role of Women in Agriculture. Doss, Cheryl and the SOFA Team. Food and Agriculture
      Organization. ESA Working Paper No. 11-02. March 2011. www.fao.org/docrep/013/am307e/
      am307e00.pdf




114
Sourcing Gender: Gender Productivity and Sustainable Sourcing Strategies, Boodhna, Anoushka in
collaboration with the International Institute for Environment and Development, Sustainable Food
Lab. This paper is targeted at businesses and practitioners who want to engage with producers and
farmers and develop more sustainable sourcing strategies. It aims to provide a deeper understanding of
gender-specific features of the value chain. This paper does not advocate the exclusion of men. Rather,
the interventions focused on women will support the performance of the whole value chain and bring
benefits to the entire community.

Women, Food Security and Agriculture in a Global Marketplace, Mehra, Rekha and Mary Hill Rojas,
International Center for Research on Women, http://www.icrw.org/files/publications/A-Significant-Shift-
Women-Food%20Security-and-Agriculture-in-a-Global-Marketplace.pdf
ICRW’s (International Center for Research on Women) report makes a case for development assistance
and agricultural investments to recognize and support women’s involvement in the full agricultural
value chain from production to processing to marketing. The report reviews current thinking and
practice on increasing agricultural productivity, both subsistence and commercial agriculture, and
examines what is known about women’s roles in both sectors.

The Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index, http://www.ifpri.org/publication/women-s-
empowerment-agriculture-index
IFPRI’s survey-based index designed to measure the empowerment, agency, and inclusion of women in
the agricultural sector. The WEAI can also be used more generally to assess the state of empowerment
and gender parity in agriculture, to identify key areas in which empowerment needs to be
strengthened, and to track progress over time. The WEAI is an aggregate index, reported at the country
or regional level, based on individual-level data collected by interviewing men and women within the
same households.


NOTES

1.FAO, State of Food and Agriculture 2012: Investing in Agriculture for a Better Future (Food and
Agriculture Organization, 2012). Accessed via Food and Agriculture Organization website: http://www.
fao.org/docrep/017/i3028e/i3028e.pdf

2. Cheryl Doss and the SOFA team, The Role of Women in Agriculture (Food and Agriculture
Organization, ESA Working Paper No. 11-02, March 2011). Accessed via Food and Agriculture
Organization website: www.fao.org/docrep/013/am307e/am307e00.pdf

3. Lone Riisgaard, Anna Maria Escobar, and Stefano Ponte, Gender and Value Chain Development
(Danish International Development Agency, 2010). Accessed via The Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development website: http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/am310e/am310e00.pdf




                                                                                                          115
116
CHAPTER 9
Measuring Results




                    U
    Why read this chapter?


    Monitoring and evaluation are powerful tools for
    informing management about the cost-effectiveness
    of smallholder supply chain initiatives. Not all tools
    have the same ability to measure and evaluate
    project impacts. Choosing the right tool depends on
    how the firm intends to use evaluation results.




V
Measuring Results
THE BUSINESS CASE FOR AN EVIDENCE-BASED APPROACH
Working with smallholder farmers is a costly endeavor. Monitoring and evaluation tools can
inform management about whether and how well a project is achieving its goals. Pilot programs
that successfully demonstrate impact with a convincing evaluation component will garner
more attention from senior management. As programs move from pilot phases to expansion,
evaluations can provide recommendations on how to adapt approaches in response to changing
market conditions or different target groups. Evaluations can test, and sometimes debunk,
assumptions about the type of assistance smallholders need, increasing the cost-effectiveness
of a firm’s investment. Independent evaluation findings can underscore a firm’s commitment to
sustainability and corporate social responsibility among the broader public.

In summary, there are several reasons to measure results in a rigorous manner:

Learning: Tracking the efficiency and effectiveness of training, sales, procurement, and
processing operations will facilitate an understanding of what really works and what the
costs and benefits of different approaches are.

Planning: Results can generate data for business planning, such as projecting crop volumes
in order to plan construction of a new warehouse.

Accountability: Results can be used to support product marketing, demonstrate corporate
social responsibility, or justify the use of donor funds. Certified B or benefit corporations are
required to evaluate social impact and give it equal weight alongside fiduciary responsibilities.


SOLUTIONS, STRATEGIES, AND BEST PRACTICES FOR EVALUATING
SUPPLY CHAIN INTERVENTIONS
The Choice of Evaluation Methods Depends on the Evaluation’s Goals

Firms have two options when evaluating projects. The first option is to observe and track
changes in participant behavior using methodologies of a process evaluation. Process
evaluations can be useful for firms looking to share stories about their work with farmers. The
second option is an impact evaluation, which uses experimental or quasi-experimental data
to measure and draw conclusions about the program’s effect on smallholder farmers. Impact
evaluations measure the value of the intervention to the firm and can inform management’s
decision making regarding future efforts.

Impact evaluations may be costlier than process evaluations, so it is important to determine
the level of rigor that is required before deciding on an evaluation methodology. For example,
an impact evaluation using randomized control trials, discussed below, are considered a
best practice for results measurement, but they can cost significantly more than before/after
methods used in process evaluations. Publishing results in a professional journal requires the
highest degree of confidence before attributing results, while promotional materials may not
require as high a level of confidence.

Process and impact evaluations are discussed in detail below.




                                                                                                    117
      Process Evaluation

      Process evaluations identify whether the supply chain intervention delivered what it was
      supposed to deliver and whether the targeted smallholders received the intended results.
      This type of evaluation can help firms answer questions such as, “What percent of farmers
      in the supply chain are pruning their cocoa trees correctly?” It is a means of assessing the
      implementation of the program but does not explain how the results were achieved, nor can
      the results be generalized beyond the direct beneficiaries being evaluated.

      Tools that can be used to conduct a process evaluation are before-and-after evaluation
      methodologies and case studies.



         A SUMMARY OF PROGRAM AUDITING OR PROCESS EVALUATION

         •	 Use data taken before and after an intervention to assess a change in behavior or outcome.
         •	 Useful for telling stories about a firm’s smallholder strategy and for demonstrating improved
            livelihood outcomes.
         •	 Can identify which aspects of implementation were more successful than others.
         •	 Provide little feedback to firms about a strategy’s cost-effectiveness.




      Before-and-after evaluations: This methodology tracks selected indicators throughout the
      life of the program and compares the end results to baseline levels in order to assess changes
      during the program’s lifetime. The before-and-after method may be acceptable for some
      uses, such as demonstrating corporate social responsibility, but the method does not establish
      causality, limiting its usefulness as an input to effective program design.

      For example, a firm might train its suppliers to correctly prune their coffee trees. At the
      beginning of the program (or baseline), 10 percent of the farmers pruned correctly. A follow-
      up survey after two years of training finds that 90 percent prune correctly and that yields
      have increased by 20 percent. Farmers and firms may wish to attribute the increased yields
      to pruning. However, off-year/on-year production patterns or favorable weather may also be
      responsible.

      Case studies: This methodology provides a detailed review of outcomes based on the
      experiences of one or a group of participants. Case studies may use qualitative techniques to
      capture opinions and observations from various individuals, such as participants, field staff,
      and project managers, who are part of a project’s implementation. These observations are
      then integrated into a report that highlights program outcomes.

      Operations Research Through Impact Evaluation

      Impact evaluations assess the changes produced by an intervention by comparing the results
      achieved to a counterfactual. A counterfactual is what would have happened if there had
      not been an intervention. Since a counterfactual is impossible to measure (because it did
      not actually happen), impact evaluations produce a counterfactual by comparing a group
      of people who closely resemble the participants (but did not participate in the program)
      to the participants themselves. Measuring participant outcomes against outcomes in the
      counterfactual group is as close as firms can get to measuring what would have happened to
      farmers without the intervention.




118
                                   Impact evaluations are more costly than process evaluations, but they can provide firms with critical
                                   feedback on the efficacy of a supply chain strategy. By taking into account external influences,
                                   such as weather, seasonality, price changes, and political disruptions, impact evaluations help
                                   firms understand what real differences the program made for farmer participants. New tools
                                   and strategies are available that can reduce the cost of impact evaluations.

                                   Randomized control trials and quasi-experimental trials are two methodologies for conducting
                                   impact evaluations.




                                      A SUMMARY OF IMPACT EVALUATIONS

                                      •	 Use data from participant and non-participant farmers taken before and after an intervention.
                                      •	 Capable of quantifying by how much the project (as opposed to some other factor) resulted in
                                         specific changes in outcomes.
                                      •	 Useful for measuring the cost-effectiveness of an intervention.
                                      •	 Relatively expensive when compared with process evaluations, but the value of the information
                                         generated is greater.




                                   Experimental/randomized control trial: Randomized control trials estimate program
                                   effectiveness by comparing participant outcomes with those who did not participate.
                                   RCTs create a comparison group through random assignment. Randomized evaluations
                                   generate a statistically identical comparison group and therefore produce the most accurate
A more detailed description of     (unbiased) results.
these techniques can be found at
www.farms2firms.org.               Undertaking RCTs in agriculture can be challenging and costly, because as many as 400
                                   farmers may be needed in each group to insure statistical validity. One strategy is to stagger
                                   the delivery of the intervention into two or more rounds of treatment. This enables farmers
                                   who will receive training or other interventions in subsequent rounds to serve as a control
                                   group for the farmers receiving training in the first round. This approach also requires a
                                   sufficient time lag (at least one crop cycle) between rounds of service delivery to assess the
                                   results of the program.

                                   Quasi-experimental: Quasi-experimental studies use statistical methods to estimate the
                                   true causal effect of a development intervention by comparing a group receiving program
                                   assistance with a group of non-participants. However, unlike RCTs the two groups are not
                                   randomly assigned. Instead, program managers identify a group that is similar enough to the
                                   participant group that it may stand in as the counterfactual.

                                   Quasi-experimental methods can be particularly useful in agricultural interventions because
                                   they are more cost-effective when working with groups of farmers. The case study below on
                                   the efforts of an Indian company, DCM Shiram Consolidated Ltd, to measure program impact
                                   illustrates the usefulness of quasi-experimental methods.




                                                                                                                                           119
               IN PRACTICE              IMPACT EVALUATION UNDERSCORES PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS

                                        DCM Shiram Consolidated Ltd, or DSCL, produces sugar in four mills operating in India. As part of an advisory service
                                        project with IFC, DSCL undertook a quasi-experimental evaluation of a program to improve low sugarcane productivity
                                        among its smallholder suppliers. The program taught farmers improved farm-level practices using classroom training
                                        and tools, such as extension manuals and farmer flip charts. The goal was to train 2,000 farmers in DSCL’s supply chain
                                        on new agronomy practices and increase productivity of trained farmers by 25 percent over three years.

                                        The evaluation matched groups of 207 participating and 207 non-participating, or control group, farmers. The
                                        control group was constructed based on field size, financial status (no overdue loans), and distance from mill.
                                        Evaluators compared productivity from the two groups at key implementation stages through crop-cutting
                                        surveys among a sub-sample. The evaluation was supplemented with qualitative analysis, such as farmer
                                        snapshots (case studies) and focus group discussions.

                                        The results of the evaluation showed an 86 percent increase in productivity among farmers who received training
                                        versus a 19 percent increase in productivity for the control group. The results were so powerful for DSCL’s
                                        management, it is now scaling up the training to reach 12,000 farmers.




                                        Data Collection Is Critical to Ensure Reliable Evaluations

                                        Every evaluation methodology is based on a careful analysis of data collected from farmers
                                        and other stakeholders. Careful data collection is essential to ensure the reliability of the
                                        information on which an evaluation’s conclusions are drawn. Common data collection
                                        methods are presented below.

                                        Surveys capture data on specific questions related to program content and goals. Good
                                        practices for survey administration include:

                                        •	 Develop sampling guidelines to ensure that respondents reflect the broader population
                                           and are statistically valid.
                                        •	 Phrase questions in an unbiased manner. Participants may wish to please surveyors in an
                                           effort to ensure continued program support. Unbiased questions will reduce the likelihood
                                           that participants answer in the way they think managers want to hear.
                                        •	 Keep questions simple. Surveyors and farmers are more likely to understand and respond
                                           accurately to simple questions. Consider what language surveyors and farmers might prefer.
                                        •	 Select a reliable firm/partner with an established track record to undertake the survey data
                                           collection and/or analysis.

                                        Qualitative interviewing is a conversation-based data collection method that is more flexible
                                        than surveying, but it can only collect anecdotal evidence. Qualitative interviews may be
                                        applied to multiple project stakeholders including farmers, field staff, producer organization
                                        staff, and project managers. Individual interviews are helpful for gaining in-depth observations
                                        or for discussing sensitive information, while group interviews can gather multiple opinions
                                        and identify consensual or conflicting opinions. Data obtained through qualitative methods
                                        can supplement an evaluation. While survey data might identify whether or not a program
      Combining qualitative methods     was successful, qualitative interviews may identify possible reasons for the success or failure.
      with impact evaluations can
      provide richer detail about
      what worked in a supply chain     Participatory appraisal (also called Rapid Rural Appraisal) is a form a qualitative data collection
      intervention and why it worked.   that involves guided group discussions. A trained facilitator works with a community group
                                        to answer a particular question, such as “How does women’s workload vary during the year?”
                                        Often, tangible markers, such as pebbles or sticks, are used to facilitate the discussion. A
                                        second facilitator records the comments for later synthesis.



120
                                      Farmer logbooks may be used to ask farmers to record real-time information on the use of
                                      inputs, productivity, sales, and household finances. Firms will need to follow up regularly with
                                      farmers to ensure proper use of farmer logbooks, and verification of some sample of the data
                                      should be undertaken. Chapter 7 provides additional information on the use of farmer logbooks.
A comprehensive list of indicators
for measuring impact in
agricultural interventions can be     The Right Metrics Can Guide Overall Program Design
found at www.farms2firms.org.
                                      The term “metrics” simply refers to what will be measured to assess a program’s effectiveness.
                                      The selection of metrics begins with a logical framework that lays out the causality and
                                      assumptions linking program activities to results (see chapter 2 for a discussion of logical
                                      frameworks). Metrics can be divided into outputs, outcomes, and impacts. As illustrated in figure
                                      9.1, output metrics measure the activities delivered by the project, such as “number of farmers
                                      trained.” Outcome metrics measure behavioral changes resulting from those activities, such as
                                      “number of farmers implementing recommendations (farmers using fertilizer correctly).” Finally,
                                      the impact indicators examine how those results have affected the beneficiaries. Impacts can
                                      measure things like “change in farmer revenue” or “change in farmer income.”



Figure 9.1. Measuring results is a process, not an end point.

Metrics can be designed by working backwards from program goals to desired impacts, outcomes, and outputs. Expected outputs will then
inform program activities and the amount of inputs (financing) the program may need.




          INPUTS                     ACTIVITIES                 OUTPUTS                     OUTCOMES                      IMPACTS

  •	 The resources that went     •	 The specific actions   •	 The activities’          •	 How the outputs          •	 How the outcomes
     into the project.              undertaken within         immediate results.          changed participant         affected the overall
  •	 Example: Funding,              the project.           •	 Example: 250 farmers        behavior.                   program goals.
     technical expertise,        •	 Example: 15 on-farm       trained on proper        •	 Example: The             •	 Example: The
     administrative and             training sessions         pruning techniques.         percentage of farmers       percentage increase
     logistical support..           on proper pruning                                     adopting new pruning        in productivity after
                                    techniques.                                           techniques.                 three years.




                                      Impact Metrics to Consider for Smallholder Supply Chain Interventions

                                      Farmers Reached
                                      The most aggregated and basic metric a firm can use is farmers reached, which counts the
                                      number of farmers impacted by a supply chain intervention. For firms that have multiple supply
                                      chain interventions affecting farmers across various sectors using diverse methodologies,
                                      the farmers reached metric provides a single, summary number for the firm’s impact on
                                      smallholder farmers. However, the metric has a number of limitations. Farmers reached does
                                      not indicate by how much farmers’ livelihoods improved or how their production changed.
                                      It does not provide firms with information about how the supply chain was strengthened as
                                      a result of an intervention. Therefore, while farmers reached is useful for aggregating the
                                      impact of various projects, it should not be the sole impact metric used on a single project.




                                                                                                                                              121
                                        Productivity
                                        A key intended impact of most farmer training programs includes methods of increasing farmer
                                        productivity. Productivity is the amount of crop harvested per unit of land (or fish per unit of
                                        pond area or liters per animal in the case of dairy). The most common metrics are kilograms
                                        or tons per hectare. Firms building traceable supply chains usually want to determine their
                                        suppliers’ productivity as a way to forecast crop procurement and calculate farm income.

                                        Productivity appears to be a simple metric. In practice, however, a number of factors make
                                        accurate measurement challenging:

                                        •	 Productivity data that is self-reported by the farmer is not always reliable. Projects should
                                           seek to triangulate data as much as possible, collecting from the farmer, through crop
                                           cutting, through records such as logbooks, and through the buyers.

                                        •	 When smallholders sell crops, they may only be partially dried. Therefore, crop weights collected
                                           at farm level should be adjusted to standard moisture levels for the crop, usually 12 to 15 percent,
                                           to be comparable with the Food and Agriculture Organization or other published statistics.

                                        •	 Because crops are often sold wet, many traders use volume measures, which may not
                                           correspond to standard metric volumes. To ensure data accuracy, firms should determine
                                           correct conversion factors.

                                        •	 Most tree crops are harvested a few kilograms at a time, over the course of several months or the
                                           entire year. Unless farmers keep written records, it is difficult for them to remember each sale.

                                        •	 If farmers are part of an outgrower scheme that provides inputs in exchange for crops at harvest,
                                           they may be reluctant to report crops that have been sold to other buyers (side-selling).

                                        •	 Many smallholders plant more than one crop on the same land. If the planting density
                                           for each crop is not optimal, yields will be lower than expected. However, producing two
                                           crops from the same land may increase overall profitability and reduce risk for the farmer.

                                        •	 Smallholders often do not know the exact size of their farms, especially if they have
                                           irregularly shaped plots or more than one plot. Even within a single plot, some areas
                                           may not be planted due to terrain or other nature features. Without accurate area
                                           measurement, productivity also cannot be determined accurately.

                                        Quality
                                        As with prices, firms usually collect data on the quality of the crops they purchase. The
                                        challenge is maintaining this data in a form that facilitates program design and measuring the
                                        results of training interventions.




      Figure 9.2. Key recommendations for developing metrics.


      The acronym SMART is a
      reminder that good metrics are:           S                  M                     A                    R                   T
      Specific, Measurable, Accurate,
      Relevant and Time-bound.               Specific          Measurable             Accurate            Relevant           Time-bound




122
                                     Income
                                     Reliably tracking changes in farmer incomes is a very challenging task. However, it is critical to
                                     understand farmer incomes because if new practices or inputs are not increasing household
                                     income, they will not be continued. In almost all cases, farmers do not keep track of all the
Supply chain interventions are       costs associated with growing each individual crop on their plots. Firms must usually rely on
sustainable when the incentives      self-reported data to understand changes in farmer income.
of farmers and firms are aligned.
Tracking increases to farmer         In the absence of collecting detailed revenue and cost data at the farmer level, one approach
income will help a firm ensure       for assessing household income is to rely on income scorecards. The scorecards need to be
that a project responds to
                                     developed based on the specific circumstances of each individual project. The results from
common needs.
                                     a scorecard survey are a proxy for income, based on more detailed surveys. An example
                                     of a simple poverty scorecard to assess income levels from Bangladesh is provided in table
                                     9.1.1 These tools predict whether a respondent is above or below the poverty line, and


Table 9.1. Bangladesh poverty scorecard.

                                                       BANGLADESH SCORECARD
 Indicator                                                      Value                                                Points    Total
 1. What type of latrine does the household use?                   Open field                                        0

                                                                   Kacha (temporary or permanent) or pit Pacca       8

                                                                   Sanitary or water-seal Pacca                      15
 2. How many household members are 11 years old or younger?        4 or more                                         0
                                                                   3                                                 7
                                                                   2                                                 12
                                                                   1                                                 19
                                                                   0                                                 27
 3. Does any household member work for a daily wage?               Yes                                               0
                                                                   No                                                9
 4. How many rooms does the house have                             1                                                 0
 (excluding ones used for business)?                               2 or 3                                            3
                                                                   4 or more                                         12
 5. Do all children ages 6 to17 attend school?                     No                                                0
                                                                   No children ages 6 to 17                          4
                                                                   Yes                                               5
 6. Does the household own a television set?                       No                                                0
                                                                   Yes                                               13
 7. How many decimals of cultivable land does the household own?   Less than 34                                      0
                                                                   34 to 99                                          2
                                                                   100 to 199                                        4
                                                                   200 or more                                       6
 8. What is the main construction material                         Hemp/Hay/Bamboo or Mud brick                      8
 of the walls of the house?
                                                                   C.I. sheet/Wood                                   6

                                                                   Brick/Cement                                      7
 9. Does the household own any cattle?                             No                                                0
                                                                   Yes                                               2
 10. Does the house have a separate kitchen?                       No                                                0
                                                                   Yes                                               5
                                                                                                                     Total




                                                                                                                                          123
      they cannot measure changes that occur below the poverty line established for a particular
      country. Another simple way of tracking household income is to query participants about
      their ownership of particular household assets, such as bicycles, motorcycles, type of roofing
      material, or use of cement in house construction.

      CONSIDERATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING EVALUATIONS
      Including an evaluation component as part of a supply chain intervention inherently means
      increasing the investment’s cost. Evaluators should be adequately trained to properly design
      and implement a monitoring and evaluation program. A number of organizations offer
      courses and seminars to assist firms in understanding the basics of program design. A few
      observations drawn from IFC’s experience are included below:

      Evaluation design/planning starts at program design. Start planning an evaluation
      immediately to properly implement the evaluation and get stakeholder buy-in. Stakeholders
      include the farmers themselves, producer organizations, training groups, and other partners
      working on the project.

      Data collected during the season is more reliable than data obtained from farmer recall.
      When possible, identify data collection methods that can be performed during the season
      instead of asking farmers to recall data. Farmers may misremember their harvests, or they may
      not know the actual number, instead providing an estimate. Farmers may also face incentives to
      misrepresent data if, for example, they participated in side-selling or are unable to repay a loan.

      The control group of farmers is not the same as a laboratory control. Farmers who
      participate in the control group of an evaluation are independent actors who may frequently
      interact with the community of farmers participating in the intervention. The control farmers
      may observe and adopt the improved practices the participant farmers learn, weakening the
      demonstrable impact from the intervention. Control-group farmers may also decide to stop
      participating in the follow-up surveys or other data collection requests since it doesn’t directly
      benefit them. To counteract this, firms may create a larger-than-necessary control group to
      account for attrition. Another strategy is to share a timeline for program expansion with the
      control group so they realize that program benefits will eventually reach them.

      Program impacts may not be immediately measurable. Some supply chain interventions
      will immediately demonstrate improved outcomes, while other may take several harvest cycles
      or several years to produce results. Adopting appropriate fertilizer techniques will have a more
      immediate impact on productivity than pruning or replanting a tree crop. In the long run,
      however, increased fertilizer use may increase farmers’ income by less than the investment in
      improved trees. Firms should consider both the activities undertaken and the desired impacts
      when developing the evaluation framework. Firms should also include a sufficient time frame
      to accurately capture benefits to avoid underestimating or overestimating the results.

      USING DATA FOR DECISION MAKING
      Once data has been collected, it can be used for a variety of purposes. Most importantly, it
      should be used to inform program implementation, eliminating or redesigning activities that
      are not producing the desired results.

      It is a good practice to discuss survey results with farmers who provided the data. This
      increases their willingness to respond to future surveys and can be used as a training tool to
      reinforce the benefits of good agricultural practices.

      Finally, impact data is critical if a firm is seeking resources from a development organization,
      either directly or through an NGO partner.




124
USEFUL RESOURCES
Man-Kwun Chan, Improving Opportunities for Women in Smallholder-Based Supply Chains (Gates
Foundation, 2010).

Cheryl Doss, The Role of Women in Agriculture (Food and Agriculture Organization, ESA Working Paper
No. 11-02, March 2011).

CABI Plantwise Program, www.plantwise.org
This is a global system for collecting data on the incidence of plant pests and diseases developed by the
CABI plantwise program.

eSoko, www.esoko.com
This is a firm that produces SMS systems for collecting and disseminating information cost effectively.

Famine Early Warning System (FEWS Net), www.fews.net
This is a global system established by USAID that provides weather forecasts and data on food crop
production.

Farmers’ Estimations as a Source of Production Data, Murphy, Josette Murphy, Casley, and John Curry,
World Bank, 1991.

Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance (FANTA), www.fantaproject.org
A USAID project that provides technical assistance and tools for measuring food production and
consumption. Many useful resources, including:
Agricultural Productivity Measurement, Diskin, Patrick, 1999.

Frontline SMS, www.frontlinesms.com
This is a firm that produces SMS systems for collecting and disseminating information cost effectively.

Geotraceability, www.geotraceability.com
This is service provider that assists off-takers in collecting, organizing and managing data about
smallholders.

Global Forum for Rural Advisory Services (GFRAS), www.g-fras.org
Best practices for evaluating agricultural extension programs. These are many useful references at this
site, including a Guide to Extension Evaluation.


LSMS Data

Grameen Foundation, Progress out of Poverty http://www.progressoutofpoverty.org/

Manual for the Implementation of USAID Poverty Tools. University of Maryland IRIS Center. May 2011.
http://www.povertytools.org/USAID_documents/Manual/USAID%20PAT%20Implementation%20
Manual%205-6-2011.pdf

Living Standards Measurement Study, http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/
EXTLSMS/0,,contentMDK:21610833~pagePK:64168427~piPK:64168435~theSitePK:3358997,00.html

Living Standards Measurement Study: Integrated Surveys on Agricultures,
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/EXTLSMS/EXTSURAGRI/0,,content
MDK:22802383~pagePK:64168427~piPK:64168435~theSitePK:7420261,00.html

Evaluating Development Co-operation,
http://www.oecd.org/dac/evaluationofdevelopmentprogrammes/dcdndep/41612905.pdf

The Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), www.povertyactionlab.org
A research center based at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It comprises a global network of
researchers who use randomized evaluations to study interventions designed to reduce poverty.




                                                                                                            125
      NOTES
      1. Mark Schreiner, Simple Poverty Scorecards (Microfinance Risk Management, L.L.C., October 19,
      2007. Reproduced from: http://www.microfinance.com/English/Papers/Scoring_Poverty_Simple.pdf




126
IFC Sustainable Business Advisory
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA

AskSustainability@ifc.org




                                    July 2013
