Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
FOOD & BEVERAGE
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein may
    not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1, or any
    other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to demonstrate
    a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into company
    management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing its impact
    on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does not
    imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Standards,
    including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply endorse-
    ment by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor the
    organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged in render-
    ing technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates comprising
    the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational purposes only, and
    are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes. Implementation of
    the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final users. The material
    in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can
    be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the
    information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other member of the World Bank
    Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, puni-
    tive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited to, damages for loss of profits,
    goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even if IFC has been advised of the
    possibility of such damages) in any way arising or resulting from use or reliance on
    the Handbook or any such conclusion or determination. The Handbook is distributed
    subject to the condition that it shall not by way of trade or otherwise be sold or oth-
    erwise circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeliness,
    completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is not
    responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice, opinions
    and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not necessarily
    represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the World Bank or
    its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in the
Food & Beverage Industry............................................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
     Overview...........................................................................................................................12
     Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................................13
     System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
     Using the Handbook and Companion Publications to Develop and
     Implement your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System............................................................ 17
     1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
         Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
         Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One..........................................18
         Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.................................................19
     2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
         Key Risks in the Food and Beverage Industry......................................................................20
     3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................23
         Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................24
         Short Cases......................................................................................................................24
         Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................37
         Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................37
     4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................38
         Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................38
         Communication and Training..........................................................................................40
     5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................42
         Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the Food and Beverage Industry.................45
     6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................48
         Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................49
         Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................50
     7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism............................................52
         External Communication.................................................................................................52
         Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................52
     8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................55
     9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................56
         Indicators........................................................................................................................57
         Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................60
         Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................61
         Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................62

Revision 2.2 June 6, 2014                         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                                       3
                       Welcome & How to
                       Use This Handbook
                       Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                       more and more important in today’s global
                       economy. There are thousands of environmental
                       and social codes and standards in the world
                       today. The codes and standards define the rules
                       and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                       implementation. An environmental and social
                       management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                       integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                       operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                       repeatable processes.

                       This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                       to help companies in the food and beverage
                       industry develop and implement an environmental
                       and social management system, which should help
                       to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                            In the current economic climate, companies are
                            under pressure to perform or even just survive.
                            New initiatives are often met with resistance as
                            people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
                            day responsibilities. Some people think that an
                            environmental and social management system
                            must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
                            is not really true. To be effective, a management
                            system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
                            the company.

                            If a company has existing management systems for
                            quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
                            to expand them to include environmental and social
                            performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
                            will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                            improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                            employees and stakeholders.




Revision 2.2 June 6, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	   5
                        Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                  These sections provide background on environmental
                         Sections I – II          and social management systems (ESMS) in the food and
                                                  beverage industry.

                                                  This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                  develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                         Section III
                                                  it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                  Toolkit.

                                                  Section I of this companion publication gives tools,
                                                  including forms, templates, checklists, and other useful
                                                  documents, to help you develop and implement the systems
                                                  described in the Handbook. We suggest that you adapt
                                                  each tool for your company.

                                                  Section II includes case studies presenting two companies
                         ESMS Toolkit and         in the food and beverage industry that implemented an
                                                  ESMS. These hypothetical cases illustrate how to develop
                         Case Studies             and implement an ESMS appropriate to the size and nature
                                                  of your company.
                                                  •	   ABC Company – a 400-person poultry processor
                                                       based in Thailand.

                                                  •	   XYZ Company – a 50-person fruit processor based in
                                                       Tanzania.

                         ESMS                     This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                         Self-Assessment          maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                         and Improvement          measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan for
                         Guide                    improvement.



                       Acknowledgements
                       This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                       department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Larissa Luy, Juan
                       Jose Dada and Robert Horner.

                       The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                       the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss and Jane
                       Hwang, as commissioned by IFC. Additional contributions were made by
                       Yogendra Chaudhry, Dundar Sahin and Caroline Lewis. Graphic design services
                       were provided by Pam Henry.

                       Additional IFC contributors include Debra Sequeira, Ekaterina Grigoryeva,
                       Louis Philippe Mousseau and Jeremy Ansell. The Handbook also significantly
                       benefited from comments from an internal peer review process, which involved
                       a diverse group of individuals who are too many to acknowledge individually.
                       However, the drafting team is very thankful for their valuable and insightful
                       comments and hopes they find their input reflected in this final version.

6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                   I

                              Benefits of an Environmental
                              and Social Management System
                              in the Food & Beverage Industry




Revision 2.2   June 6, 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	   7
“Our principal
customer required
a food quality and
safety management
system. We couldn’t
afford not to comply.              Benefits of an Environmental
Now we repeatedly
                                   and Social Management
ask ourselves
how we survived
                                   System in the Food &
without it.”                       Beverage Industry
Managing Director -
                                   Today, food and beverage companies are confronted with a number of significant
Citrus products grower,            environmental and social challenges. None of the challenges are insurmount-
processor and exporter             able, but if not effectively addressed and managed, they will hurt your core busi-
in Africa.                         ness operations and profitability.

                                   Among these challenges are increasing energy and raw materials costs, the grow-
                                   ing power and influence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies, and
                                   rapidly evolving consumer awareness and concerns about environmental and
                                   social issues. These risks are in addition to the primary risk of failing to manage
                                   food safety while building brand and consumer confidence. All of these risks ul-
                                   timately can have financial consequences. Moreover, export is vital to the success
                                   of many food and beverage businesses; but exporting brings even more demands
                                   from international legislation, voluntary standards and consumer requirements
                                   – increasingly related to environmental and social practices. All of these risks,
                                   requirements and pressures that your business faces are forces that encourage you
                                   to implement a management system.

                                   There are direct business benefits from implementing an environmental and so-
                                   cial management system. Conserving and using energy and materials efficiently
                                   helps to reduce production costs. Reducing waste and discharges can minimize



                                  “We are seeing a direct correlation – the suppliers
                                  with better social compliance consistently score
                                   higher in key performance indicators such as
                                   on-time delivery and quality.”
                                   Senior VP – multi-national retailer




         8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                 “The regulatory agency required secondary
                                 wastewater treatment. Estimated costs were
                                 very high. Through the management system
                                 review process, we determined that organic
                                 waste conversion could meet 60% of our
                                  electric power needs. We learned our waste
                                  is a useable by-product.”
                                  CFO - Integrated poultry and pork producer in Latin America.




                              the cost of increasingly expensive, regulated discharges to the environment
                              (such as greenhouse gases and wastewater). In the food and beverage industry,
                              there can be financial benefits from waste management. Instead of merely
                              capturing and treating process wastes with no benefit, you can convert organic
                              wastes to biogas for boiler fuel or generate electric power, or organic fertilizer
                              and soil amendments to strengthen crop production sustainability. A manage-
                              ment system, can elucidate where expenditures exceed industry benchmarks
                              and identify potential production cost savings.

                              The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transpar-
                              ent human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                              workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems.
                              Effective occupational health and safety management procedures work toward
                              the identification of workplace and process hazards, then seek to eliminate or
                              reduce them through engineering controls and employee training on how to
                              avoid job site risks. This serves not only to reduce incidents, accidents and
                              fatalities, but also contributes to reducing insurance premiums for worker
                              compensation.




“First we implemented Good Manufacturing Processes (GMP)
to promote hygiene for food processing areas, machinery, and
 packaging. Then we expanded our system to include waste
 disposal. What we didn’t know was frightening. How did we
survive before?”
General Manager – shrimp producer in Asia



Revision 2.2   June 6, 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                    9
                          Management systems are widely used by food and beverage companies in qual-
                          ity control and food safety. An environmental and social management system
                          simply extends that approach to managing the impact your business has on the
                          environment and the working conditions at your facility.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized,
                          instead of having one system for quality, one for food safety and one for ESMS.
                          Integrated management systems are the goal, but the focus of this Handbook is
                          on helping you implement an ESMS that is appropriate for the size and nature
                          of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                  II

                              Understanding an
                              Environmental and Social
                              Management System




Revision 2.2   June 9, 2014      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Revision 2.2   June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                 13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve            A lot of companies in the food and beverage industry already have management
                             systems for quality or food safety. If so, you may already have elements of an
what you don’t               ESMS, and there is no need to replace what you already have. In this Hand-
                             book’s companion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide,
measure.                     we provide a self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements. The self-
                             assessment will allow you to measure your current level of system development
                             and implementation. You will answer a series of questions and get your score for
                             each element in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score measures
                             the maturity of your system. Once you understand the maturity of your system,
                             it is easier to target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                       THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                              Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                      chain partners – continual improvement embedded in opera-
                                      tions
                              Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                      routine improvement projects
                              Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                      tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                              Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                      primarily reactive
                              Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                              Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




   14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                              REMEMBER
                              A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                              valuable if it is well-implemented.

                              SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                               One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                               is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                               management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                               lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                              “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                               cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                              Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                              routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                              goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                              that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                              to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                              ment.

                              One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                              development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                              tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                              well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                              mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                              developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                              organization change.

                              The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, Toolkit and
                              Case Studies and Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system
                              development and system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                               DEFINITIONS
                               System                     The documented policies and procedures.
                               Development
                               System                     Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                               Implementation             ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.
Revision 2.2   June 9, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                    15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK

     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan                                               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
     •	   Learn how other companies                                           elements of an ESMS
          scaled the ESMS to their
          size and complexity
                                                 REDO this graphic
                              ESMS
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                            TOOLKIT &
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                              CASE
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                             STUDIES
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                 III
                            Practical Guidelines for
                            Developing and Implementing
                            Your Environmental and Social
                            Management System

                            This section provides step-by-step instructions on
                            how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                            For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                            way to measure where you are now.


                                     When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                     there is a tool in the companion publication
                                     Toolkit and Case Studies to make it easier
                                     to get started.




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies in
    place.                      and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related poli-   it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    cies and procedures.        of the specific risks you face in the food and beverage industry.




    18    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your        Commitment;
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   and
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.
                                                                                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-       Your senior
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          management
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           can help you to
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
                                                 The key message is that this       accelerate all
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for              will contribute to the com-
 Developing a Company Policy                     pany’s success and that each       three stages.
 Statement to get ideas of what you              person will benefit - but that
 could include in your policy.                   they  will also be held ac-
                                                 countable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
                                                 stages with your senior man-
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter                 agement. Consider accompa-
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to               nying the Policy Statements
 get started.                                    with a message from the CEO.




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	           19
                                     ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     identify the potential negative environmental
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-     and social impacts so that you can develop the
    tors, subcontractors, third
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   appropriate strategies to address them.


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
    itization of E&S risks         In the following pages, we present the key issues
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
                                   that come up in the food and beverage industry.
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-
    ment in company.               KEY RISKS IN THE FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY




3
    Awareness and engage-        1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency
    ment of staff in identifica-     •	 Use of large amounts of freshwater
    tion and prioritization of
                                     •	 Effluents containing large amounts of organic material and highly toxic
    E&S risks and impacts.
                                        substances (pesticides, fertilizers, biocides, pathogens)
    External experts involved as
    required.                        •	 Emission of unpleasant odors
                                      •	 Production of large amounts of organic waste
                                      •	 Emission of particulate matter
                                      •	 Energy consumption for heating and cooling equipment




2
    Procedures in place for
    identification of E&S risks    2.	 Occupational Health and Safety
    and impacts across all key
                                      •	 Exposure to hazardous substances such as preservatives, smoke particles,
    activities.
                                         refrigerants, and ingredients that can cause allergic reactions
                                      •	 Exposure to pathogens and biological agents that can cause severe human disease
                                      •	 Injuries related to falls, cuts, and strains from carrying heavy loads and
                                         repetitive work
                                      •	 Exposure to extreme temperature conditions




1
    Basic identification and          •	 Exposure to unsafe levels of noise
    assessment of E&S risks
                                      •	 Exposure to unsafe levels of irradiation used to extend shelf-life of product
    and impacts, but limited to
    a few activities.
                                   3.	 Labor
                                      •	 Use of migrant/temporary labor
                                      •	 Use of recruitment agencies/contractors
                                      •	 Non-integrated supply chain
                                      •	 Excessive overtime due to inappropriate production planning or inadequate




0
    No identification or assess-         contingency planning
    ment of E&S risks and
    impacts.




      20    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




                            4.	 Community Health, Safety and Security
                              •	 Emission of unpleasant odors which may be a nuisance for people living in the
                                  vicinity
                              •	 Exposure to disease vectors that could be transmitted from stored raw materials
                                  and organic waste
                              •	 Production of food not meeting food safety requirements
                              •	 Increased vehicle traffic due to transport of raw materials and finished products
                                  to/from the plant



                            There are different ways to conduct a risk assessment. One
                            common method is to map your facility and production
                            processes – this can highlight OHS and environmental risks.
                            A common method for labor risks is to use a checklist of risk
                            factors , such as employee demographics, regional labor
                            laws, contracting arrangements, etc.

                            The following are key considerations for a robust risk
                            assessment system:

                             •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks;

                             •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;

                             •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to op-
                                  erations;

                             •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as
                                  new laws or regulations;

                             •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers;

                             •	   Include input from affected communities and other ex-
                                  ternal stakeholders;

                             •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff does
                                  not have the capability;

                             •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the severity
                                  and probability of negative impacts;

                             •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those
                                  in your company; and

                             •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
                                  business.




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                         21
2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




  Top 3 risks and
  opportunities in the
  Food and Beverage
  industry
                                                  Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks in
  1   Beverage production
      requires large amounts
  of fresh water, which is also
                                                  the food and beverage industry, you can first use the Risk
                                                  Identification Worksheet to identify your potential risks
  used for cleaning activi-
                                                  and negative impacts based on your operations and operating
  ties, cooling and heating.
                                                  environment. Then you can use the Process Mapping or
  A reliable and sustain-
                                                  the Physical Mapping tools to identify in more detail where
  able supply of fresh water
                                                  problems are likely to arise within your production process.
  is essential for ensuring                       Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
  continuity of production.                       single environmental and social impact that your company
  High-quality fresh water                        could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form
  could be required in order                      to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.
  to meet quality standards
  for products. There may
  be potential for optimizing            For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
  the efficiency of water use,           and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at
  for preventing shortages               www.ifc.org/sustainability.
  and for addressing conflicts
  with other users of the
  same water resources.


  2   Effluents from the
      food industry may
  contain significant quanti-
  ties of organic material or
  highly toxic substances.
  High levels of nutrients
  and microbes can result in
  water pollution. Washing
  fruit or vegetables can
  contaminate water with
  pesticides, while the clean-
  ing of production plants
  may lead to the pollution
  of water with biocides and
  detergents.


  3   Food processing may
      also emit unpleasant
  odors. The processing
  of meat is usually associ-
  ated with unpleasant
  odors,which may be a
  nuisance for people living
  in the vicinity.
 ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                                     5
Management Programs are centered on Action                             Verified progress against
                                                                       objectives and targets;
                                                                       significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                       in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                       onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were                      continual improvement
                                                                       using annual improvement
                                                                       plans.
identified.


                                                                                                     4
                                                                       Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                       mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                           activities to proactively
                                                                       manage E&S risks and
                                                                       impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                       pany-wide objectives and
                                                                       targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the                     and update.




                                                                                                     3
lack of a system for employees to express their                        Actions/activities in place
                                                                       to manage E&S risks and
                                                                       impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                              mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                       avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                             compensate. Proactive
                                                                       approach to managing
                                                                       issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                                     2
                                                                       Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of solid waste and you have                           responsibilities to address
                                                                       and mitigate E&S risks
identified this as a risk factor because of the                        and impacts across all key
                                                                       activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                       tive.
high percentage of organic waste produced in
your plant, you may take action by building a

                                                                                                     1
                                                                       A few informal programs
                                                                       or activities to mitigate
composting facility to avoid sending organic waste                     E&S impacts. No systems
                                                                       awareness or repeatable
to the landfill.                                                       processes.




                                                                       No process for mitigating
                                                                       E&S risks and impacts.
                                                                                                     0
Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014   ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                 23
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                   First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                   example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                   water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                   differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                   owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain preserva-
                                              tive process that exposes workers to toxic chemicals and pollutes the
             MITIGATION HIERACHY
                                              local river system. You might design your product mix to avoid this
                                              process or find alternate preservation methods.
             Prioritizing Your Actions
                                              In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                       AVOID                  be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                         ▼                    cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, sup-
                      MINIMIZE                pose that you are located in an area where women are traditionally
                         ▼                    given lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace
                                              they are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. The
              COMPENSATE/OFFSET
                                              local cultural context and the need to hire both men and women is
                                              unavoidable. It is important to pay attention to your recruitment,
                                   hiring and training procedures, to make sure that women are hired on equi-
                                   table terms and given equal access to training and promotion opportunities.
                                   You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure that rules for
                                   recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow. Additionally,
                                   you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of and follows
                                   the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.


            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in the
            food and beverage industry. Action Plans can be scaled to the
            size of your company and the nature of the risks you face.

            24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: THAILAND


Meat Processing Company
RISK: Emissions of foul odors and dangerous vapors
A meat processing company operates from a small facility located in the heart of Bangkok.
About 85 percent of the production is supplied to food service businesses, hotels, restaurants
and fresh markets. Therefore, it is crucial for the company’s profitability that it operates in the
city to minimize the transportation and warehousing costs. As the company has increased pro-
duction over the past few months, there have been several cases of ammonia leakage from the
refrigeration, causing a foul odor, as well as dangerous vapors. Neighbors are also complaining
of foul odors, which are coming from the rendering of waste.

  I M PAC T

   •	 Concerns and complaints from community/neighbors
   •	 Worker illnesses due to exposure to ammonia

  AVO I D

   •	 Contract specialized services for ammonia refrigeration plant preventive maintenance
     and repairs
   •	 Provide training to personnel responsible for operation of the refrigeration plant
   •	 Inspect ammonia refrigeration equipment and eliminate ammonia leaks
   •	 Ensure all regulatory requirements related to building codes, ammonia storage and use
     and safety/labor codes are met, monitored and reported on a regular basis
   •	 Segregate wastes that may be used for animal feed and dispatch these wastes to farms
     where the wastes may be consumed (e.g. blood meal for fish)
   •	 Store, transport and dispose of waste as per the regulatory requirements to prevent foul
     odors and discharge to air, water or land environment

  MINIMIZE

   •	 Minimize leakages of ammonia during handling/replacement of the ammonia cylinders,
     regulators, manifolds, etc. and during purging operations
   •	 Minimize ammonia exposure to employees through proper training, appropriate PPEs and
     adequate ventilation in the operation area
   •	 Consider production and distribution planning to minimize cold storage requirements
   •	 Reduce volume of wastes generated by improving meat processing operations
   •	 Reschedule raw materials receipt and production timing to reduce requirement for refrig-
     eration and cold storage

  OFFSET

   •	 Engage in active consultation with neighboring facilities and settlements and regulators
     to address their concerns
   •	 Provide necessary information and training to the neighboring units on emergency proce-
     dures related to ammonia leakage
   •	 Pay for medial checkups of workers (e.g. pulmonary capacity tests) and compensate as
     needed




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	              25
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: INDIA


           Beverage Company
           RISK: Excessive, inefficient water use
           Based on the high demand during the summer season, a beverage company in Andhra Pradesh,
           India wishes to expand its capacity by about 30 percent. As per the regulatory requirements,
           the company is required to have the necessary environmental permits to expand and operate
           from the State (provincial) Pollution Control Board (PCB). However, as the region is already
           experiencing severe water shortage, the PCB is not willing to provide the “consent to establish”
           (permit for expansion). After repeated attempts, the company is granted a conditional permit
           allowing it to expand its capacity by 30 percent, provided there is no additional fresh water
           withdrawal.

              I M PAC T

                 •	 Depletion of local water resources (ground and surface water)

              AVO I D

                 •	 Develop water balance for specific processes and estimate consumptive and non-con-
                  sumptive water usage
                 •	 Benchmark water use against industry standards
                 •	 Conduct process mapping to identify and prevent all water losses, including pilferage,
                  transmission losses due to seepage (exfiltration), leakage, evaporation, etc. and
                  inefficient/unnecessary water usage
                 •	 Modify/replace water-intensive or wet processes with zero-water or water-efficient
                  technologies (e.g. sweeping with brooms vs. sweeping with water)
                 •	 Identify and implement decentralized water recycling/reuse techniques in specific
                  operations (e.g. using final rinsing water from CIP or bottle washing for pre-washing
                  operations)

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Install decentralized water meters and monitor and reduce water consumption in specific
                  operations/processes
                 •	 Reduce water consumption by minimize water usage in non-consumptive processes
                  (e.g. floor cleaning, vessel cleaning, CIP, bottle washing, etc.)
                 •	 Equip water hoses with water-saving nozzles, high-pressure nozzles, spring closures and
                  other water-saving devices
                 •	 Plan and implement water conservation awareness and training program for workers,
                  supervisors and managers
                 •	 Participate in and promote Integrated Water Resources Management processes in
                   the region

              OFFSET

                 •	 Develop and implement rainwater harvesting programs
                 •	 Reduce demand by others through adequately treating the industrial wastewater and
                  finding alternative applications for the treated wastewater (e.g. irrigation, horticulture or
                  as raw water resource for other local industry or potable water treatment plants)
                 •	 Engage in active consultation with local communities, regulators and NGOs to address
                  water concerns in the region




            26     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: SOUTH AFRICA


Fruit processing factory
RISK: Supply chain
A factory in South Africa produces juice and packaged fruit, with a variety of products across
different seasons. The factory has recently expanded operations, installing new equipment and
adding 100 new workers, for a total of 300. With the expansion, the factory expects to qua-
druple its production, mostly exports to the European market. To meet production targets, it
needs to add new suppliers of fruit, mostly from the Western Cape area. There has been increas-
ing demand from both domestic and European consumers for ethically made products, and the
factory participates in the ethical trade program recently launched by the South African fruit in-
dustry. The program involves labor standards audits at the factory, and training for workers and
managers. However, the factory management is concerned about recent reports of wide-scale
labor abuses in South African farms and vineyards.

  I M PAC T

   •	 Social and labor violations in supply chain including forced labor, child labor, inadequate
     remuneration, excessive working hours, discrimination, poor disciplinary practices, restric-
     tions on freedom of association and health and safety risks at supplier farms

  AVO I D

   •	 Develop well-defined labor policies based on international norms in the supply chain; com-
     municate policy to purchasing managers and supplier farms
   •	 Make policies contractually binding under purchasing agreements with supplier farms
   •	 Provide training and capacity building to purchasing managers and supplier farms, about
     labor policies and procedures and management systems
   •	 Periodically monitor and audit the supplier farms for their labor performance as per the
     organization’s own policies and procedures

  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Select and reward supplier farms on labor criteria in addition to price and quality

  O FF S E T

   •	 Assist the supplier farms in remediation of labor violation cases
   •	 Assist the supplier farms in identifying the root causes for identified labor violations
     and assist them in implementing suitable corrective action and preventive actions
   •	 Work with the supplier farms to make sure that the affected workers are suitably
     remediated and compensated as per established policies and procedures




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                27
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: BRAZIL


           Meat-processing plant
           RISK: Worker exposure to chemicals and vapors due
           to lack of adequate ventilation
            A 50-worker meat processing plant in Brazil occupies the basement and three floors of a build-
            ing in an urban area of São Paolo. The main customers are retailers within the city, so the loca-
            tion of the plant is strategic - it helps to minimize transport and refrigeration costs. Commercial
            rents in São Paolo have been increasing, so the plant managers want to maximize the use of
            space by including the basement. Workers are concentrated in the basement, where they handle
            chemicals used in meat preservation. The basement also houses the large refrigerators that are
            used to store the meat – these refrigerators are not properly vented and expose workers to toxic
            ammonia vapor from the cooling system.


              I M PAC T

                 •	 Worker illnesses due to exposure to chemicals and vapors
                 •	 Emergency situations due to major leakage, fire or other immediate evacuation require-
                   ments

              AVO I D

                 •	 Contract specialized services for ammonia refrigeration plant preventive maintenance
                   and repairs
                 •	 Provide training to personnel responsible for operation of the refrigeration plant
                 •	 Inspect ammonia refrigeration equipment and eliminate ammonia leaks
                 •	 Move refrigeration plant to an upper floor to increase air ventilation
                 •	 Move production and processes requiring chemical handling from basement to upper
                   floors. Basement could be used for non-hazardous/non-flammable material or simple
                   operations that do not require chemical handling
                 •	 Ensure all regulatory requirements related to building codes, ammonia storage and use
                   and safety/labor codes are met, monitored and reported on a regular basis

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Minimize leakages of ammonia during handling/replacement of the ammonia cylinders,
                   regulators, manifolds, etc. and during purging operations
                 •	 Minimize ammonia and meat preservation chemicals exposure to employees through
                   proper training, appropriate PPEs and adequate ventilation in the operation area
                 •	 Provide necessary information on hazards of ammonia exposure to workers using MSDS
                   and ICSC
                 •	 Install ammonia detection systems with visual and audible alarms; train workers on emer-
                   gency response, evacuation and rescue procedures

              OFFSET

                 •	 Pay for medical checkups of workers (e.g. pulmonary capacity tests)
                 •	 Provide medical assistance for cases of workplace related injury/illnesses
                 •	 Compensate injured workers for wages lost
                 •	 Compensate for loss of life and loss of ability to work




            28     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: INDIA


Beverage Company
RISK: Disposal of hazardous solid waste
A beverage company in South India generates more than 1000 tons of sludge from its wastewa-
ter treatment plant every year, which requires proper disposal. For years, the beverage company
officials claimed that this sludge is a good fertilizer and made it available to the local farmers free
of cost. After many years of use of this sludge as fertilizer, the local farmers have claimed that the
land and water in the region is contaminated with toxic chemicals and the crop quality and yield
have been severely affected. Soil and water samples from the surrounding region sent for testing
by some NGOs and media representatives were found to be contaminated with high levels of
cadmium, lead, chlorides and other toxic chemicals.


  I M PAC T

   •	 Land contamination
   •	 Groundwater contamination and surface water contamination through run-offs
   •	 Stakeholder concerns and disputes with local communities

  AVO I D

   •	 Sample and analyze wastewater streams to identify the sources of pollution
   •	 Provide bins for separate collection of all non-process waste (chemicals, detergents, used/
     waste oil, batteries, etc.) and dispose off-site; prevent hazardous waste from entering the
     wastewater stream
   •	 Investigate, prevent and substitute all chemicals, detergents and paints from the beverage
     bottles that may be responsible for leaching heavy metals into the wastewater streams
   •	 Segregate, collect and treat wastewater streams from bottle-washing plant separately and
     send the Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) sludge to hazardous waste disposal facility
   •	 Stop distribution of sludge to local communities and send all sludge/solid waste to a
     hazardous waste disposal site if needed

  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Minimize sludge generation in wastewater treatment by pretreatment of wastewater
     (e.g. filtration) and treatment chemical substitution
   •	 Provide training to employees on regulatory requirements and waste handling including
     identification and disposal of hazardous waste

  O FF S E T

   •	 Engage with affected stakeholders/community members and asses the level of impact
     on them due to the use/exposure to toxic and hazardous waste (sludge)
   •	 Identify the extent of the problem; analyze the concentration of cadmium and lead in
     soil samples and compare to the background concentration levels of these elements in
     the area
   •	 Consider initiating or supporting the remediation of contaminated sites with the help of
     regulators and/or competent agencies




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                29
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: BRAZIL

           Dairy Company
           RISK: Discharge of untreated or ineffectively
           treated wastewater
           A medium-sized multinational company operating from northern Brazil produces multiple food
           products, including skimmed milk powder, bottled fruit drinks and different chocolate brands.
           The company generates about 600 cubic meters (m3) of wastewater from its various processes,
           which include bottle-washing and other industrial processes. The water is treated and discharged
           into a nearby river. In recent months, there have been increased complaints from the down-
           stream communities that the river water has turned black or very dark, there are fish kills, there
           is a foul smell coming from the river water, and the quality and quantity of fish is affected. The
           river water is not suitable for irrigation because it is plasticizing the soils and impacting irriga-
           tion activities. The company officials deny that these impacts are due to its operations, but have
           admitted some malfunctions have occurred in its wastewater treatment plant.


             I M PAC T

              •	 Contamination of surface water/downstream river

             AVO I D

              •	 Investigate and reduce all sources of wastewater and minimize non-consumptive water
                 usage
              •	 Develop water balance to manage supply and usage
              •	 Modify/replace water-intensive or wet processes with zero-water or water-efficient tech-
                 nologies (e.g. sweeping with brooms vs. sweeping with water)
              •	 Replace or minimize the use of potentially toxic or hazardous substances that may con-
                 taminate wastewater
              •	 Collect nontoxic and uncontaminated concentrated liquid wastes for sale to pig farmers
                 or cattle farmers (if possible), thereby reducing the overall load on the effluent treatment
                 plant (ETP)




            30    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                              3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Optimize effective wastewater treatment by evaluating and improving the operations of
     the Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP):
     •	 Analyzing the ETP “inlet” and “outlet” characteristics and other operating parameters
     •	 Evaluating treatment works for hydraulic and or organic slug flows such as bottle and
        equipment washing; adjust to an integrated flow rate that matches the design flow
     •	 Minimizing fluctuating loads on the ETP by having a collection and “equalization”
        sump before treatment or temporarary holding facility
     •	 Scheduling and staggering bottle washing and other water-intensive operations
     •	 Installing interlocking system to ensure ETP shutdown during any malfunction;
        convey untreated wastewater to a temporary holding facility to prevent discharge
        of untreated effluent
     •	 Providing adequate training to the effluent treatment plant (ETP) operator and ensure
        the ETP is operated and maintained as per the recommended operating criteria (such as
        design flow) and standards
   •	 Stop sludge bulking and overflow through adequate desludging and other management
     techniques
   •	 Analyze treated wastewater for its compliance before its final discharge
   •	 Consider having separate treatment facilities for toxic/chemically contaminated wastewa-
     ter streams (e.g. wastewater from bottle washers contaminated with detergents or other
     chemicals)

  O FF S E T

   •	 Engage in active consultation/engagement with local communities, regulators and NGOs
     to address water concerns in the region
   •	 Adequately treat the industrial wastewater and find alternative applications for the
     treated wastewater, e.g. irrigation, horticulture or as a raw water resource for other local
     industry




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	             31
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: CANADA


           Meat processing plant
           RISK: Poor infrastructure, process and
           equipment design
           A meat processing plant employing 400 people has had 200,000 pounds of processed beef re-
           called after being linked to 18 consumers getting sick from E. coli bacteria. The plant’s operating
           license has been suspended pending detailed inspection of the sanitary conditions, equipment,
           procedures and facilities. Initial reports suggest employee and animal sacrificing hygiene practices
           are poorly informed and executed, and slaughtering practices are being observed by the state
           veterinarian to determine where there are breakdowns in internationally recognized good manu-
           facturing practices (GMPs). In addition, swab tests are being collected from selected carcasses.
           E. coli can result if feces from an animal’s intestines or hide spread onto the tools for butchering
           and also onto employees’ hands, clothing and boots if cross-contamination steps in all aspects
           including employee hygiene, toilet use, hand washing and other practices are not addressed
           thoroughly. Each day, 4,500 cattle are slaughtered at the plant, a total that a previous audit of the
           facility suggested was a “strain on the system” with “high potential for problems.” According to
           interviews conducted by the auditor, workers complained of having just a few seconds to pick up
           a sterilized knife and complete the gutting. The auditor noted this has inevitably led to worker
           fatigue, which can lead to mistakes during butchering and consequent contamination by the
           animal feces.

             I M PAC T

                 •	 Risk to consumers’ health due to consumption of contaminated and E. coli infected product
                 •	 Product contamination and exposure of workers to pathogenic bacteria due to poor infra-
                  structure, process design and personal hygiene
                 •	 Occupational health and safety risk because of worker fatigue in butchering section (due
                  to inefficient and poor process design)

             AVO I D

                 •	 Design and implement HACCP plan to prevent product adulteration and eliminate prod-
                  ucts exceeding the “critical limits”:
                   •	 Establish and implement “operational prerequisite programs”, including GMP and SSOPs
                   •	 Establish and implement systems for verifications at regular intervals
                   •	 Establish and define “food chain,” conduct a “food safety hazard analysis” and deter-
                      mine the “acceptable levels”
                   •	 Identify the “critical control points” and determine “critical limits” for all critical control
                      points
                 •	 Optimize the operation process at slaughtering by employing effective sanitary dressing
                  procedures during slaughter
                 •	 Inspect and improve employee sanitary facilities for proper operations and train employ-
                  ees on personal hygiene
                 •	 Ensure boot wash, hand wash, clothing appropriateness and associated cross-contamina-
                  tion stations and activities are functioning as designed and as required by GMP
                 •	 Ensure adequate staff for operations
                 •	 Implement more frequent testing




            32     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Train and re-train employees on GMP, personal hygiene and prevention of food
     adulteration

  O FF S E T

   •	 Engage with key stakeholders, such as regulators, food authorities, customers, consumer
     groups, NGOs and media, to address their concerns and communicate on the steps taken
     by the organization to ensure consumer health
   •	 Effectively communicate the organization’s food safety policy and the organization’s
     response to the E. coli outbreak to consumers and other stakeholders through print and
     electronic media campaign, social networking sites and other formal and informal events
   •	 Recall the affected lot; recall all the product if no traceability system in place
   •	 Appoint a a key staff person from senior management and make him/her available to
     receive and respond to consumers grievances




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                33
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: CHINA


           Bakery and confectionery
           RISK: Excessive overtime hours and hour averaging
            A baking facility in China employs 50 workers in a one-shift operation. The facility supplies local
            markets and there is typically a 20-30 percent fluctuation in demand for certain holidays and
            seasons. Supplies of flour, milk and eggs are usually delivered once a week and stored at the
            facility. Sometimes there are delays from the suppliers, so the facility cannot run at full capacity
            and the workers do not work their full shifts. The facility compensates for the lost production
            by having the workers work extra hours in the late evening once supplies become available. In
            addition, due to the short shelf-life of supplies, the facility often runs its operations past normal
            working hours to prevent waste. The extra working hours are then averaged over the month so
            the workers do not receive overtime premium pay.


              I M PAC T

                 •	 Non-payment of overtime work at premium rate

              AVO I D

                 •	 Develop organization’s policy on remuneration and working hours; communicate policy
                  to workers, supervisors and managers
                 •	 Remunerate workers for their regular and overtime working hours based on regulatory
                  requirements and industry norms; all overtime should be limited, voluntary and be paid
                  at premium rate
                 •	 Provide training to managers and supervisors on production planning
                 •	 Consider operating two shifts to meet demands of fluctuating schedules and production
                  requirements

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Engage with customers and suppliers and agree on systematic planning to minimize un-
                  certainties in demand of products and supply of raw materials
                 •	 Provide workers with periodic and clear records of pay calculations including worked over-
                  time and received compensation

              OFFSET

                 •	 Retroactively compensate for overtime work at the established overtime rate




            34     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                               3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: UNITED STATES


Ready-made salads processing plant
RISK: Use of third party migrant workers
A vegetable processing plant in the United States has 100 permanent workers and 300 contract
workers. The contract workers are placed at the factory by a recruiting agency. The factory man-
agement prefers this arrangement since the plant is in an area where it is hard to find workers
willing to take seasonal work. The agency brings migrant workers to fill the demand. It is re-
sponsible for recruiting and transporting the workers, and for training and paying them. The
factory supervisors and permanent workers are from the local area and speak English. They are
well aware of their rights under US labor law and feel that the factory is a good place to work.
They feel that there is a challenge in working with many of the contract workers, who only speak
Spanish and do not seem to have the same level of skills and awareness of their rights.

  I M PAC T

   •	 Discrimination against contract or migrant workers
   •	 Forced labor/human trafficking

  AVO I D

   •	 Decrease company’s reliance on temporary workers
   •	 Use only legally accredited recruitment agencies
   •	 Develop adequately defined hiring and remuneration policies and terms of employment
     for contract/migrant workers; communicate policies to workers, supervisors, managers and
     recruitment agencies
   •	 Ensure organizational labor policies are understood by the recruitment agencies; make poli-
     cies contractually binding under the service agreement with recruitment agencies
   •	 Periodically monitor and audit recruitment agencies’ labor performance as per the organi-
     zation’s own policies and procedures and local law

  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Make sure that contract/migrant workers are informed (in all applicable languages) on
     their rights including wages, benefits and deductions
   •	 Agree with recruitment agencies on reasonable deductions for housing, transport and
     other services provided to contract/migrant workers
   •	 Make sure all contract/migrant workers receive contracts and periodic clear records of pay
     calculations in their native language
   •	 Implement a grievance mechanism accessible to both permanent and temporary workers
   •	 Periodically talk to contract/temporary workers on complaints and opportunities

  O FF S E T

   •	 Make sure that workers are reimbursed for illegal deductions made by recruitment
     agencies
   •	 Retroactively pay workers whose compensation did not meet legal minimum wage (or
     agreed contract value if higher than legal minimum)




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	               35
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: VIETNAM


            Fish processing plant
            RISK: Discharge of organic solid waste into
            surface waters
            A fish and shrimp processing facility employing 100 people discharges solid waste directly into the
            surrounding estuary water. Although it is an organic substance, waste from fish processing can
            deplete oxygen levels in the receiving water through bacterial decomposition. Other waste ele-
            ments can increase salinity and temperature or depress pH levels, affecting local communities that
            are dependent on the estuary’s fisheries.

            There is also further concern over the effect of methods used by supplier farms to the factory on
            safe water supplies due to lack of oversight. For example, a nearby 150 hectare shrimp farm is
            one of several that uses pig and geese manure as shrimp feed (which is cheaper than commercial
            feed), with the possibility of contaminating the estuary’s water with antibiotics and pathogens
            present in the manure.


              I M PAC T

                 •	 Adverse impact on the estuary water quality through depletion of dissolved O2 levels
                 •	 Adverse impact on the aquatic life
                 •	 Adverse impact on the livelihood of the local communities
                 •	 Adverse impact on the health of local community due to contamination of estuary and
                   affected aquatic life

              AVO I D

                 •	 Prevent all solid waste disposal near estuary
                 •	 Substitute pig and geese manure with commercial shrimp feed; eliminate raw manure use

              MINIMIZE

                 •	 Establish, implement and monitor waste disposal plan in line with the regulatory require-
                   ments and industry best practices
                 •	 Provide training to the employees on waste management, regulatory requirements and
                   the organization’s procedures on waste handling and disposal

              OFFSET

                 •	 Engage with key stakeholders, including regulators, NGOs and local communities, to
                   address their concerns and communicate on the steps taken by the organization to
                   prevent any further contamination to the estuary
                 •	 Identify the affected community members and provide suitable compensation for the loss
                   of livelihood. Compensation could be provided in terms of alternate employment oppor-
                   tunities, financial compensation, and/or providing vocational training to assist them in
                   enhancing their employability




            36     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           3. Management Programs


                            WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                            Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                            process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and adjust
                            the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve the
                            right internal people and departments.

                            As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
 Use the Toolkit            think about:
 item Action
 Plan Chart to                •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
 get started.                 •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                              •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                                   results (targets)
                              •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                              •	   Who – responsible people
                            The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the industry. These
                            are just some of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to your
                            situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet your company’s specific situa-
                            tion. As you tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and managers,
                            experts and external stakeholders, including your suppliers and community. They
                            can offer insight into important issues and effective actions. They can also help
                            you obtain commitment for plans you are trying to implement, and provide can-
                            did feedback about how well the plans are working. This will be critical to the
                            continual improvement of your systems.

                            WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                            Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and managers.
                            They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how to behave. They
                            enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turnover. Clear, detailed
                            procedures help to embed your social and environmental policies into your daily
                            operations.

                            It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your pro-
 Use the Toolkit            cedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists, flowcharts,
 item Outline               or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary depending on
 of Procedure               the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for managers and
 and the Sample             supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with less literate or
 Procedure                  immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as short and simple as possible.
 Flowchart to               Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is the
 get started.               ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new proce-
                            dure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the skills and
                            knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through routine commu-
                            nication and effective training. You will learn more about this in the next chapter,
                            Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                            Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version of
                            each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly marked
                            as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old procedure.


For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and community risks and impacts
in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.

Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014                 ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                    37
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                   A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S       trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management          that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                   ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                   IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                   First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                   commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.        beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an           sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte- grated system. New       the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S        do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.           long-term commitment by your company.

                                   Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                   responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company      anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-         duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles       involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily     A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is       with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                   sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                   contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is       In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-      have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                   social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-       tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided    the labor aspects, production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                 and the reduction of waste, procurement manages the qualifications and
                                   performance of suppliers and contractors, and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with         equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-         tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles        The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-    impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    ing to get defined. No         be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all
    systems awareness or
                                   levels of the company, including including supervisors and workers, as they
    repeatable processes.
                                   are key frontline identifiers of problems.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    38    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                            As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                            and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                            departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                            The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                            exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                            consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                            Once the ESMS Team is selected, they need to select a team leader. This is an
                            important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader needs to set the
                            tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initiatives in a compa-
                            ny face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is no exception.
                            The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable hurdles, and
                            should have direct access to senior management.



                              Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate
                              for Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit and
                              Case Studies for a list and sequencing of activities to develop and
                              implement an ESMS.




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                 39
                                                          EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                        Quality
                                                                  Human
When selecting a                                                 resources
                                                                                        control


team leader, look                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                              health & safety
for someone who                                Production


has the following                                                           Select a
                                                                          team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                       Procurement/
                                                          Worker
                                                                                           Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                   Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.            Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                   dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                   This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                   There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                   1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                      •	 What is it?
                                      •	 What are its goals?
                                      •	 What do I need to do?

                                   2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                       the company.
                                      •	 How does this help our company?
                                      •	 How does it help my department?
                                      •	 What will change?
                                      •	 What is in it for me?

                                   3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                      their roles.
                                      •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                      •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                      •	 How do I do that?
                                      •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        40   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                           Your ESMS Team needs detailed training so they
      Effective Communication and Training
                                                           can develop the necessary knowledge and skills.
                                                           They will need to understand the basics of the
      Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                           Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle and know the nine
      munication or training module is to build
                                                           elements of an ESMS. This Handbook provides
      awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                           the information they will need, but additional
      people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                           help may be necessary. In addition to the detailed
      implement.
                                                           training of the team, everyone will need to receive
                                                           awareness training so there is a shared understand-
                                                           ing of the goals of the ESMS.

                                The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                                general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                                learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                                You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                                tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                                Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                                way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                                and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                                people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                                responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                  Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                  tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                     CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N




    Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                       41
                                    ELEMENT 5


                                   Emergency Preparedness
                                   and Response
                                   Even when you have considered all the risks and
    Regular engagement with        put the appropriate management programs in


5
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and         place, accidents and emergency situations can
    offsite emergency plan.
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neigh-
                                   happen.
    boring companies.

    Senior management              Your business is a dynamic operation, and many


4
    and all units and shifts,
    including contract and         things change from day to day – people go in and
    temporary workers, par-
    ticipate in emergency risk     out of your workforce, materials and suppliers
    assessment, preparedness
    planning and mock drills.
    Continual improvement.
                                   enter and exit your supply chain, facilities and

    All onsite and off-site
                                   equipment are added to and removed from


3
    emergency issues have
    been identified and an         your production line. A management system
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan     will help to maintain continuity and consistency
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local     throughout these changes. However there may
    industry best practices.
                                   be momentary lapses or gaps in the system (e.g.
    The emergency prepared-



2
    ness plan is in place, but     someone not properly trained, someone not
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-
    tion. Some trainings are
                                   following the procedures, a machine breakdown),
    provided to the workers
    on emergency require-          or an external force (e.g. natural disaster) that can
    ments.
                                   lead to an accident or emergency situation at your


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,     facility. While it is not always possible to prevent
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.      such situations, you can be prepared to respond
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.           effectively to prevent and mitigate any harm to



0
    Very limited emergency         your workers, community and the environment.
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No
    formal plan in place.


      42   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                             5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                            The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                            help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                               •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                 communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                 your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                 mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community.
                               •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                 explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                 everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs to do.
                               •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                 response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                 people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                 that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                 during accidents and emergencies.
                               •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                 it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                 working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                               •	 Communicate so that everyone in your company understands the importance
                                 of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                 monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                 who may be affected.
                               •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an overview
                                 of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what to
                                 do – ask for input on what needs to be addressed and what can be improved.
                                 Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will need to exercise
                                 individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations. This is more
                                 likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system beforehand.
                               •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                 you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                               •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to see how well the system is working and to
                                 re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                 continually improve your system.
                               •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                 Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                 the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                 response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability
                                 and effectiveness.


                             Look at the Sample Fire Response Procedure and Sample Ammonia
                             Leakage Preparedness and Response Procedure Flowchart for
                             examples.




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                               43
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                      An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                      should include:
                                         •	   identification of potential emergencies based on hazard
                                              assessment;

                                         •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency
                                              situations;

                                         •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                         •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution;

                                         •	   procedures for decontamination;

                                         •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation, including a
                                              designated meeting place outside the facility;

                                         •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                                         •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for employees
                                              responsible for responding to the emergency (fire-
                                              fighting equipment, spill response equipment, personal
                                              protection equipment for the emergency response teams,
                                              first aid kits and stations);

                                         •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment and
                                              facilities;

                                         •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and maintenance
                                              of emergency equipment;

                                         •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and meeting
                                              points;

                                         •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local emer-
                                              gency response services (fire fighters);

                                         •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                         •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols, includ-
                                              ing with affected communities when necessary, and pro-
                                              cedures for interaction with the government authorities;

                                         •	   procedures for periodic review and update of emergency
                                              response plans.




             44    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                   5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the
Food and Beverage Industry

  Common
  Hazards/
  Emergency
                            Potential Causes
  Situations in the
  Food and
  Beverage Industry
                            •	 Absence of machinery guards resulting in cuts or lacerations
                            •	 Poorly designed knives and scissors (e.g. awkward grip and/or
                              hand position) or not maintained in good condition
                            •	 Personal Protective Equipment are not appropriate or adequate
                              (e.g. cut-resistant gloves are not cut-proof)
                            •	 Poorly designed work stations (e.g. inappropriate height, inad-
 Cuts and lacerations         equate lighting, improper knife storage, employees working very
                              close to each other, etc.)
                            •	 Poorly planned incentive schemes (e.g. piecework incentive im-
                              pacting safety considerations)
                            •	 Distractions at work place (e.g. excessive noise, interruptions from
                              supervisors/coworkers, etc.)
                            •	 Maintenance or cleaning of machines while in operation	
                            •	 Absence of machinery guards resulting in workers struck by, struck
                              against or caught in machinery
                            •	 Removal of machine guards by workers (e.g. removal of defeat
                              guards in order to increase production rates, especially true in
 Cuts, fractures,
                              case of production-based incentives)
 puncture wounds,
                            •	 Absence of lockout/tag-out procedures, equipment and training
 amputations, and
                            •	 Failure to follow safety practices for forklifts, trucks and storage
 fatalities due to
                              (safe shelving)
 being “struck by,”
                            •	 Improper attire (e.g. loose clothing or gloves, unconfined long
 “struck against,”            hair, jewelry etc.) being caught in moving parts of machinery
 and “caught in”
                            •	 Absence of floor markings indicating flow of traffic and spaces
 the equipment and            reserved for pedestrian and vehicle traffic
 plant machinery            •	 Improper structural stability and design to accommodate dynamic
                              and static loads
                            •	 Improperly designed or installed materials or utilities suspededed
                              from ceilings and overhead structures
                            •	 Slippery floors, platforms and stairways due to water, blood,
                              animal fat or spilled fruit juices
 Back injuries, strains     •	 Tripping over boxes, electrical cords, equipment, or other items
 and sprains, contu-          that are left in aisles and walkways
 sions and fractures        •	 Uneven floors or uncovered floor drains resulting in trips and falls
                              by workers
 due to slips, trips
 and fall                   •	 Missing rails or non-slip treads in the stairways
                            •	 Absence of guardrails or toeboards on elevated work places
                            •	 Use of ladders not equipped with non-slip safety feet




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                  45
5. Emerg.Preparedness and Response




               Common
               Hazards/
               Emergency
                                            Potential Causes
               Situations in the
               Food and
               Beverage Industry

                                            •	 Examples of confined space may include:
                                               •	 ice houses;
                                               •	 packing area: blast freezers chilled by carbon dioxide or nitro-
                                                  gen;
                                               •	 offal area: vats and pits;
                                               •	 wastewater handling/treatment area: settling tanks or vats,
                                                  tanks of sulfuric acid, hydroxides or other chemicals; and
                  Entrapment,
                                               •	 gas storage areas: large ammonia, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, or
                  engulfment, and                 chlorine tanks.
                  hazardous atmo-           •	 Improper identification and evaluation of confined spaces and the
                  spheric conditions           associated hazards
                  in confined spaces        •	 Inadequate testing for atmospheric hazards: oxygen, combustible
                                               gases or vapors, and toxic gases or vapors in the identified con-
                                               fined spaces
                                            •	 Poor controls to prevent unauthorized entry
                                            •	 Inadequate procedures specifying the acceptable entry conditions,
                                               isolating the permit space, providing barriers, purging, or ventilat-
                                               ing the permit space - to eliminate or control hazards necessary
                                               for safe operations


                                            •	 Examples of hazardous chemicals may include:
                                               •	 ammonia (anhydrous) used in refrigeration systems;
                                               •	 hydrochloric acid;
                                               •	 phosphoric acid and sodium hydroxide to produce STPP; and
               Burns, scalds, respi-           •	 carbon dioxide.
               ratory and poten-            •	 Inadequate procedures for handling, storage and clean up of
               tially carcinogenic             process/laboratory chemicals
                                            •	 Excessive use of antimicrobial chemicals in sprays and rinses on
               effects from expo-
                                               processing equipment or in the chiller (e.g. to reduce E. coli and
               sure to chemicals               salmonella)
                                            •	 Use of large quantity of wastewater treatment chemicals due to
                                               the greater volume of wastewater generation
                                            •	 Use of large quantities of chemicals in on-site laboratory testing
                                               (e.g. salmonella and E. coli)




             46     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




  Common
  Hazards/
  Emergency
                            Potential Causes
  Situations in the
  Food and
  Beverage Industry
 Electric shock or          •	 Use of ungrounded and improperly grounded machinery and
 electrocution                equipment
                            •	 Electrical cables passing through/laid around damp/humid
                               locations
                            •	 Cracked fuses, plugs and sockets, damaged distribution boxes, circuit
                               breakers and poorly connected and/or worn, frayed or bare cables
                            •	 On/Off power circuit switches that are not located at clearly visible
                               points
                            •	 Absence of lockout/tag out maintenance procedures, training and
                               required apparatus to de-energize electrical circuits
                            •	 Absent, insufficient and unreadable signage related to electrical
                               hazards
                            •	 Inadequate electrical lightning conductor deployment and instal-
                               lation leading to power surges and associated problems
                            •	 Lack of PPE for workers that may be in contact with exposed
                               electric parts
 Emergency events           •	 Workers not trained or comfortable about informing manage-
 arising out of fires         ment of malfunction or dangerous sites, processes, etc.
                            •	 Inadequate procedures for maintenance and cleaning of heat-
 and/or explosions
                               producing equipment, such as burners, ovens, stoves and fryers
                            •	 Inadequate handling, signage and storage of flammable, combus-
                               tible and explosive materials, including pressurized containers
                            •	 Inadequate housekeeping (cleaning, servicing, repairing), collec-
                               tion and disposition of flammable materials from workplaces and
                               storage areas
                            •	 Poor inspection and maintenance of fuel lines
                            •	 Leaks and spills from flammable materials containers and installa-
                               tions
                            •	 Inadequate ventilation facilitating accumulation of fine dust par-
                               ticles exceeding the lower explosive limit (LEL)
                            •	 Improper storage (e.g. unventilated places) and transport (e.g.
                               rolling instead of using carts) of pressurized gas cylinders
                            •	 Failure to reject, return to supplier or eliminate damaged or in-
                               completely equipped gas cylinders (e.g. missing regulator caps)
                            •	 Inadequate procedures for controlling ignition sources such as
                               smoking, welding, and burning
                            •	 Unsafe gas hoses and gas welding equipment
                            •	 Use of equipment producing sparks close to explosive, combus-
                               tible and flammable materials storage and usage
                            •	 Poor electrical maintenance using unauthorized electricians
                            •	 Faulty electrical wiring
                            •	 Operating electrical equipment over the normal “sanctioned
                               load”
                            •	 Absence of adequate smoke/fire detection and alarm systems
                            •	 Absence of adequate fire suppression and safety equipment
                            •	 Absent or insufficient training of personnel on fire safety, emer-
                               gency response, building evacuation and first aid procedures
                            •	 Lack of lighting at emergency exits, in corridors and hallways
                            •	 Obstructed or locked emergency exits

Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	               47
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement           Your company may have an impact on the lives
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      of many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group varies considerably,
    is actively considered.
                                      and you need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           risks to your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    effective dialogue. Some          to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                                    FINANCIAL
                                                                               S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                            ER                   AC
                                                                    U   M
    Some public events, lim-                                     NS                             G R TIV




2
                                                            CO                                     OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                                                           PS T
    process. Sporadic and
                                                       ES




    selective responses
                                                UN D
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    when approached by
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                         NGO




    stakeholders.
                                            A




                                                                                                                           s




    Limited channels in place.                                                 COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                                 S/
                                                                                                                     O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                              NS
                                                                                                                     C IA E R
                                                                                                                         TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                           TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                               AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                               T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                          EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                      M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                   RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                                  SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                            GO
    with stakeholders.                                                        CONTRACTORS




      48    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing Your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                           6. Stakeholder Engagement




                Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                engage with each of them.



                 INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                   Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                   need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                   and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                   However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                   those used for external stakeholders.




                   Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                   Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.



Revision 2.1 February 11, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages             49
For effective                           DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                        After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                        to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                           ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                        environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                        At a minimum, even if your company does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                        munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                        receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your manage-
•	 Disclose meaningful                  ment program (see Element 7, External Communication).

   and accurate                         If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to implement
                                        a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, Grievance Mechanism) and actively
   information;                         engage them in consultation, regularly disclosing clear and meaningful infor-
                                        mation on both your impacts and potential benefits, and providing communi-
•	 Use culturally                       ties with opportunities to express their concerns and suggestions.
   appropriate means to                 In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and
   reach them;                          communities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                        and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
•	 Provide opportunities                ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                        pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
   for two-way dialogue ;               mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plan.
•	 Document to keep                     Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
                                        your company is putting in place to address the issues identified through
   track of issues raised;
                                        the engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected
   and                                  Communities).

•	 Report back on how                   Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excellent way
                                        for you to understand how company operations affect them and to get early
   their input has been                 warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to stakeholders,
                                        ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time. Don’t wait
   considered
                                        until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those relationships
                                        in place to manage the problem.


                                                                    Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                    Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                    with the important stakeholder groups.




           50     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 6. Stakeholder Engagement




                            TIP

                             Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                             ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                  you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                             ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                  significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                                  elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                             ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                             ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                  sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                                  fected groups and communities.

                             ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                  where they feel comfortable.

                             ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                             ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                  provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                  your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                             ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                  in the “outside world.”

                             ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                  expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                             your company

  Affected                   People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                             verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                             personal safety, health or livelihood.




                            For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                            Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                            Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                51
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your business is perceived and,
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-
                                   mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is
    limited to those directly      and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    handling the complaints.       responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




      52    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                            In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                              •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                   pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                   are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                   regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                              •	   Assign a person or team in your company who is responsible for receiving,
                                   registering and processing all grievances.
                              •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                   mine resolution and redress options.
                              •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                   ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                   response.
                            Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                            company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                            same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                            such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                            immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                            investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                            lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                            dent mediators.
 TIP
                                                           The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                       dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                           resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and
                                                           The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your company.
                                                           ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                           for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily                     to raise concerns. This requirement mandates
       understandable, accessible, trusted                 having the right people leading this effort inside
       and culturally appropriate.                         your company. The grievance mechanism must be
                                                           accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
  ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-
                                                           party that originated the complaint and should not
       ance procedure so people know where
                                                           impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
       to go and whom to approach.

  ••   Commit to a response time and keep                  Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       to it as this will increase transparency            ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       and a sense of “fair process.”                      ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
                                                           problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
  ••   Keep records of each step to create a               to address.
       “paper trail.”




Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                         53
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                     Independent
                                                                                     mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Company team                                            Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                        TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).


             54    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
        ELEMENT 8




       Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                         Affected communities’
                                                                                         issues and concerns are
                                                                                         proactively addressed.
       Affected Communities                                                              There is ongoing com-
                                                                                         munication to avoid risks
                                                                                         and impacts before new
       Affected communities will want to know what                                       projects as well as to
                                                                                         address existing issues.
       actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                         Reporting to affected
       the issues identified when engaging with them.                                    communities is regu-
                                                                                         larly implemented and
       Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical ele-    evidenced in documen-
       ment for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know when        tation. Key units are
       to expect an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the amount of    involved in the review
       time you spend responding to questions.                                           of the key issues.




                                                                                                                     3
       The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of          When applicable, con-
       stakeholders’ concerns, but it should be at least annually. If your company’s     sultation processes have
       activities change or new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to    been implemented.
       contact stakeholders outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.    External consultants are
                                                                                         involved as required. No
TIP                                                         You can also decide to       ongoing review.
                                                            report back to the wider
 Ongoing Communication                                      public on your progress




                                                                                                                     2
                                                            in meeting your commit
••    Provide an immediate update if new                                                 Procedures in place
                                                            ments to avoid, reduce
      environmental or social risks emerge.                                              for reporting, usually
                                                            and mitigate any nega-
••    Report progress on implementation of your                                          assigned to E&S staff.
                                                            tive environmental or
      commitments.                                                                       Primarily reactive.
                                                            social impacts from your
••    Report monitoring results on issues that              company’s activities.
      interest the community.                               Sustainability reporting
                                                            initiatives, guidelines,



                                                                                                                     1
••    Use the opportunity to communicate the
                                                            including sector-specific    Some basic communica-
      benefits generated by your company.
                                                            guidelines, and good         tions with affected com-
••    Translate information into local languages            practices are also rapidly   munities, mostly limited
      and easily understandable formats.                    emerging in this area.       to meetings.
••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals with          The most notable is the
      the community.                                        Global Reporting Initia-
••    Involve your employees as communication links
                                                            tive (GRI).



                                                                                                                     0
      to the community.
••    Consider conducting a stakeholder survey to                                        No reporting.
      learn how your company is perceived.


           Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities for
           examples of formats and venues you can use.



       Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                 55
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



      56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          9. Monitoring and review




                             TIP

                              Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                             Intent:
                                   1.	 Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                             Implementation:
                                   2.	 Are the action plans being carried out?
                                   3.	 Are procedures being followed?
                             Effectiveness:
                                   4.	 Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                   5.	 Are you making progress toward your overall objectives and
                                      targets?
                                   6.	 How is the environmental and social performance of the com-
                                      pany in general?




                            INDICATORS
                            A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                            titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                            might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                            environmental and social policy.

                            Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                              •	   emissions to air;
                              •	   raw water quality;
                              •	   volume of solid waste disposal;
                              •	   water consumption;
                              •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                              •	   energy consumption;
                              •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage), incidents and near misses;
                              •	   lost time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates
                              •	   emergency response incidents;
                              •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                              •	   wages levels;
                              •	   incidences of child labor;
                              •	   incidences of disciplinary complaints; and

                              •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.


Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                     57
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          You can also use this information when reporting to a wider public on your
                                         ESMS performance. When selecting your key performance indicators, you may
  Improving                              refer to voluntary guidelines such as the Food Processing Supplement of the
                                         Global Reporting Initiative, which provides a list of indicators relevant to the
  Remember, you                          food and beverage industry.
  can’t improve what                     Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  you don’t measure.
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
                                         a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
                                         evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing for water and energy conservation;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?

                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability.




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit and Case Studies for
                                           more examples of key indicators common in the Food and Beverage
                                           industry.



             58    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                9. Monitoring and Review




                                         THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                            Visual observation                  Interviews
                            physical walk-throughs of           consultations with workers,
                            your facility and surround-         managers and external stake-
                            ing land. Examples of what          holders. Examples of topics
                            you might observe: physi-           you might discuss: Do workers
                            cal obstructions and blocked        and managers understand
                            exits, placement of hazard-         the policies and procedures?
                            ous materials, housekeeping,        How are they impacted? Are
                            ground and surface water            there ideas for improvement?
                            flows, worker and manager           Do workers feel comfortable
                            actions related to water use,       filing complaints? How are
                            production processes, hygiene,      external stakeholders im-
                            worker and manager body             pacted by the company? Are
                            language and interactions.          there ideas for improvement?
                                                                Do external stakeholders feel
                                                                comfortable filing complaints?

                            Measuring and                       Document review
                            testing                             looking through documents
                            checking through calibrated         and records. Examples of
                            equipment. Examples of              what you might review: water
                            what you might check: air           meter logs, water and energy
                            emissions, water quality, soil      bills, inspection records, com-
                            quality, water and energy con-      plaint logs, wage slips, time
                            sumption, ground and surface        cards, policies and procedures,
                            water levels, noise decibel         training records.
                            levels, ambient tempera-
                            ture, chemical levels in blood
                            samples.




                                     Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                     on how to conduct an audit.



Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	              59
9. Monitoring and Review




             Monitoring and auditing are words that are often used
             interchangeably, which can be confusing. Auditing is a formal, on-site
             evaluation against a specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
             internally by your own staff or by outside parties. Monitoring is
             an umbrella term that includes various methods for evaluating
             performance. These may include: visual observation, measuring
             and testing, questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
             and external stakeholders, and document review. It is important to
             design your monitoring program to obtain qualitative and quantitative
             information. It is also important that workers and managers are
             monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.




                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing, Docu-
                                         ment Review and Interviewing People.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.



             60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                           Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                           Improvement Plan
                                           Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                           environmental, labor and community
                                           problems and remediate negative impacts
                                           ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                           continually improve the management system to
                                           support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                     Ongoing Reporting
               Risks and Impacts




                                                                   Preparedness and




                                                                                                    Communications
               Identification of




                                                                                                                                         Monitoring and
                                                  Organizational




                                                                                                    and Grievance
                                   Management




                                                                                                                     Communities
                                                  Capacity and




                                                                                      Engagement




                                                                                                    Mechanisms
                                                  Competency




                                                                                      Stakeholder




                                                                                                                     to Affected
                                                                   Emergency

                                                                   Response
                                   Programs




                                                                                                    External




                                                                                                                                         Review
     Policy




      Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
      improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
      Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
      improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the company
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



Revision 2.2 June 9, 2014                       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Food and Beverages	                                                        61
9. Monitoring and review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




              62   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



June 2014
