2ND
INTERNATIONAL
SUSTAINABLE BANKING
FORUM
LAGOS, NIGERIA.
MARCH 2-4, 2014
Sustainable
Banking                   Fm»C   ~o
Network              I C l¥ ~  o


﻿@ 2014 INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433 U.S.A.
Telephone: 202 473-1000
Facsimile: 202 974-4384 Internet: www.ifc.orglenviro
All rights reserved
First printing, August 2014
The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Executive Directors of the International Finance
Corporation or of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (the World Bank) or the governments they
represent.
Rights and Permissions
IFC encourages use and distribution of its publications. Content
from this document may be used freely and copied into other
formats without prior permission provided that clear attribution is
given to the original source and the content is not used for
commercial purposes.


﻿2ND
INTERNATIONAL
SUSTAINABLE
BANKING
FORUM
LAGOS, NIGERIA.
MARCH 2- 4, 2014
FOREWORD
ABOUT THE SUSTAINABLE
BANKING NETWORK
AGENDA AND PRESENTATIONS
OVERVIEW OF FORUM
4.1 KEY MESSAGES
4.2 DISCUSSIONS
OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL
REGULATORY INITIATIVES
5.1 BANGLADESH
5.2 CHINA
5.3 INDONESIA
5.4 MONGOLIA
5.5 NIGERIA
5.6 PHILIPPINES
5.7 VIETNAM
USEFUL RESOURCES


﻿2ND
INTERNATIONAL
SUSTAINABLE
BANKING
FORUM
FOREWORD
With more than a half century of experience            This e-book provides a comprehensive overview of the
encouraging private sector in emerging markets,        presentations at the 2014 Banking Forum, and summaries
including advisory services to banks and regulators,   of discussions and country level updates on regulator
IFC promotes sustainability. Our impact is felt through  activity to encourage sustainable banking. These materials
our investments and by supporting robust risk          demonstrate multiple approaches of adopting regulation to
management systems that strengthen sustainable         suit different economic and political environments. It
banking in line with IFC Performance Standards.        contributes to the knowledge and tools to encourage
knowledge sharing and collaborative learning on this
On March 2 -4, 2014, the Central Bank of Nigeria, and the important topic.
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, co-hosted the
Second International Sustainable Banking Forum in Lagos.  We thank our colleagues and partners who contributed to
The high level forum brought together more than 100    this important initiative. IFC will continue to support these
participants, with participation of 30 banking regulator  efforts and learn from them to ensure our own approaches
representatives from 14 countries, including governors and  are robust and relevant in emerging markets.
deputy governors of central banks from seven countries.
IFC's Performance Standards, and the World Bank Group
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines serve as
international benchmarks for national policy development
in emerging markets. Brazil, Bangladesh, China, Colombia
and Nigeria have issued related guidelines for banks.
Indonesia, Peru, Mongolia and Vietnam are in the process
of developing guidelines.
Many emerging market banking regulators are teaming up
with partner agencies to pioneer the development of
regulatory guidance that encourages local banks to adopt
sustainable banking practices. This includes more effective
management of environmental and social risks in the
projects they finance, and support for businesses that are
greener, more climate friendly, and socially inclusive.
2N


﻿SBN members
include banking regulatory
bodies, environmental
regulators and industry
ABOUT THE associations
2SUSTAINABLE BANKING
NETWORK
The Sustainable Banking Network (SBN) is an informal  references for national policy development in markets such
and exclusive group of banking regulators and banking  as China and Nigeria.
associations from emerging markets. Members are
interested and involved in the creation of national  Annual SBN meetings, implemented since 2012, are the
enabling frameworks for sustainable banking. A main  principal space for dialogue, networking and knowledge
focus is the design and implementation of effective  generation. These conferences are hosted by a different
policies, guidelines and practices. The Network aims to  member country each time and have been implemented in
facilitate the collective learning of its members and  cooperation with the lFC. Regulators are also invited to
support them in policy development to create drivers  participate in lEC-hosted dialogue events and expert
for sustainable finance                              groups, such as the annual Performance Standards
Community of Learning, The Community of Learning
The idea for the SBN arose during the 1st International  supportsfinancialinstitutionsthathaveadoptedtheEquator
Green Credit Forum in Beijing, China, in May 2012. The  Principles, a global risk management framework, based on
event was co-hosted by IFC and the China Banking     lFC's standards, for determining, assessing and managing
Regulatory Commission (CBRC). During a special       E&Sriskinprojects.
roundtable with banking regulators, participants from 12
countries requested that IFC facilitate a knowledge network  Other donors and partners that are supporting the
which would allow the practical exchange of lessons and  Sustainable Banking Network and its activities include the
tools. The Network was formally launched in September  German Agency for Development Cooperation (GIZ), on
2012.                                                behalf of the German Ministry for Economic Cooperation
and Development (BMZ), the government of Japan through
As the largest global development finance institution  the Ministry of Finance, and the Government of Switzerland
focused on the private sector in emerging markets, IFC has  through the State Secretariat for EconomicAffairs (SECO).
more than a decade of experience providing technical
assistance to emerging marketfinancial institutions. With an
emphasis on sustainability, IFC support its financial sector  SBN members include banking regulatory bodies,
clients to create robust environmental and social risk  environmental regulators and industry associations, such
management systems (ESMSs) and to seek lending       as banking associations. The Network is open to all officials
opportunities that leverage new business models for green  or specialists working in these institutions, who have an
and inclusive economies. Examples include renewable  interest in environmental and social sustainability issues, as
energy, clean technology, and access to finance for women  well as in supporting the financial sector with guidance to
entrepreneurs.                                       manage environmental and social risks and opportunities.
IFC also increasingly assists regulators in emerging  The SBN is entirely voluntary. Membership does not
markets to benchmark and design approaches to promote  constitute any legal obligation or formal commitment to
sustainable finance in their home countries. For instance,  undertake regulatory actionsAdefining characteristicof the
IFC's Environmental and Social (E&S) Performance     network is the practicality and openness with which
Standards and the World Bank Group Environmental,    regulatorsarecollaboratingtoshareknowledge.
Health and Safety Guidelines have served as technical
austsinabse
A Se           sBanking
Network
LAGOS, NIGERIA. MARCH 2- 4, 20143


﻿* China Ministry of Environmental Protection
* The Annual Sustainable Banking Forum hosted by a     Mongolia Banking Association
Network member                                       Mongolia Ministry of Environment and Green
* Regular updates on the progress of policy development  Development
and implementation in each member country            Nepal Rastra Bank
* Bilateral exchanges between member countries such as  Thai BankersAssociation
study tours and learning events                      Vietnam Ministry of Natural Resources & Environment
* Access to IFC's annual Performance Standards
Community of Learning event                        The SBN welcomes regulators, officials, and specialists to
* Access to member-led thematic groups on Policy &   join at any time and encourages them to share experiences,
Guidlin  Devlopent;Montorig &Supevison; learn from others, and to benefit from Network activities.
Guideline Development; Monitoring & Supervision;
Sector Guidelines; and Incentives                  To become a member of the SBN, please get in touch
* Access to knowledge and learning products such as  with Ms. Rong Zhang at rzhang@ifc.org.
publications, documentaries, reports and case studies
http://firstforsustainability.org/home/sustainable-banking-
network!
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank of the
Philippines)
*BankAI-Maghrib (Central Bank of Morocco)
*Bank of Bangladesh
*Bank of Lao PDR
*Bank of Mongolia
*Central Bank of Nigeria
*Central Bank of Brazil
ThChina Banking Regulatory Commission
nOJKOJK (Indonesia Financial Services Authority)
*State Bank of Vietnam
laSuperintendence of Banks, Insurers, and Private
Pension Funds of Peru (SBP)
wAsobancaria (Banking Association of Colombia)
*China Banking Association
2ND INTERNATIONAL SUSTAINABLE BANKING FORUM


﻿Preserving the
environment and ensuring social
01                      equity and inclusiveness is vital
in maintaining vibrant
economies
3AGENDAAND
PRESENTATIONS
All available presentations can be downloaded at the First  M
for Sustainability Website:
for ustanablityWebste:Welcome Address by Dr A'isha U. Mahmood, Special
http://firstforsustainability.org/sustainable-banking-  Adviserto CBN Governoron Sustainable Banking
network/sustainable-banking-network-meetings/
KEYNOTESPEECHES
*Dr. Kingsley Moghalu, Deputy Governor, Central Bank of
R                                                       Nigeria
Welcoming and opening remarks:                            Mr. Solomon Quaynor, Country Manager of Nigeria and
Chief Investment Officer, IF
Drir Kingsley Moghalu, Deputy Governor, Central Bank of
Nigeria                                                PANEL DISCUSSION 1:
*DrAisha U. Mahmood, Special Adviser to CBN Governor   Mntrn,Eauto           n   netv      ehnssi
on Sstaiabl BaningMonitoring, Evaluation and Incentive Mechanisms in
on Sstaiabl Baningsupport of Sustainable Banking Regulatory Frameworks
Mr. Yanfei Ye, Deputy Director-General, China Bankingaen
Regulatory Commission
*Mr. Solomon Quaynor, Country Manager of Nigeria and
Chief Investment Officer, IFC                         Bilal Rahill, Senior Manager, Environment, Social and
Governance Department, IFC
Thematic Discussion on developing sector-specific
guidelines
* Mr. Khondkar Morshed Millat, Deputy General Manager,
Bangladesh Bank
Bilal Rahill, Senior Manager, Environment, Social and     Mr. Yanfei Ye, Deputy Director-General, China Banking
Governance Department, IFC                                Regulatory Commission
Thematic Discussion on Basel and E&S Risks              * Dr. Aisha Mahmood, Special Adviser to CBN Governor on
Sustainable Banking
Piotr Mazurkiewicz, Senior Environment & Social
Development Specialist, IFC
LAGOS, NIGERIA. MARCH 2- 4, 2014 5


﻿PANELDISCUSSION2                                     MARCH 4, 2014
Technical Advisory for Financial Institutions on Sustainable
Banking through Mobilizing Market Resources, Solutions,  SESSION I
and Tools
Sector Challenges and Opportunities
Ms. Careen Abb, Banking Commission Coordinator, UNEP
Finance Initiative                                    Bilal Rahill, Senior Manager, Environment, Social and
Governance Department, IFC
* Mr. Zaiping Yang, EVP, China Banking Association     Presentation on Nigeria Sustainable Banking Sector
Guidelines by Mr. Kehinde Johnson, Managing Partner,
* Mr. Edi Setijawan, Deputy Director, Indonesia Banking  Rosebank Consulting
Architecture Department of Banking Research and       Presentation on the Word Bank Group Environment,
Regulation                                            Health and Safety Guidelines by Ms. Emiola Abass,
* Mr. Naidalaa Badrakh, CEO of the Mongolian Bankers   Environmental and Social Development Specialist, IFC
Association
* Mr. Cat Quang Duong, Deputy Director of Credit
Department, State Bank of Vietnam
Climate Change - Business Opportunities, Good Practices,
PANEL DISCUSSION 3                                  Tools
Financial Institutions - Good Practices and Innovation
Mr. Roland Gross, Project Coordinator, Financial Systems
Development, Deutsche GeselIschaft fOr Internationale
Dr. Aisha Mahmood, Special Adviser to CBN Governor on  Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
Sustainable Banking
* Presentation on Sustainable Energy Finance by Mr. Bilal
Rahill, Senior Manager, Environment, Social and
Governance Department, IFC
*Mr. DotunAdeniyi, Executive Director, Skye Bank     0 Presentation by Mr. Peter Damian Mbama, CEO,
*Dr. Alex Otti, Group Managing Director, Diamond Bank  RegCharles
 Mr. Omar Hafeez, CEO, Citibank Nigeria               Presentation by Dr. James Allan, Associate Director,
*Mr. Piotr Mazurkiewicz, Senior Environment & Social   Maplecroft
Development Specialist, IFC
CmMr. Fedja Canters, Senior Investment Officer, FMO
2ND INTERNATIONAL SUSTAINABLE BANKING FORUM


﻿The ~ ~ ~    ~      ~      ~~                    h fn nentoa  utial  akngFrm  o   eeoe  yteclaorum  wftn(1)laigloa
toglahsne firsicte tm tlo a eeting
Th Fru cnsstd f n ntmae,haf-ayrondabeppofh tigras koiden woudtakbe pacen
dicusin orreultos n uda, arh nd fllwe   hs loand ineefo the r African contrient Dr
g os,Neria, rom Mrch 2nd t h 2014 .
The Forum Intei                                             the o llabo ratno ofintimate  leyings
With the increasing realization that preserving the nfban  resubsequetl enos by  the ralink
environment and ensuring social equity and inclusivenessNig  and me anatorygforallakin Ni
is vital in maintaining vibrant economies, sustainability isaoach  ieria'sco ie na n
now recognized as central to the growth of emerging
markets. This formed the core of the conversations at the  Theernoraofathe entan of igria, ude
Forum, with each participant discussing the progress of  prt  of the  l  o  te    o     s
sustainable banking in their home country.                               wold failae ming
The following high-level themes emerged from the 2ndofa reato tf sionts  ifi to t in.
Inentionetand nsringl sockial equty anbncuivnssTig woldnecanseitin reeiona deopent   whirsoffiach
iAl inimaintsaninwvibranth conome oustaiaiyis uqeMcl berepicae ewer tl ed  ob  oebh
noweveope r cogne asllabtio ofme teondh gren goal
marents.ned thsfoed thea e  of the twoversationskatt  w ereis snureul e ased of theg Cticluad o
Fnoumwithe ehartiipaont dising the proress to  otera n thme fnanalor eort an inesia.
sustaiale bacning inpthihoe otry          alrabeesehr.uieady lookingtis aytoend  sustaicinbenfiance
Mongies ine inuracaedi penimo follow a stocka
4.1prch. sieors. iaC's workent to eutinle arkit n t
exhanals, ganed iteretwith fronthe fs i SAfrica , 
Inien toaa Sustainable Banking orum:         bakn c       w      d     se
Atllo                                               technor till nk to Nier, dned  the
collbortiv  pltfom.artciptin reulaorsNptorkn rone rgtoer udeand. th proposal
mtonhediathdvalueiofgtheoNetworkt ite  oe  fri scc wofig gero  whic weolmd artilarlton
Netoled shauldrngmamng peallero   th macn toe  aocsin teeulos su s  onitori n aii thereion,
spreialzes techntia y xeris noalabrten elsewhr.d  butial nigusiness opportunities, anecnoi mnenties
Memes would als lextonggegionaldecvelyment which
Parugticpant exprss interest to furtherwep   and  iatemiv fese icha Bel e .
deepenythe Susaortinabl Bankingze Netork Thisinbl couldintjutaburs
mean  There a  r expansnindoathis kin toinlude
we aeenin ff the oforkny te      toinrn                          eoStenesi is
iniiathrug  dedAicadworkinggrous. It was  n the   Trey kings w rad wapes ttendor mor sustainabdia
eutor shoulce ren smeAfcall en tontintheraties to nlo bnsinrace  port untie hanrog
curenofthe levelingmmbers of intimy  and  raton s ut oad   ichanbe bang. sicines wrk wit e emerg e  asoc
enoucug osy viban-in tasorms n kwedgerian  excmaes w and rth  psion A in  So sAkr
catalytioaoSustainable Banking   Forum:tsanb banking i             f       not jus faoutc
management.IThereIare paIndusat  trie and busie oe
Theleeatboratimedlthor.Pportuipting egladthismoesmrgninepnetoE        calgs.Ct
mntived the Afia.u Itwa the firtr timethe ineterms of saigtobinsethuhbterstiaiiy
rnedgrsto pacen aong erand tine Ngacess  pefractsasonatatiepopchtfnnir
oeothfonigmmesothSBanstnsotacaprmt.Participants exprssedinteesteotfutherexpadoan
depteSustainable Banking lsN etofrk.Tisncipls
mean moreregulatorGand finacialAinsttutions4jining4 a


﻿4.2                                                     these sectors on economic growth. According to the
speakers, key stakeholders in these sectors were involved
During the two-day conference, panel discussions featured  in the development of the guidelines to ensure necessary
contributions from both regulators and banks on the  issues were taken into consideration. One major challenge
following topics:                                    identified was striking a balance between ensuring
continuous productivity in these sectors whilst they comply
Monitoring, Evaluation and Incentive Mechanisms in   with sustainability guidelines.
support of Sustainable Banking Regulatory
Frameworks: Participants shared their knowledge and  Climate Change - Business Opportunities, Good
experience in monitoring banks' compliance with      Practices, Tools: Climate change was noted as a major
sustainable banking regulations, and in providing incentives  trend impacting emerging markets and having different
for adherence to voluntary principles. It was clear much  effects in different regions. Climate related risks, such as
work still needs to be done in this area. Many countries are  droughts, fires, and severe storms and floods, are already
still in the process of designing policies. A next step is to  recognized by the insurance sector and are affecting some
introduce systems to collect updates from banks and  banks' lending portfolios. Mitigation and adaptation to
assess progress.                                     Climate Change, moreover, requires innovative business
responses, such as renewable energy, clean technology,
Technical Advisory for Financial Institutions on     and infrastructure solutions. Banks were encouraged to
Sustainable Banking, including Market Resources,     adopt proactive strategies to anticipate and manage both
Solutions, and Tools: A recurring theme during the Forum  the business risks and opportunities related to Climate
was the limited availability of technical know-how in the area  Change, and to understand specific regional impacts.
of sustainable banking, related for instance to key aspects
such as policy development, incentive schemes, and
compliance measures. The Forum provided an avenue for
participants to learn more and highlighted possible solutions
and resources. Participants also welcomed the idea of
specific working groups to focus on these topics.
Financial Institutions - Good Practices and Innovation:
Discussion focused on leading financial institutions and how
they have skillfully incorporated sustainability into their day-  pran
to-day business. A number of speakers identified the
benefits of good practice in risk mitigation, strengthening
market positioning by establishing a good reputation,
identification of green business opportunities, gaining
access to funding by meeting (international) investor
demands on sustainability practices, as well as increased
ability to comply with regulatory and investor demands in a
listing process, or initial public offering (IPO).
Sector Guidelines - Challenges and Opportunities:
Speakers from several countries discussed how they have
selected sectors in which to establish specific guidelines for
sustainable banking. Sectors were selected predominantly
by the effect they have on the environment and the effect the
environment has on these sectors, as well as the impact of
8  2ND INTERNATIONAL SUSTAINABLE BANKING FORUM


﻿Participating countries provided the following updates
on the development of guidelines, implementation,       Ti    scnutdo          nana       ai    ne    h
incentives and major issues.copeesvbakisetnmduefthCnrl
5.1 BANGLADESHud                                                             rvlin inne cee oprmt
Since 2008, Bangladesh Bank has formulated policies forclirenaigfcltesroBnldsh                  akat%
promoting sustainable banking and has introducedg                                             d     n
incentives to broaden the scope of sustainable finance to                         rd               ina
include corporate social responsibility (CSR), stakeholdern
engagement, green banking, environmental riskN                                                    ii
isustainable banking practices based on the banks' reports.
onmentaThis is conducted on an annual basis under the
bnkes n ancmalr istuts tcomprehensive bank inspection module of the Central
Bank.
sse IANLADESH 2Incentives include a revolving finance scheme to promote
green financial products. Under this scheme banks can
Sinc 208, angldes Bak ha fomulted oliiesfor claim refinancing facilities from Bangladesh Bank at 5%
wlrolleg outinable 3 an g pagainst the direct finance of 9% for green products, and 11 %
in the case of financing supported by a multilateral finance
inPhae 1:rpPolicysoandlgovernance,litincorporatio oer iinstitution. Bangladesh Bank has introduced 10 new green
e       agement,               environmental          products and allows banks to claim refinancing facilities for
management, and financial inclusion.                    a total of 16 green products.
In 2011, Bangladesh Bank introduced guidelines on         coultatinc
environmental risk management (ERMV) to encourage
banks and financial institutions to consider environmental                                           a
fa   s i sectorspured way in the overall credit appraisal  stors  receve f edbackon lope in and tor
system. In 2013, the policy guidelines for green bankrne  specific g ident  key focus n           the
were extended to all financial institutions. These guidelinesof impaente gideli           e
will be rolled out in 3 phasesthmaovaibebigpluon125scorpcfc
* Phase 1: Policy and governance, incorporation of ERM in
credit risk management, in-house environmental (GRs)
management, green financing, climate risk fund, green
marketing, onl ine   reing, training, research and 
Gudlnst nld       oilrs atr,developmento
monito nt toe assessg finacia insittins complianceisttuios,an
wiPhase II: Sector-specific environmental policies, green
strategic planning, green branches, and bank-specificcoeaetidnfykyousrasndnblth
environmental risk management plan.        and
dPhase    III: innovative products and sustainability
reporting in line with the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)
Bangladesh Bank is currently working with IFC to upgrade
the ERM framework. The specific outcomes from this
collaboration will include revision of the existing ERM
Guidelines to include social risk factors, development of a
monitoring tool to assess financial institutions' compliance
with the ERM Guidelines, formulation of sector-specific
policies to complement the ERM Guidelines, and
development of a quantitative scoring model to generate
E&S ~ ~      ~       ~      ~       ~      Sco guidelines fnacalinttuios
Basetors and areetl currently bein develope int sector-han
ieviomet it impactr onne the sector andviie vice versa,t withh
ditheen majort vaial beingnbl pollution 12-15des seto-secfi
also~~~                   ~       ~n financial institutions. ad  vauaio  o
WithLA                OS regardA toRC dise iato  an4mlme tto,  a04


﻿*   *      *      *A *I*
5.2                                                   evaluation system, and development of technical tools and
resources. CBAwill focus on capacity building for banks and
In July 2007, the China Banking Regulatory Commission  technical service providers on green credit.
(CBRC), the Ministry of Environmental Protection, and the
People's Bank of China jointly launched the national Green  Sector guidelines
Credit Policy. By December 2007, CBRC introduced the
Credit Guidance on Energy Efficiency and Emission   CBRC requested that banks develop their own sector-
Reduction Lending.                                  specific guidelines. Banks have the freedom to develop
guidelines for any sector they select. Larger commercial
With support of IFC, CBRC subsequently introduced the  banks find it easy to develop their own sector-specific
Green Credit Guidelines in February 2012, which applies to  guidelines. The smaller banks, due to their lack of capacity,
all Chinese commercial and policy banks for their domestic  have requested the help of CBRC in developing basic
and overseas investment. The Guidelines outlined three  sector-specific guidelines, which are still under
pillars for bank implementation:                    consideration.
* Environmental and social risk management          CBRC has developed guidelines for energy efficiency
financing, which focus not just on the risk but also on the
* Identifying related business opportunities        business opportunities. The focus on energy efficiency is
* Managing banks'own footprints                     based on the fact that it cuts across all sectors and is
therefore a core sector issue. These guidelines are currently
In November 2013, under the initiative of CBRC and China  being reviewed by commercial bank experts.
Banking Association (CBA), 29 leading banks in China  China has also identified some specific sectors as green
signed the joint commitment to Green Credit by the Chinese  sectors to enable banks to invest more financial resources
Banking Industry.                                  in these sectors. They include green agriculture, recycling
The Green Credit Guidelines are applicable to all Chinese  projects, renewable energy/green energy, and water
banks and have specific requirements in terms of    projects.
organizational structure, policies  and  capacity  building,
lending process management, internal management, and  CBAkin asso in   the  rci bank s c e
information disclosure. As a result, in 2012, financial  working on developin  a gree  rcte book  ob
institutions used the Guidelines as an E&S risk      blished in 2014.This ook io  on the price of
management framework to screen over USD 8 trillion or  banks ndeg
approximately85% of all corporate finance. The Guidelines
also require Chinese banks to actively lend to green
industries such as those related to energy efficiency and
renewable energy. As of Dec 2013, over 9% of the portfolios
of major 21 Chinese banks were invested in green
industries, amounting to USD 0.9 trillion.
As a next step, CBRC plans to introduce a mix of qualitative
and quantitative key performance indicators as a guidance
tool for self-assessment by banks.
Going forward, CBRC will focus on improving compliance
with the Green Credit Guidelines through a monitoring and
1 0   2ND INTERNATIONAL SUSTAINABLE BANKING FORUM


﻿5.3 I   N                                         5.4 MN     L
Up to December 2013, Bank Indonesia (BI) led the  The Mongolian Sustainable Finance Initiative is the result of
development of a draft Green Banking Regulation. Since  a joint effort by the Dutch Development Bank (FMO), Trade
January 2014, the newly established financial services  and Development Bank of Mongolia (TDB), IFC, Mongolian
authority, Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (OJK) has taken over the  Bankers Association (MBA) and the Banking and Finance
agenda. In partnership with IFC, OJK plans to issue policies  Academy (BFA).
and regulations on sustainable finance, which could impact
all financial institutions covered by OJK, including the  During the CEO Roundtable in March 2013, at which CEOs
capital market, insurance, pension funds and other non-  from 13 Mongolian banks shared their views on how banks
banking institutions.                              could address sustainability through E&S policies, it was
agreed to develop and release a joint statement and
To prepare for the regulation, OJK will build awareness and  establish a Working Group for Sustainable Finance.
capacity of the banks and bank supervisors to get buy-in
and understanding and to equip them with technical  The Mongolia Sustainable Finance Working Group was
knowledge and tools to implement the regulation after it is  established and its first meeting was held in September
launched. Partnering with the Ministry of Environment,  2013. Over 30 participants represented the key
BI/OJK offered a series of seminars and workshops in the  stakeholders, such as Bank of Mongolia (BoM), the Ministry
last year and trained 160 bankers from 80 banks, as well as  of Environment and Green Development (MoEGD),
20 bank supervisors to accelerate the uptake of sustainable  Mongolian Bankers Association (MBA) and all the
finance, OJK is also currently in coordination with other  commercial banks. During the meeting, the Mongolia
ministries and government agencies on preparation of  Sustainable Finance Joint Commitment Statement was
incentives for financial institutions. Moving forward, OJK  signed by all commercial banks of Mongolia. Led by MBA
intends to undertake the following activities:     and representing all Mongolian banks, the Sustainable
Finance Working Group agreed to develop a road map
* Enhance the capacity of banks in terms of environmental  towards developing principles, guidance and industry
and social risk management and increase green    guidelines to support banks in practicing sustainable
financing portfolios (e.g. renewable energy, energy  banking.
efficiency, sustainable agriculture, green building, eco-  In November 2013, the Mongolia Sustainable Finance Joint
tourism, and eco-label products).                Commitment Statement was signed by all commercial
* Enhance collaboration with international institutions (e.g.  banks of Mongolia. This event was an important milestone
technical assistance, green lending models/guidelines,  for the Mongolia's banking sector to embark on a journey to
capacity building).                              develop and launch the Mongolian Sustainable Finance
* Increase exchange of information among banks and  Principles. Subsequently, MBA, with support from IFC, had
regulators.                                      a number of high-level meetings with some key
stakeholders (MoEGD and BoM) and got their full support
OJK  will harmonize all regulation related to sustainable  forthe initiative.
financeforallfinancial services institutions in Indonesia.  Also in the same month, a training for the Mongolian
Sustainable Finance Working Group members was
conducted, which focused on international best practices in
sustainable banking and the Mongolian E&S related laws
and regulations. 20 members attended the training. The
Mongolian Sustainable Banking Principles were also
LAGOS, NIGERIA. MARCH 2- 4, 2014


﻿*   *      *       *~    *         *
successfully finalized and received strong support from the  Currently 34 financial institutions have committed to the
financial sector community at the MBA Annual meeting in  implementation of the NSBP. The Principles direct banks,
December2013.                                       discount houses and development finance institutions in
IFC signed a Cooperation Agreement with MBA to jointly  Nigeria to integrate E&S risk considerations into their
implement the Mongolian Sustainable Banking Initiative in  business activities and operations. They cover nine key
March 2013 during the Mongolian Economic Forum.     themes as follows:
Sector guidelines:
Mongolia is focusing its efforts around sector-specific  E&S risk management
guidelines on the following four major sectors based on a
review of major banks' portfolios:                    E&S footprint management
Human rights
* Mining                                              Women's economic empowerment
* Agriculture                                         Financial inclusion
* Manufacturing                                       E&S governance
* Construction                                        Capacity building
These sectors were also selected because they form the  Collaborative partnership
backbone of Mongolia's national economy.              Reporting
Sector-specific guidelines are currently being developed for
these sectors, which will be released by the first quarter of
2014.                                                Seto guideline
5.5                                                    Sector-specific guidelines have been developed for three
key sectors: Power, Oil and Gas and Agriculture. Selection
The Nigerian banking sector plays a significant role in  of these sectors was based on their contribution to the
national economic growth and development through its  economy as well as their impact on the environment. Going
Nand investment activities. The context in which  forward, sector guidelines for the mines and steel industry
business decisions are currently made is, however,                                             key
characterized by complex and growing challenges in  A reporting template has been developed which will assess
population growth, urban migration, poverty, food insecurity,  and monitor performance according to the sector
energy and infrastructure challenges, amongst others.  guidelines, and compliance will be reviewed.
With these challenges in mind, the Bankers' Sub-
Committee on Economic Development and Sustainability
met to discuss the prudence of adopting a sustainable
banking framework for the burgeoning industry. The
initiative, which was led by a group of Nigerian financial
institutions, with an enabling environment provided by the
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), cumulated in the creation of
the Nigerian Sustainable Banking Principles (NSBP) in July
2012. By September 2012, the Principles were approved
and adopted by the CBN.
1 2   2ND INTERNATIONAL SUSTAINABLE BANKING FORUM


﻿*   *      *      *~    **
5.6 PHILIPPINES
On May 2013, IFC and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
(BSP) jointly organized the Roundtable on Sustainable
Finance for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth in the
Philippines. The Roundtable is an unprecedented initiative
to enable multi-stakeholder dialogue and discussions on
sustainability for the Philippine banking sector. A number of
concrete steps were proposed by participants of the
Roundtable, including systematic awareness raising and
capacity building for the sector, a multi-stakeholder dialogue
mechanism, and research to map out the environmental
and social sustainability landscape affecting the banking
and finance industry
Following the consensus reached during Roundtable, BSP
deemed that the research is a good starting point to provide
the basis and approach to create a market environment
conducive to sustainable and inclusive growth of the sector.
IFC has initiated the research in cooperation with BSP.
5.7
With the support of IFC, the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) is
leading the drafting of an Environmental and Social Risk
Management Circular for banking activities, which is
expected to be issued in June 2014.
SBV is also developing sector-specific E&S due diligence
checklists for approximately 5-10 key sectors, which will be
the primary tool used by commercial banks to identify E&S
risks when appraising loan proposals for those particular
sectors.
Key performance indicators (KPIs) and reporting templates
will also be developed to enable SBV to monitor and
evaluate the implementation of the Circular by banks. In the
past two years, SBV, in partnership with IFC, organized a
number of awareness raising and capacity building events
targeting leaders at commercial banks. Once the new
regulation is issued, SVB plans to continue partnering with
IFC and other international and local technical partners to
organize more technical and in-depth training for Fl staff and
leaders. Awareness raising and capacity building will also
be conducted for SBV inspectorates and other staff to
strengthen their supervisory and enforcement capacity.
LAGOS, NIGERIA. MARCH 2-4, 2014  13


﻿The publication "Moving forward with Environmental and         TelGSsanblt           rmwr
Social Risk Management" provides an overview of the
implementation of ESRM in commercial banks in nine             ht:/i.ylu68
emerging markets.                                              TelGPromneSadrs
http://bit.ly/1 rLc5syhtp/btylwSL
First for Sustainability is an online platform hosted by lFC that
provides information and tools on sustainable finance andThlGEniom               ta,HlhadSfeytnars
E&S risk management for banks. A dedicated section
provides updates on the SBN and useful resources, such asww.fogehudene
presentations from the 2nd International Sustainable Banking   TeEutrPicpe:wweutrpicpe.o
Forum.                                                         TeE-oli sa          sesetto,dsge           oass
http://firstforsustainability.org/thE&rikanopruiieascaedwhter
The IFC Sustainability Training and E-Learning Program         ivsmns
(STEP) is a free, online training, designed to help financial
institutions better understand sustainable finance and E&S     hts/wwetoktcm
risk management, and to explore sustainability-related
business opportunities:
http://bit.ly/1qHtkeO
Information from the Green Credit Forum in China in 2012 is
availablestinabilty eBmewor
httttp://bitlyy/1uA6181
Video on the ChinaPGrenrCredit Foruma2012
hhttp://bit.Iy/1pwTSZ
Tnd
Thepuliaton"Mvig orar wthEnirnmntl ndThe E&CSssandbiopportuitesocitdrihkhi
availale ais Manae nt eBook:a oeriw       f h
http://bait.n/1r EJ ncmecilbnsi nntp/bi.ylu68
Vmid ng thets hin Gree Creditanc Forumd2012:
http://bit.ly/WK8w9ett:/btlylwTZ
14s      o   u t i a iiyi  n o ln  laf r   o t d b  F   h tT          eI C E  vro m  n a,H  at   n   a ey S a d r s


﻿warUrnati"a
ABOUTc IFCpCREDITS
OUR VISIONM
That people should have the opportunity to escape poverty   Prepared by Suss Productions.
and improve their lives.
and mproe thir lves.Edited by Louise Gardiner, Damilola Sobo, and Rong Zhang.
Contributions provided by Ananya Kader, Atiyah Curmally,
* Excellence                                               Batmunkh Batbold, Christina Poser, Damilola Sobo, Ejura
Audu, Huong Thien Nguyen, Marinela Pascua, Rahajeng
* Commitment                                               Pratiwi, Upoma Dutta and Wei Yuan.
* Integrity
* Teamwork
* Diversity                                                The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the author and interviewees
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
To create opportunity for people to escape poverty and            International inand Deeopen the
improve their lives by catalyzing the means for inclusive and  W orld  Bank r t eoverment typs
sustainable growth, through:                                             ro       ts
iMobilizing other sources of finance for private enterprise
development
C                                                             bPromoting open and competitive markets in developing
countries
ASupporting companies and other private sector partners
where there is a gap
THelping generate productive jobs and deliver essential
services to the poor and vulnerable
To achieve its purpose, IFC offers development impact
solutions through firm-level interventions (direct
investments, Advisory Services, and the ItC Asset
Management Company); promoting global collective action,
strengthening governance and standard-setting; and
business enabling environment work.
Creating Opportunity Where It's Needed Most


﻿*0    -
sustainable                              gaergina
INTEjNBanking IR CO * q *O
Network                                   WOLBNKRU


