SOLAR ROOFTOPS
LEARNINGS FROM GLOBAL AND
INDIAN EXPERIENCES



Countries all over the world are faced with climate change
and energy security concerns. An estimated 700 million
people in South Asia do not have access to electricity.
About 90 percent of them live in rural areas. To help
address these concerns, IFC is working to eradicate
energy poverty by focusing on both grid connected and
off-grid energy through innovative and market transforming
initiatives.


This white paper explores the growing interest in
developing countries in using grid-connected rooftop solar
PV to provide access to green power for large numbers of
people. It also looks at how private participation can
support dissemination of rooftop solar PV systems. This
white paper draws lessons from global experiences in
designing and implementing rooftop solar systems,
identifying success drivers and potential challenges. It is
based on industry consultation, and the development of
case studies from recent rooftop solar initiatives, such as
the Indian state of Gujarat’s Gandhinagar experience with
the public-private partnership approach.


In this publication, ‘rooftop solar PV systems’ refers to
solar photovoltaic power systems installed on rooftops and
elevated areas on consumer premises. A solar rooftop PV
system can be either one or a combination of two
arrangements, namely, (i) building-attached PV systems
and (ii) building-integrated PV systems. Building-attached
                                                              Photo: Azure Power

                                                    19
PV systems are added on to the rooftops and elevated areas such as parking areas and canopies,
but not directly related to functional aspects of the building or the premises. These generally include
rack-mounted arrays and are used both to retrofit and for new buildings. Building-integrated PV
systems are functional parts of the building structure, or architecturally integrated into the design of
the building and elevated areas. This category includes designs where PV material replaces the
normal roofing material, such as shingles, tiles, slates, roof, skylights, or facades.


This white paper explores how technological advances, production expansion, and the shifting of
manufacturing bases to low-cost Asian regions have led to a rapid decline in the cost of PV, and looks
at the two main approaches to develop rooftop solar: (i) the utility-driven route, and (ii) the consumer-
driven route.


Globally, rooftop solar PV installations have led the development of the solar photovoltaic sector.
Ground-based projects, on the other hand, have developed due to enabling policies and regulatory
frameworks as defined by the laws of each country. This white paper identifies the phases of a
maturing rooftop solar sector, based on the experiences of countries such as Germany, Japan, and
the U.S., to highlight how the market grows from a concept stage where pilot models are tested,
to become a mature market based on self-replication.


Harnessing Energy from the Sun looks at the opportunities provided by rooftop solar for developing
countries like India and highlights the common barriers that prevent the development of the rooftop
solar sector.


A key driver of rooftop solar PV development across the globe has been the design and
implementation of models which combine policy and regulatory frameworks with market dynamics
to deliver bankable and sustainable projects. Globally, implementation models vary in terms of
ownership (self-owned versus third-party-owned) and metering (gross versus net metering). This
document identifies six distinct models based on solar system ownership patterns and on the manner
in which electricity generated is consumed and sold. It provides insight on how these models have
evolved in response to specific policies and regulations suited to particular market conditions.




                                                    20
India and many other developing countries benefit from reliable solar radiation, and are keen to
convert this into energy. But they are also challenged by the scarcity of land to develop large ground-
mounted projects. This paper explores the regulatory path followed by India to create the enabling
environment to support the growth of the rooftop solar market. It draws lessons from the preparation
and implementation of the rooftop solar program piloted in Gujarat, India.


Incorporating private sector participation in the rooftop solar market can help its rapid development.
However, forming a well-balanced complementary relationship between public and private sectors is
challenging, and can have consequences on a wide range of stakeholders. The process needs to be
carefully managed through adequate planning and implementation.


International experience indicates that several administrative and institutional challenges need to be
addressed to allow each stakeholder to participate in the transition to a mature self-replication phase.
This white paper explores these challenges and also the fundamental steps in successful project
preparation, based on the rooftop solar program piloted in Gujarat.


Finally, this paper brings together the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder: government,
manufacturers and developers, rooftop owners, and utility companies in particular. It shows how
interaction between these stakeholders can benefit each one of them, and society as a whole.




                                                   21
HARNESSING POWER
FROM THE SUN



                                                              Photo: Azure Power
Countries all over the world are faced with climate change
and energy security concerns. Declining costs, and
improved efficiency and reliability, are making the
renewable energy sector attractive. This is leading to
increased investment in renewable energy resources.
Among renewable energy resources, solar photovoltaics
are the third most important renewable energy source in
terms of installed capacity, after hydro and wind power. As
per the REN21's Renewables Global Status Report 2013,
total renewable power capacity (not including hydro)
reached 480 gigawatt in 2012, up about 21.5 percent in
2011. 2012 saw further movement in activity from
developed to developing economies, although the former
group still accounted for more than half of global
investment. In 2007, developed economies invested two-
and-a-half times more in renewables (excluding large
hydro) than developing countries; in 2012, the difference
was only 15 percent (figure 1 shows the growth of
renewable energy installed capacity from 2004 to 2012.




                                                      23
Figure 1: Global penetration of renewable energy (installed capacity)

                            500
                            450
                            400
                            350
                            300
                 Gigawatt




                            250
                            200
                            150
                            100
                             50
                                 0
                                  2004      2005   2006     2007        2008      2009      2010    2011

                                               Wind       Solar         Biomass          Others

Source: REN21's Renewables Global Status Report 2013




Overview of the Global Solar PV Market

Globally, solar energy is becoming the fastest-growing power generation technology. Figure 2 shows
that the growth in global operating capacity of solar photovoltaics (PV) reached the 100 gigawatt
milestone in 2012, from 20 gigawatt in 2007. From 2008 to 2012, the installed capacity of solar PV
grew at the average annual rate of 56 percent (figure 2). These capacity additions are driven by rapid
technological advances such as increase in efficiency, new manufacturing techniques, use of new
materials, declining production costs, and shift of manufacturing bases to low-cost regions in Asia.
However, in most mature markets such as Australia, Japan, Germany, Spain, Australia, and the U.S.,
the main driver has been the establishment of enabling policies, solar promotion programs, and
incentives to increase penetration of solar power applications.

Figure 2: Growth in solar PV global capacity


                                                             Gigawatt
                        120

                        100

                            80

                            60
                                                                                                   Gigawatt
                            40

                            20

                             0
                                 95
                                 96

                                         19 7
                                           98
                                            99
                                            00
                                            01
                                            02
                                            03
                                            04
                                            05
                                            06
                                            07
                                            08
                                            09
                                            10


                                            12
                                            11
                                           9
                             19
                                  19
                                       19


                                         19
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20
                                         20




Source: REN21's Renewables Global Status Report 2013
                                                                  24
Due to increasing production scales and advances in technology, there has been a rapid decline in
the cost of solar PV system installations from $3.50 to $4 per watt-peak in 2004 to about $1 per watt-
peak in 2012.1 Figure 3 shows the declining trend in solar PV system prices globally between 2008
and 2012.

Figure 3: Solar PV system price trends

          5
        4.5
          4
        3.5              1.8
          3
        2.5                                       1.5
          2                                                                 1.3
        1.5
                         2.7                                                                         0.9
          1                                       1.8                       1.5
        0.5                                                                                          0.8
          0

                      2008-09                  2009-10                   2010-11                  2011-12

                                           Module                Balance of system

Source: The Rising Sun, Grid parity gets closer - A point of view on the Solar Energy sector in India, September 2012, KPMG
http://www.kpmg.com/IN/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/Rising-sun-2-full.pdf)




Global Deployment of Grid-connected Solar Energy Installations

The development of grid-connected solar programs has followed two broad approaches (table 1):
one under which utilities or third-party developers undertake solar energy development to fulfill
renewable purchase obligations or preferential tariffs, as in the U.S. and India, and the second where
retail customers drive solar energy development to benefit from attractive and facilitating policies and
regulatory environments, as in Germany.




1
    Reconsidering the Economics of Photovoltaic Power, available at http://www.bnef.com/WhitePapers/download/82
                                                            25
Table 1: Two key approaches followed globally to develop grid-connected solar programs


 Utility/third-party-driven programs                            Customer-driven programs

 Utilities or third-party developers undertake projects         Governments and regulators create facilitating
 primarily to address regulatory and policy                     policies and regulations to encourage consumers to
 requirements (for example: renewable purchase                  invest in and develop small solar projects on their
 obligations). These projects are usually large                 premises.
 megawatt scale with a focus on optimizing costs.
 These projects are usually developed either by the             Decentralized, distributed solar generation models

 utilities themselves or by third party developers who          have become popular among consumers due to the

 enter into long-term power purchase agreements                 declining cost of solar energy, proliferating fiscal

 with the utility. The cost of procurement is eventually        incentives like feed-in tariff, net metering and tax

 spread out and passed on to customers served by                rebates, and increased costs of grid-based

 the utility.                                                   conventional energy.




Several hybrids of the above approaches have emerged in specific markets, depending on
regulations, market opportunities, and role of intermediaries. Most markets, including Germany,
Spain, and the U.S., have developed their solar industries using a combination of large grid-
connected solar plants and small decentralized solar projects located on consumer premises.
Globally, there has been remarkable growth in small rooftop and other small-scale PV installations.
Germany is the world’s biggest small-scale PV user with an installed capacity of 32 gigawatt, as of
September 2012. Of this, approximately 60 percent of the capacity is installed on rooftops: 9 percent
(1-10 kilowatt) mostly on private buildings, 26 percent (10-100 kilowatt) on social, commercial, and
agricultural buildings, and 24 percent (above 100 kilowatt) on large commercial buildings (figure 4).




                                                           26
Figure 4: Share of rooftop solar PV installations in overall installed capacity of solar PV in Germany

            Mounting
            effort
             BIPV




                                                                     <1%



                        Residential (1-10 kWp)        Commercial (10-100 kWp)          Industrial (>100 kWp)
             Rooftop




                                          9%                               26%                           24%
             mounted
             Ground-




                                                                         40%


                        Image: Schuco, grammer, sharp, Solarwatt, BP, Geosol                         Size of system

Source: Jorg Mayer (May 17, 2013), German Solar Industry Association, BSW Solar, “The German Solar PV Rooftop Market,”
Dutch 20GW Challenge, Amsterdam



Australia, Italy, and the U.S. are other countries with significant shares of rooftop installations. Of the
3,500 megawatt of photovoltaic capacity in the U.S., 1,000 megawatt is large scale and owned by
utilities. The rest is installed on rooftops of either commercial buildings, like those atop big-box stores,
accounting for about 1,500 megawatt of capacity, or on residential buildings with 1,000 megawatt of
installed capacity. The average system size (for residential buildings) varies from 2 to 5 kilowatt.2 This
has prompted several developing countries to work on developing their own solar promotion programs.
The next section, Rooftop Solar Market Development Phases, discusses the trends followed in the
development of the rooftop solar PV segment in countries that have now reached a mature market.




2
    http://grist.org/news/the-government-finally-figures-out-how-much-rooftop-solar-there-is

                                                               27
ROOFTOP SOLAR
MARKET DEVELOPMENT
PHASES


This section looks at the path followed by countries around
the world to promote the growth of the rooftop solar sector.
It identifies trends and lessons from their experiences that
can be used by policy-makers to address challenges faced
in developing countries.


Rooftop solar PV market development can be divided into
three phases, as depicted in figure 5.




                                                               Photo: Anjali Garg

                                                   29
Figure 5: Rooftop solar PV market development phases


   Proof-of-                           Market                              Mature self-
   concept                             transformation                      replication
   phase                               phase                               phase




    Focus on implementation             Focus on building capacity          Emergence of efficient
    of demonstration projects                                               implementation models
                                        Ÿ Market transformation -
    Ÿ Showcase technical and               bridge between proof-of-         Ÿ Markets in self-replication
       financial feasibility of            concept and mature self-            and self-sustaining phase
       rooftop solar PV projects           replicating phase                   (Japan and Germany).

    Ÿ Provide insights to policy        Ÿ Government or public              Ÿ New implementation
       makers to envisage                  agencies play active roles          models emerge, which
       implementation models               as market facilitators              drive the market towards
       and capacity targets                                                    greater efficiency
                                        Ÿ Financing market for
    Ÿ Reveal implementation                investors emerges and            Ÿ Financing market for
       issues to move market               matures                             individuals emerges
       towards self-replication                                                and matures
                                        Ÿ Example: Germany’s
       phase
                                           100,000 rooftops                 Ÿ Government inputs are
    Ÿ Example: (a) Japan’s                 program.                            minimal with focus on
       monitoring program for                                                  providing a facilitating
       residential PV Systems                                                  regulatory environment.
       (b) Germany’s 1,000
       rooftops program.




Proof-of-concept phase

This phase consists of the implementation of demonstration projects to primarily accomplish the
following three objectives:

Ÿ Showcase technical and financial feasibility of pilot rooftop solar PV projects

Ÿ Highlight implementation issues, such as permit procedures, technical standards, metering and

   interconnection mechanisms, and appropriateness of tariffs, which will have to be addressed to
   move to the next phase

Ÿ Enable policymakers to transpose lessons learnt from these projects to envisage implementation

   models and capacity targets, enabling them to make appropriate policy and incentive choices to
   move the market forward.

                                                   30
Box 1: Example of “Proof-of-concept phase” development in rooftop solar PV


  Germany launched the Thousand Rooftops Program in 1990, the first major solar installation initiative in
  the world. Under this program, rebates of up to 60 percent of system costs were offered to owners.
  Approximately 2,250 systems with a total capacity of 5.25 MW were installed by 1995. The program
  monitored the performance of the systems to identify issues in project design and execution. This program
  attracted worldwide attention from countries interested in implementing similar programs. Several issues
  came up during implementation, including financing barriers, grid technical standards, and levels of
  incentives. These were addressed successfully in subsequent phases. Japan began to invest in solar PV
  research and development following the first oil crisis in 1974. Its rooftop solar PV program, called the
  ‘Monitoring Program for Residential PV Systems,’ paid 50 percent of installation costs. The number of
  participating households rose from 539 in 1994 to 1986 two years later. This program demonstrated the
  technical feasibility of grid interconnection and helped identify incentives to promote rooftop solar PV
  systems. Germany, Japan, and the U.S. established legal frameworks and guidelines at early stages
  for grid-interconnection of small and dispersed renewable systems, along with safety procedures.




Market Transformation Phase

The market transformation phase is the bridge between the ‘proof-of-concept’ and the ‘mature self-
replicating’ phases and involves government or public agencies playing the roles of market
facilitators. The most successful examples of this are Germany and Japan. After the successful
1,000 rooftops program, Germany launched the 100,000 rooftops program in 1999 that provided
concessional, ten-year loans along with attractive feed-in tariffs to further incentivize households to
participate. This created the effective market pull needed for the program, and targets were achieved
a year ahead of schedule, in 2003. The overall development of the German solar market, where
about 60 percent of all installations are rooftop-based, is highlighted in figure 6.

Figure 6: Key phases of development of the German solar industry

                      Feed-in Act          100,000
  Regulatory                                                    National            New               Almost at
                    1,000 Rooftops         Rooftops
    inputs                                                    Feed-in Law        Feed-in Law          grid parity
                       Program             Program


 Milestones              1990                1999                 2000              2004                 2011

                   Create PV demand     Higher installed capacities          PV became:           FIT being modified
   Industry        by making solar      building up domestic PV              - Cost-competitive   to volume-based
 development       PVs financially      production capacity base             - A sustainable      degression and
   strategy        attractive                                                  energy source      encourage captive
                                                                                                  consumption



                                                         31
Japan facilitated the development of its rooftop solar PV sector with a coordinated effort to grow both
the solar industry and rooftop solar market through publicly-funded research, demonstrations, and
deployments. Research and development activities were undertaken on the supply side while, on
the demand side, capital subsidies and self-owned net metering schemes encouraged households
to adopt rooftop solar systems. Subsidy programs for residential PV systems started in 1994 under
which subsidies were provided to individuals as well as owners and developers of housing
complexes. While the subsidies ended in 2005, it was reestablished in 2009 and extended in the fall
of 2011 following the Fukushima disaster. In July 2012, Japan implemented a new feed-in tariff (FIT)
system under the Act on Special Measures Concerning the Procurement of Renewable Energy by
Operators of Electric Utilities. Under the terms of the feed-in tariff system, power utilities must
purchase electricity at a fixed price for a given period from renewable energy sources, including solar,
wind, hydro, geothermal, biomass, and others, generated by certified power-generating facilities.


The high cost of retail power also encouraged the installation of these systems. The development
path of the Japanese rooftop solar PV market is given in figure 7.

Figure 7: Key phases of development of the Japanese solar industry


                                        Residential PV        Advanced PV
  Regulatory         New sunshine                                              New energy          Feed-in
                                        dissemination          generation
    inputs              project                                                   law               tariff
                                           program              program


 Milestones              1994               1997                 2001             2007               2012

                   Build domestic       Focus on mass production            Research and      Large-scale
   Industry        demand and           which leads to cost reduction       development for   proliferation of
 development       stimulate                                                next generation   rooftop solar
   strategy        manufacturing                                            PV systems        following the
                   base                                                                       Fukushima disaster




Market Maturity and Self-replication

Today, markets like Japan and Germany are near a stage where the development of rooftop solar PV
installations is self-sustaining. In Germany, the new FIT regime requires utilities to procure not more
than 80 percent of rooftop power production. The remaining 20 percent is consumed by the rooftop
owner, which is relatively attractive as FIT rates are almost similar to utility retail tariffs.




                                                         32
On the other hand, California - the largest market in the United States for solar projects, though not at
the stage of grid parity - has implemented new models and ownership structures with greater maturity
and capacity for replication. California has been promoting the third-party ownership model coupled
with tax rebates and net metering to expand the installation base. This model has increased total PV
market demand by addressing issues like financing, upfront adoption costs, technology risks, and
administrative complexities. It represents an evolved intermediary-driven market, where third-party
service providers have led the expansion of rooftop projects. It is worth noting that the third-party
PV market grew significantly in California only after tax benefits were offered.


In 2011, New Jersey added the second highest number of solar installations after California. The
state had a cumulative capacity of 306.1 megawatt at the end of 2011, up from a capacity of 132.4
megawatt at the end of 2010.3 It started with an extensive system of subsidies, which were phased
out in favor of performance-based incentives. Until 2008, New Jersey had a subsidy program to
encourage solar installations, subsidizing residential installations at $5.50 per watt in 2005 and
$43.50 per watt in 2007, before phasing these out in 2008. Subsidies still in place in New Jersey
include exemptions from sales tax and value-added property tax for installations. The key policy
instrument that New Jersey has used is the Renewable Portfolio Standard, which requires utilities
or suppliers to have 22.5 percent share of renewable power, out of which solar has a specific share.
New solar installations are guaranteed participation in the state-wide solar renewable energy credit
(SREC) market for a significant period of time (15 years) and utilities must pay fines for shortfalls in
SREC compliance obligations.4 Individually owned as well as third-party leasing systems exist in New
Jersey. Third-party leasing companies have become significant players in the residential solar market
in New Jersey, and offer 15 to 20-year leases to consumers with nil down-payments.5




3
    US Market Trends 2011, Interstate Renewable Energy Council, August 2012
4
                                                                                                                      ,
    Renewable Energy Credit (REC) is a credit awarded for the generation of 1000 kWh of renewable energy (such as solar
    wind, geothermal). To meet renewable energy targets, utilities must accumulate RECs through renewable energy
    production or by purchasing credits from others. Solar Renewable Energy Credit (SREC) is 1000 kWh (kilowatt hour)
    renewable energy credit that is specific to the production of solar power.
5
    Griffith, A.B., M.Higgins, J.M. Turner. A rooftop revolution? A multidisciplinary analysis of state-level residential solar
    programs in New Jersey and Massachusetts. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences December 2013.
    10.1007/s13412-013-0156-6

                                                                   33
Measures Facilitating the Penetration of Rooftop Solar Projects

Three markets - Japan, Germany, and California - have followed similar trajectories of penetration
of rooftop solar power in their energy mix. However, each was based on different legal, policy,
regulatory, and commercial paths, reflecting the market policies and regulatory preferences typical to
each country. Table 2 highlights the approaches of different programs across the globe that have
successfully addressed the pre-requisites for rooftop market development.

Table 2: Measures to facilitate development of rooftop solar PV

    Supporting
                      Germany                            Japan                        California
    factors

    Regulation      The Renewable Resources              Grid interconnection         Interconnection, operating, and
    of grid         Act provides guidelines for          technical requirement        metering requirements for
    interconnection interconnection, and                 guidelines and the           generating facilities to be
                    mandates the connection              Electricity Utility          connected to Southern
                    of renewable systems on              Industries Act provides      California Edison’s distribution
                    priority basis. VDE 4105             provisions on safety         system were provided
                    Code of Practice is
                    mandatory from January
                    2012 for interconnection
                    with the low-voltage grid

    Financial         FIT, periodically updated          Capital subsidy,             Incentives,6 tax credits
    incentive                                            renewable purchase
    structures                                           obligation


    Sustainable       Ÿ Long-term FIT guarantee          Ÿ Soft financing             Ÿ Emergence of third-party service
    business          Ÿ Soft financing                   Ÿ Streamlined                    providers who take on the risks
    models                                                  interconnection and           associated with the development
                      Ÿ Streamlined
                                                            administrative                and performance of the system
                          interconnection and
                          administrative approval           approval processes        Ÿ Savings in electricity bills for
                          processes                      Ÿ Savings in                     households or rooftop owners
                                                            electricity bills         Ÿ Lease payments and tax benefits
                                                                                          to project developers or owners

    Metering          Gross metering to                  Net metering due to          Net metering to facilitate the
    arrangements      encourage solar project            very high consumer           development of decentralized
                      development, independent           tariff coupled with          solar systems
                      of captive loads of                promotion of captive
                      consumers                          consumption


6
    California solar incentive payments are disbursed in one of two ways: (i) Expected performance-based buy down (EPBB):
    The applicant receives the entire incentive payment at the time the system is installed, and the payment is based on expected
    electrical output of the system. (ii) Performance-based incentive (PBI): The applicant receives a portion of the incentive
    payment every month over a period of five years, and the payment is based on the actual metered output of the system.

                                                                 34
The three markets are well on their way to achieving grid parity, and government initiatives have
played a major role in leading the rooftop solar PV segment to maturity. The German government
has led the way in developing the domestic supply chain for the solar segment through private sector
participation. The German FIT model has helped in developing a well-structured private industry,
leading to strong distributor and dealer networks with well-trained installers and good customer-
support capabilities. Germany has become the leading PV manufacturer in Europe with around 40
manufacturers of silicon, wafers, cells, and modules, more than 100 PV material and equipment
suppliers, numerous manufacturers of other system components, and over 50 PV research institutes
as well as a number of project development, system integration, and installation companies.


In the United States, utilities have played an important role in market development. Incentive
programs such as subsidies and high retail electricity rates have created a well-developed solar
PV service delivery industry, with a large number of local suppliers and qualified installers across
the country.


The paths followed by each country have varied in terms of implementation models and market
organization, reflecting the policies and regulatory preferences typical to each country. While
Germany and Japan provided incentives initially by subsidizing system costs, the market in California
grew significantly only after tax benefits were offered. FITs, concessional loans, renewable purchase
obligations, and tax rebates are other policy instruments used by countries to encourage the success
of rooftop programs. The role of incentives and policy support to help the market transition from proof-
of-concept phase to market transformation and then self-replication is evident in the way the segment
has developed in these countries. This will be analyzed in greater details subsequently in this paper.


The next section assesses the benefits that emerging economies may find by developing rooftop
solar PV projects, and the constraints that may hinder their growth.




                                                   35
WHY IT MAKES SENSE
TO GENERATE POWER
ON ROOFS


This section discusses the key opportunities to develop
rooftop solar PV projects and constraints in frontier
markets, including gaps in policy and regulatory
frameworks. It draws extensively from lessons learned
during the implementation of the rooftop solar program in
Gujarat, India, and other initiatives by the government of
India. Table 3 captures the opportunities and challenges
that are described in more detail here.


Table 3: Opportunities and challenges in solar rooftop
market development


 Opportunities                  Challenges


Ÿ Flexible model enabling       Ÿ Higher capital cost
   large-scale                     differential between
   self-replication                ground-mounted and
                                   rooftop solar PV plants
Ÿ Enhancing power supply
   reliability and supporting   Ÿ Need for policy and
   energy efficiency               regulatory framework to
                                   encourage market
Ÿ Ease of implementation
                                   development
  (permits, site selection, and
  clearances)                   Ÿ Need for roadmap and
                                  implementation models to
Ÿ Creating value from
                                  drive market growth
  underutilized rooftops and
  saving of productive land     Ÿ Need for robust and well-

  for alternative uses            defined technical standards
                                  to ensure quality
Ÿ Savings in transmission
                                  installations matching the
  and distribution losses
                                  asset life and sustainable
Ÿ No new transmission             grid interconnections
  infrastructure required.      Ÿ Technical adequacy of the
                                   distribution grid including
                                   grid availability.
                                                                 Photo: Sivaram Krishnamoorthy

                                                      37
Benefits of Grid-connected Rooftop Solar PV

Rooftop solar PV systems can be permitted and installed faster than most ground-mounted systems
as interconnection and site eligibility norms for rooftop systems are easier to execute. Not only do
these systems provide a clean, quiet, and visually unobtrusive source of power, they also improve the
reliability of power supply without the need to establish long-distance transmission lines associated
with large-scale solar generation plants. As illustrated in the section Rooftop Solar Market
Development Phases, several European nations, Germany in particular, have moved away from
large-scale ground-mounted PV plants that need large land masses to distributed rooftop solar PV
installations.


Value Creation from Under-utilized Rooftops

Rooftop solar PV systems on unused rooftops can lead to potential savings and generate income.
In some models, third-party developers lease roof surfaces from building owners, which provides
long-term rental income. Internationally, third-party developers provide rooftop owners an opportunity
to monetize unutilized roofs, without making upfront investments. A recent study in Massachusetts
shows that a homeowner installing an average-sized residential rooftop solar PV system (say 6
kilowatt) could enter into a lease for approximately $75 per month; her/his first year energy cost
saving would be $108. Assuming energy costs and lease amounts increase at 3 percent a year,
over 20 years savings would be $2900. Alternatively, such a system could generate two streams of
revenue for a homeowner: first, cost savings from electricity generation (6,300 kilowatt hours at the
rate of $0.16 per kWh) and second, revenue from sales of solar renewable energy credits (six SRECs
at the rate of $200 per SREC).7




7
    Griffith, A.B., M.Higgins, J.M. Turner. A rooftop revolution? A multidisciplinary analysis of state-level residential solar
    programs in New Jersey and Massachusetts. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences (December 2013).
    10.1007/s13412-013-0156-6

                                                                   38
Savings in Network Losses and Costs of Transmission Infrastructure

The electricity sector in most developing countries is plagued with high transmission and distribution
losses. Distribution losses in India, for instance, range from 15 to 45 percent across utilities in various
states, representing both technical as well as commercial losses.8 Although accurate estimates of
technical losses of most Indian utilities are not available in the public domain, it is commonly
accepted that they range from less than 10 percent in a few efficient urban areas to well above
15 percent elsewhere. Rooftop solar projects have the advantage of supplying energy close to load
centers as opposed to energy from large-scale generators that has to be sent across significant
distances to load centers. Rooftop solar PV systems can significantly benefit distribution systems
with high network losses.


Large-scale ground-mounted solar power plants need significant land resources. As a result, they
are invariably located at a distance from load centers and urban areas. Adequate transmission
infrastructure is needed to connect ground-based solar projects with power grids at extra high voltage
levels, which means augmenting existing infrastructure to deliver power to load centers. Thus, the
tariff difference between rooftop and ground-mounted solar PV projects can be bridged when savings
on transmission and distribution losses and transmission connectivity costs are also added to the
equation.


In India, potential savings by reducing transmission and distribution losses through rooftop solar PV
can vary from Indian rupees 1.24 ($0.02) per kilowatt hour (kWh) to Indian rupees 1.87 ($0.03) per
kWh, depending on the level of losses (figure 11).9 Similarly, potential savings from avoiding
transmission infrastructure - which increases with distance from generating sources to load centers -
can vary from Indian rupees 0.78 (0.01$) per kWh (for 50 km) to Indian rupees 0.88 ($0.014) per kWh
(for 100 km) for an assumed 300 megawatt solar park.




8
    Network loss of utilities in India is typically reported in the form of transmission and distribution loss, which reflects both
    network-related energy losses (owing to factors such as copper loss in power lines, and core losses in transformers) and
    unaccounted leaks due to unauthorized consumption of electricity.
9
    Exchange rate of $1=Indian rupees 60.33 (as on May 2, 2014; Reserve Bank of India)

                                                                  39
This analysis is based on the tariff order issued by the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission
(Order No.1 of 2012, issued on January 27, 2012). The order outlines a tariff differential of Indian
rupees 2.07 ($0.03) per kWh between rooftop solar (Indian rupees 12.44, about $0.20, per kWh) and
large-scale ground-mounted solar plants (India rupees 10.37, about $0.17 per kWh). While savings
from transmission and distribution network losses will depend on the actual losses, this analysis
assumes three scenarios: high, medium, and low. Potential savings accruing from rooftop systems
have been quantified for these three scenarios.


Figure 8 shows that a solar park of 300 megawatt capacity requiring transmission evacuation through
a single-circuit 220 kilovolt line and a 33/220 kilovolt sub-station is comparable to a rooftop solar
system in terms of cost per unit of delivered energy, if transmission charges saved per unit of
generation are taken into account.

Figure 8: Tariff difference between rooftop and ground-mounted solar PV projects

                                    Ground-mounted solar PV           Rooftop solar PV


                                                    10.37 ($0.17)
   Tariff (Rs/kWh)
                                                                                                          12.44 ($0.20)


                                                                       2.07 ($0.03)

                             T&D loss levels (%)                    Avoided costs (Rs/kWh)


                             High         18%                                                      1.87 ($0.03)
       Savings on T&D
  A                       Medium          15%                                             1.56 ($0.025)

                                                                                    1.24 ($0.02)
                             Low          12%

  +
                              Transmission                                 Avoided
                          connectivity distances                        costs (Rs/kWh)
        Savings on
        transmission                Km     100                                  0.88 ($0.014)
        connectivity costs
  B     for 300 MW solar
                                    Km     75                             0.83 ($0.013)
        park losses when
        using rooftop
                                    Km     50                       0.78 ($0.012)
        solar PV



Source: Based on 2012 GERC tariff order




                                                         40
In Germany, the costs of rooftop PV systems fell to $2.20 per watt by mid-2012 from approximately
$6.50 per watt in 2007. PV system costs declined so rapidly that previous projections of cost
reductions became obsolete in a very short time. Industry projections from the European Photovoltaic
Industry Association in 2012 suggest a slowdown in cost reductions of PV systems, with residential
rooftop systems in the most competitive European markets falling to $1.80-2.40 per watt by 2020.10
FIT for small-scale rooftop systems in Germany has declined from $0.26 per kilowatt hour in 2012
to $0.18 per kilowatt hour by December 2013.


Enhancing Supply Reliability and Supporting Energy Efficiency

Electricity shortfalls, especially in developing countries, result in poor supply, both in terms of quantity
and quality, jeopardizing economic growth and livelihood. Inadequate investment in distribution
network infrastructure, even in urban areas, adds to the problem. In 2011-2012, the Central Electricity
Authority of India estimated that India had an energy deficit of 10.2 percent. Bangladesh fared much
worse, suffering from a peak deficit of 37 percent in 2009-2010 (Ministry of Power, Energy, and
Mineral Resources). Rooftop solar power systems offer a long-term solution to meet peak loads in
great measure. The European Photovoltaic Industry Association estimates that 40 percent of the EU’s
total electricity demand by 2020 could be met by rooftop PV (Prayas Energy Group11). Incorporating
rooftop solar systems should play a critical role in the design and development of buildings,
particularly green buildings where energy conservation measures are an integral part of the design
aimed to reduce overall energy consumption.




10
     IEA-ETSAP and IRENA 2013, Solar Photovoltaics Technology Brief, E11 - January 2013 (available at
     http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA-ETSAP%20T     ech%20Brief%20E11%20Solar%20PV.pdf)
11
     Solar Rooftop PV in India, Prayas Policy Discussion Paper, November 2012

                                                             41
Ease of Development (Permits, Site Selection, and Clearances)

Large projects face significant hurdles and delays due to land acquisition and clearances and
approvals from various authorities. In India, for example, several authorities, from the village level
to the departments of rural development and revenue at the state level, need to be consulted for
land-related approvals such as change in land use and ground water extraction where applicable.
Sanctions are also required for power for construction from the local distribution utility and
infrastructure for grid-interconnections.


In comparison, rooftop solar PV projects require relatively few clearances; projects are usually
permitted through automatic standard provisions in most countries. Site selection and related
clearances under building by-laws can also be standard rather than project-specific. Most clearances
required for rooftop solar projects pertain to structural and fire safety, pollution control, and electrical
safety. Clearly, rooftop solar projects are easier to permit and simpler to develop.


Quality assessments along the project life cycle are a critical element for successful commissioning
and operations of any system. In the Indian context, the Deutsche Gesellschaftfür Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH and the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India,
have developed a web database that provides support to all stakeholders involved in solar projects
by explaining necessary administrative/legal formalities and regulatory framework, from
conceptualization to commissioning (http://www.solarguidelines.in/).


Ability to Self-replicate

A key attribute of rooftop solar PV initiatives is that successful projects can easily be replicated on
a large scale, provided policy, regulations, financing, and technical conditions make it feasible for
rooftop owners to opt for such systems on their own. Rooftop solar PV systems are modular,
relatively easy to install, and require low maintenance. Individual rooftop owners, residential or
commercial, can easily deploy systems of all sizes, making its propagation broad-based and fast.
It does not depend on a few limited large developers. This is the reason why they have become so
popular in countries such as Germany, Japan, Spain, and the U.S.




                                                      42
Key Challenges in Development of Rooftop Solar PV Projects

Rooftop solar, like any new sector, experiences teething challenges. This was the case in Germany,
which faced issues at every stage of the sector’s growth. A key barrier in most developing markets is
the absence of clear capacity targets for grid-connected rooftop solar PV development. In India for
instance, while the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission12 provides an enabling framework, a
definite roadmap has not yet been outlined, creating substantial ambiguity in implementation. The
following section discusses some key challenges in emerging markets.


Capital Cost Differences between Ground-mounted and Rooftop Solar PV Plants

The capital costs per megawatt of rooftop solar PV systems are approximately 20 percent higher than
that of large-scale PV systems. This is due to higher installation costs, small-sized components, lower
economies of scale, and a smaller base on which to spread fixed costs. This is because rooftop solar
PV projects consist of a number of small solar energy systems scattered across a number of rooftops.
On the other hand, large ground-based solar plants typically use fewer but large-sized components,
reducing the total project costs.


The cost of leasing rooftops, including developmental charges, or the opportunity costs in case of
self-owned rooftops in urban areas, is higher than the annualized value of land costs. To address
this issue, some state electricity regulators in India have provisioned higher tariffs for rooftop solar
projects compared to large-scale ground-mounted projects. As demonstrated above, the tariff
difference between rooftop and ground-mounted projects evens out if potential savings on
transmission and distribution losses, and transmission connectivity costs, are taken into account.




12
     Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM), also known as the National Solar Mission, is a major initiative by the
     Government of India and state governments to promote ecologically sustainable growth while addressing India’s energy
     security challenges. It was launched in January 2010 and has set an ambitious target of deploying 20,000 megawatt of
     grid connected solar power by 2022. It aims at reducing the cost of solar power generation in the country through (i) long-
     term policy; (ii) large-scale deployment goals; (iii) aggressive research and development; and (iv) domestic production of
     critical raw materials, components, and products, and achieve grid tariff parity by 2022.

                                                                43
Regulatory Framework

Government policies and incentives are vital to facilitate implementation of rooftop solar PV in any
jurisdiction. Favorable policies and regulatory environments are critical precursors to the development
of vibrant solar rooftop markets, even with dramatically reduced technology costs.


A key factor to ensure financial sustainability of the sector is determining tariffs for the rooftop solar
segment by regulators, which is different from ground-mounted large-scale solar projects. Given the
cost differences between the two, separate tariffs for rooftop projects are required for gross-metered
systems. For example, many states in India do not have separate tariffs for rooftop projects, and
therefore failed to create the right incentive structure for the market to develop. However, some
states have determined separate tariffs for this segment (Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Karnataka
among others).


Several measures must be taken to create a strong framework conducive for rooftop solar PV
projects. These are

Ÿ Metering arrangement: The type of metering arrangement for energy accounting, whether it is

      single meter or dual meter, needs to be defined under FIT and net-metering schemes respectively.


Ÿ Net metering: Rooftop owners consume electricity generated from net-metered rooftop PV

      systems, and use the grid to store excess power. These installations should not be treated as
      captive generation in the strict sense. In India, if a project is developed by a third party, it does not
      qualify as captive generation13 under the Electricity Act 2003. It is treated as ‘open-access’ power
      transmission, attracting wheeling and cross-subsidy surcharges (box 2). ‘Open access’ and the
      consequent cross-subsidy charges should be waived to make third-party ownership models viable.




13
     Captive generation under the Electricity Rules, 2005, require the captive user to own at the least 26 percent of the equity
     in the captive generating plant and to consume at least 51 percent of the electricity output, determined on an annual basis.
     Captive users are exempt from payment of cross-subsidy surcharges.

                                                                44
Box 2: Provisions in the Indian regulatory framework for open access and their impact on development
of solar rooftop PV projects


  Ÿ Third-party-owned solar rooftop PV projects generate electricity for captive use and provide electricity to

     the grid. Under the Indian legal/regulatory framework (Electricity Act, 2003), a project of this kind may
     either be a captive plant or an ‘open access’ project that utilizes the transmission/distribution network of
     a licensee to provide energy to its consumer(s). According to the Electricity Act, 2003, a captive project
     should have at least 26 percent owner equity and 51 percent of the energy must be captive
     consumption. Solar rooftop PV projects may not meet both conditions simultaneously all the time and,
     therefore, these projects would fall under the category of ‘open access’ projects.


  Ÿ All intra-state ‘open access’ projects in India are saddled with wheeling and cross subsidy surcharges.

     This is because general intra-state ‘open access’ consumers utilize electricity lines of the distribution
     licensee. Since solar rooftop PV projects do not do so, imposing those charges on such projects is
     regressive.




Ÿ Interconnectivity: The point of interconnection needs to be defined for kilowatt-scale projects at

   different voltage levels. This is critical to maintain grid safety. Connecting various small generation
   projects without specified interconnection standards to the grid is a threat to the safety of the grid
   and the overall project. In addition, the sharing of interconnection costs and any associated
   network capacity enhancements needs to be clarified with the local distribution utility.


Interestingly, despite being one of the early leaders in adopting rooftop solar PV systems, the U.S.
continues to allocate resources to tackle regulatory barriers hindering the growth of this market
segment. The United States Department of Energy has identified barriers that still constrain the
development of the rooftop solar market: restrictive interconnection and net metering rules, regulatory
uncertainty regarding PV financing mechanisms, including third-party ownership, community solar,
and property-assessed financing, absence of renewable portfolio standards, and PV siting restrictions
in local codes, ordinances, and covenants. The U.S. Department of Energy through its ‘SunShot
Initiative: Rooftop Solar Challenge’ aims to address these issues and reduce costs of rooftop solar
energy systems through improved permitting, financing, zoning, net metering, and interconnection
processes for residential and small commercial PV installations
(http://www.eere.energy.gov/solarchallenge).




                                                        45
Technical Standards

The technical standards for the specification, installation, and maintenance of rooftop projects must
be clearly defined to ensure installations are of high quality, safe, and reliable. This helps ensure
efficiency and maximizes life of the assets. Technical standards for interconnection equipment are
also essential to ensure reliability and safety of the low-voltage grid. This is of particular concern in
developing countries where availability of the grid at the low-tension level, its monitoring on a real-
time basis, and functioning of the power evacuation facility, all have commercial implications.


With increasing interest in rooftop solar PV projects, the following important operating conditions
have to be carefully considered, and standards and regulations designed to address them.

Ÿ Handling reverse flows on electrical distribution networks


Ÿ Addressing variability in energy production and transients due to partly cloudy weather conditions

      (PV modules respond instantaneously to changes in solar irradiance).


Modern day inverters handle grid interface functions including synchronization, over or under voltage
and over or under frequency-related disconnects, and PV array control function (maximum power
point tracking). It is thus essential to define standards for PV inverters, keeping long-range
penetration scenarios in mind. For example, voltage instability and output fluctuations due to higher
PV penetration can be addressed to an extent by specifying some degree of reactive support by
inverters while maintaining real power service.


This approach has been followed in high PV-penetration markets like Germany, where recent
connection regulations require PV systems connecting to the low-voltage grid to provide ancillary
services support vide mandatory VDE14 4105 code of practice. For this, power electronics and energy
storage capacitors must be suitably oversized to provide reactive production, or inverters must have
absorption features. Common standards should be devised for distributed generators connecting and
operating in parallel with the low voltage grid. For instance in India, the Central Electricity Authority
has powers under section 73 (b) and 73 (c) of the Electricity Act, 2003 to specify technical standards
for construction of power plants and their interconnection with the grid.




14
     VDE-AR-N 4105: Generators connected to the low-voltage distribution network: Technical requirements for the connection
     to and parallel operation with low-voltage distribution networks.

                                                              46
Technical Adequacy of the Distribution Grid

Given the intermittent nature of solar power, the distribution grid’s capacity to absorb this power and
withstand transient and possible reverse flow is critical. As increasing numbers of solar PV systems
get embedded within established networks, issues of technical adequacy will impact the stable
operation of the grid.


Electricity networks are designed to ensure that power flows in only one direction; from the utility
substation to the consumer premises. In case of a reverse power flow, network protectors (like
switch gears and circuit breakers) disconnect the faulty supply feeder, isolating the fault to prevent
equipment damage.


In grid-connected solar PV systems, when a customer’s rooftop installation produces more power
than the customer can use, excess power is fed into the grid causing reverse power flow.
Network protectors get into action, causing equipment wear. A short-term solution to this issue is to
adjust network protector settings to be less sensitive to reverse power flow. However, as more PV
installations start connecting with the grid, utilities will need to monitor, exchange information, and
control network protectors and PV systems. This can be done either through remote adjustable
network protector settings, or by periodic curtailing of solar PV production to reduce reverse power
flow.


California was among the first states in the U.S. to adopt a standard practice to connect distributed
energy resource devices to the power grid. Known as Rule 21, it initially proposed that a project not
exceeding 15 percent of the peak load on the line section15 be fed into the grid through non-
schedulable power sources such as solar. The 15 percent rule was adopted as an approximation of
50 percent of the minimum load on the line section. Some statistical analysis suggested that the
annual minimum load on a line section is approximately 30 percent of the annual peak load. A load
flow study would have to be conducted for every connection above that capacity.




15
     15A line section is the next size down from the circuit level, which itself is the next structure down from the sub-station
     level.

                                                                  47
The Federal Energy Regulation Commission of the U.S. recently adopted this rule for the entire
nation. However, the commission changed the 50 percent minimum load rule to 100 percent, which
effectively doubles the size of projects eligible for fast tracking. This means the U.S. has pre-defined
interconnection regulations/standards for distributed generation systems with capacities up to 30
percent of peak load on a line section (low tension level). For any capacity above that, load-flow
studies and case-specific arrangements can be made.16


California Public Utilities Code, Section 2827(c) (1) limits net metering-based projects to 5 percent of
the utility’s “aggregate customer peak demand.” This means that if the sum of individual customer
peak demand is 1000 megawatt, the maximum net metering-based projects that can be connected
to the utility’s network is 5 megawatt.


As grid penetration increases at low voltage levels, power flows could reverse towards distribution
sub-stations and result in increased voltage levels. In such situations, capacitor banks and voltage
reactors in particular can boost voltage above standard limits. Beyond certain levels of penetration,
strengthening networks is essential to accommodate additional PV projects. Hence, current flows
need to be monitored (load flow analysis) at each level of penetration and networks upgraded as
needed. Upgrades may range from installing automatic tap-changing transformers to changing feeder
architecture from radial to loop or mesh, to increasing diversity of load and reducing variations.


Looming energy shortages, rising fossil fuel prices, and falling prices of solar PV clearly make the
case for countries to increase the share of solar energy in their generation mix. Within the solar PV
market, the rooftop segment offers several advantages: savings in network losses and transmission
infrastructure costs, ease of development (permits, site selection, and clearances), ability to self-
replicate, enhanced supply reliability, and energy efficiency. There is a clear need and economic
rationale for countries to develop this market segment. However, flexible enabling frameworks that
do not constrain expansion of the private sector and the emergence of innovative and sustainable
business models need to be developed.




16
     https://solarhighpen.energy.gov/article/beyond_15_rule, http://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/ferc-adopts-new-
     california-fast-track-interconnection-rules-nationwide

                                                              48
The next section discusses in detail possible business models for the sector, some of which have
already been tested and adopted by markets around the world.




Photo: Anjali Garg




                                                 49
ROOFTOP SOLAR PV -
IMPLEMENTATION MODELS



The different approaches to support the emergence of
rooftop solar PV installations around the world can be
broadly split into two, based on the type of ownership:
utility-driven models and customer-driven models. Local
legislative frameworks, regulations, and natural market
maturation also has led to the development of hybrid and
innovative models making greater use of intermediaries.


Figure 9 highlights the typical implementation models in
rooftop solar PV project development, classified on the
basis of ownership of the solar systems.




                                                           Photo: Sivaram Krishnamoorthy

                                                   51
Figure 9: Implementation models for solar rooftop projects

                         Utility-driven                                                  Customer-driven
                        Implementation                                                   Implementation




 Utility-owned on own/               Third-party or                  Third-party-owned (California        Self-owned
 customer premises                   customer-owned                  and New Jersey in the U.S. and       (Germany,
 (San Diego Gas & Electric;          (Sacramento Municipal           Gandhinagar in Gujarat, India)       India, Japan)
 Tata Power, Delhi)                  Utility District)




Utility-driven Implementation Models

Here, the utility’s involvement is in the form of direct ownership, participation, or financing of solar
rooftop projects. The energy generated can be fed directly into the grid or consumed by the rooftop
owner on-site, with or without provision for surplus generation to be exchanged with the grid.
Table 4 provides a few examples of utility-based ownership models.

Table 4: Examples of utility-based ownership models


  Utility                     Description


  San Diego Gas &             SDG&E installed solar PV systems at customer sites, which are connected to the
  Electric (SDG&E)            utility side of the meter and the electricity flowing directly into the grid. There is no
                              net metering and no effect on the customer’s electricity bill. The building owner can
                              obtain credits towards the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
                              Program and points for the Collaborative for High Performance Schools program.

  Sacramento                  SMUD launched one of the first “community solar” programs in the U.S. SMUD’s
  Municipal Utility           SolarShares program allows customers to sign up for “shares” in a larger, offsite
  District (SMUD)             solar power system, and receive credits on their bills commensurate with their
                              “portion” of the larger system.




Utility-based implementation models gain prominence when utilities start viewing decentralized
rooftop solar generation as potential competition. Utilities can build on existing relationships with
consumers to play an active role in solar generation and supply. Given their access, scale, size, and
industry knowledge, utilities are in a significantly advantageous position to play a role in the lifecycle
of designing, financing, developing, and maintaining such projects.



                                                             52
Customer-driven Implementation Models

Customer-driven implementation models have led the accelerated development of rooftop solar PV
projects in countries such as Germany, Japan, and the U.S. In this model, grid connected and/or off-
grid projects are owned either directly by the consumer or by a third-party player utilizing the
consumer’s premises. These models can apply to all consumer categories (domestic, commercial,
industrial, and institutional). They are largely dependent on supporting instruments such as capital
subsidy, renewable purchase obligation, FIT, and tax incentives to increase their financial
sustainability and achieve desired penetration level in the long term. The model has been
implemented in India in the off-grid and captive power categories. It can be applied in the distributed
rooftop models based on gross or net metering alike. Figure 10 presents several sub-models, based
on how the power generated is consumed, that is, either within the premises where it is produced,
or fed into the grid. Each sub-model is explained in detail in the following section.

Figure 10: Customer-driven implementation models for rooftop solar PV projects
ownership




                         Self-owned                                        Third-party-owned
 Project
metering
Type of




                         Grid feed      Grid feed                                Grid feed           Grid feed
            No grid         Net          Gross            No grid                   Net               Gross
             feed        metering       metering           feed                  metering            metering
Type of
rooftop




                                                        Large
            Individual    Individual    Individual                  Individual   Combined    Individual   Combined
                                                      Individual


                         Japanese       German       SunEdison California                    Standalone Pilot project
                           rooftop       rooftop      Walmart    rooftop
Examples




                                                                                               captive     under
                          solar PV      solar PV       rooftop  solar PV                       rooftop Gandhinagar
                             net         feed-in      solar PV   leased                       solar PV    Rooftop
                         metering          tariff      project systems for                    systems    Program
                            model         model                residences




                                                     53
Sub-model 1: Self-owned rooftop solar PV installations: Captive generation and consumption
(no grid feed)

Ÿ Description: In this sub-model (figure 11), the rooftop owner consumes all power generated from

      the rooftop. This system is connected to the household through specialized grid-interactive
      inverters and is not designed to feed any energy into the grid. The rooftop system owner may
      continue to buy electricity from the grid and is billed by the utility.


Ÿ Applicability/key consumer segments: Since these systems are for captive use, they find

      applicability across several consumer segments, both in rural and urban areas, depending on the
      financial and operational attractiveness vis-à-vis the alternative it seeks to replace. It is particularly
      attractive in situations where it seeks to abate expensive fossil fuel-based generation. Examples
      of this model exist across several public buildings in India, where rooftop solar projects were
      deployed under the solar cities program of the government of India. Several private corporations17
      have also deployed such projects in India. Some rural institutions18 have opted for this in areas
      where grid power is erratic.


Ÿ Pros and cons: The key benefit of this scheme is that rooftop owners can use solar power for

      specific loads, improving the reliability of power supply for these loads. However, in the absence
      of grid feed, excess solar generation has to be curtailed or costly energy storage sub-systems
      such as batteries and charge controllers have to be installed to optimize output. The model has a
      limited role to play in proliferation of rooftop systems. Most deployments have been in a regime
      where there are no enabling policies, regulations or grid standards to facilitate grid feed or areas
      with poor grid availability.


Ÿ Tariff methodology, financial incentives, and regulatory regime: This sub-model is usually

      prevalent in a regime where adequate regulations have not been developed around grid
      connectivity of rooftop systems. There is no exchange of electricity with the grid and no tariffs to be
      paid by the utility. Consumers opt for systems after comparing life cycle (or levelized) costs of solar
      energy with energy that consumers normally depend on. Governments in many countries do make
      provisions for capital subsidies for such systems, which improves their economic viability for
      consumers.


17
     SunEdison has installed such a project on the Standard Chartered Bank’s captive BPO office building in Chennai,
     Tamil Nadu, India.
18
     Teacher training institutes in Bihar are considering rooftop solar deployment to avoid diesel generating sets.

                                                                 54
Figure 11: Self-owned rooftop solar PV installations: Captive generation and consumption
(no grid feed)


                                                                      Diesel generator

                                  Rooftop solar PV system           Consumer meter measures the energy
                                                                    imported by the consumer, which is
                                                                    billed by the utility according to the tariff
                                                                    category




                                  Grid-interactive inverter               Consumer meter


       Battery                                                When grid is available, the grid
                                                              interactive inverter ensures that solar
The battery charges during                                    and grid power is combined to meet
low demand periods and                                        the energy requirements of the
discharges during grid                                        rooftop owner. This reduces the grid-
outage and high demand               Rooftop owner’s          based electricity use and hence the
periods                               premises load           utility bill
                                  (captive consumption)

                                                                                                           Grid



Sub-model 2: Self-owned rooftop solar PV installations: Captive generation and consumption,
with excess power fed into the grid (net metering)

Ÿ Description: In this sub-model (figure 12), the rooftop owner is also a grid consumer and invests

   capital to install the rooftop solar PV system, either independently or through a third-party
   supplier/financier. Energy generated by the system is first used to service captive loads within the
   consumer premises. Power in excess of the owner’s consumption is fed into the grid through a
   bi-directional meter (net meter). The positive net generation received by the grid is then credited
   to the owner’s account and adjusted against consumption from the grid over a defined settlement
   period. In effect, solar energy from the rooftop system displaces the consumer’s consumption from
   the grid over a settlement period and is compensated by the retail tariff applicable to the specific
   consumer. Net metering examples across the world have variations. In most cases, generation in
   excess of consumption is capped and excess injection is not compensated. In some cases a
   carryover to the next settlement period is allowed, or a specific tariff is paid for excess generation
   if permitted by regulations.




                                                       55
Ÿ Applicability/key consumer segments: Viability of net metering is linked to retail tariffs

   applicable to consumers. Thus, it is attractive to consumers who pay higher retail tariffs. For
   instance, in India, tariffs for commercial and industrial consumer segments in most states cross-
   subsidize other consumer segments such as domestic and agricultural consumers. A net metering
   system is therefore attractive to commercial and industrial consumers in India, even with minimal
   or no fiscal incentives from the government. In Japan, the relatively higher retail tariffs for
   household consumers combined with capital subsidy make such systems attractive to home-
   owners.


Ÿ Pros and cons: This sub-model allows development of solar energy projects without additionally

   burdening other consumers of the utility. Since generation from net-metering-based projects is
   effectively compensated at prevailing retail tariffs, implications for the utility are to the extent of a
   reduction in consumption from the grid. It is not in the nature of absorbing costlier generation, as
   is the case in the system based on FIT. However, with a spurt in penetration of such systems over
   the years, utilities in developed countries have become increasingly vocal about charging the full
   cost of services extended to such consumers. This includes the cost of being the supplier of last
   resort, “banking” of electricity with the grid, and technical and commercial implications of absorbing
   variable electricity from rooftop solar systems.


Ÿ Tariff methodology, financial incentives and regulatory regime: For this sub-model to work,

   clear permitting provisions need to be prescribed to allow rooftop solar PV systems to interconnect
   with the distribution grid through a metering scheme including a net meter.


Net metering projects with upfront capital subsidy or tax rebates have their economics linked to
current and future retail tariffs, which are beyond the control of the rooftop solar PV developer. This
introduces an element of uncertainty. This incentive mechanism can have a negative effect on the
developer’s behavior, who may be driven primarily by large upfront subsidies, resulting in poor
maintenance and sub-optimal efficiency during the life of the assets. As an alternative to the capital
subsidy, generation-based incentives for the developer will reduce uncertainties associated with
rooftop projects. This incentive is in addition to applicable retail tariffs.


Since net generation is to be credited to consumer accounts, fiscal incentives are required to bridge
the difference between the higher cost of solar generation and retail tariffs. Different incentives have
been tried out across the globe for net-metering schemes. Japan’s net metering scheme worked with
a capital subsidy while in the case of the U.S., tax rebates are the primary incentive mechanism for
rooftop developers.
                                                       56
Figure 12: Self-owned rooftop solar PV installations: Captive generation and consumption, with
excess power fed into the grid (net metering)


                                                    Rooftop owner’s
                                                      captive load


                                                Flow of
                                                energy from                                 Infusion of excess
                        Returns (savings        rooftop                 Flow of energy      energy from the
                        in electricity bills,   solar PV                from grid           rooftop solar PV
                        capital                 system                                      system to the grid
                        subsidies/rebates
                        and tax incentives)
   Rooftop owner                                    Rooftop solar PV
                                                        project                     Net meter               Grid
    and investor
                             Investment
                            (Capital cost)
                   Debt
Debt            repayment
                                        Payments:
                                        capital cost,          Project design and construction
                                        operations and         Operation and maintenance
       Debt financing                   maintenance
                                        costs


                                                  Equipment supplier;
                                                      service and
                                                     maintenance




Sub-model 3: Self-owned rooftop solar PV installations: Grid feed (gross-metering)

Ÿ Description: In this sub-model (figure 13), the rooftop owner installs the system, which generates

   and supplies energy entirely into the grid. The system can be supplied and installed by specialized
   intermediaries who provide complete engineering, procurement, and construction services. The
   generator is compensated at a pre-determined FIT approved by the regulator. Countries that have
   adopted gross-metering/FIT models include Germany, Italy, and Spain.


Ÿ Applicability/key consumer segments: With a clear FIT specified, the scheme can be adopted

   by anyone owning a suitable rooftop. In practice, the market gets shaped over time by
   intermediaries, since rooftop owners may have little knowledge or means to develop and finance
   rooftop solar installation and maintenance.




                                                          57
Ÿ Pros and cons: The primary benefit of this sub-model is that project economics and commercial

   mechanisms can be worked out with certainty for investors. Intermediaries or third-party marketers
   can play a more active role in this sub-model as the primary customer is the utility and tariff
   payments can be securitized, offering opportunities for intermediaries to innovate on supply,
   financing, development and maintenance of solar systems for home- owners. The primary criticism
   of a gross-metering-based approach is that it does not offer any opportunity for rooftop owners to
   use the solar power produced for their own use thereby losing opportunities to reduce grid costs.
   Also, as the FIT gets compared with wholesale electricity prices, which are much lower than
   average retail tariffs, gross-metering-based systems take longer to achieve grid parity and thus
   require longer periods of financial support from the government.


Ÿ Tariff methodology, financial incentives, and regulatory regime: Permit provisions for gross-

   metering have to be specified by the regulator with a clear, well-differentiated FIT for gross-
   metering-based rooftop solar systems. Rooftop systems do not compare favorably with
   centralized, large-scale projects as the cost of generation is higher, thus requiring rooftop FIT to
   be set up separately from ground-mounted projects. In India, where renewable purchase obligation
   and FIT are applied concurrently to encourage renewable energy projects, gross-metering-based
   rooftop solar projects require a specific renewable purchase obligation along with differentiated
   FIT.


Germany was the first country to try out FIT. It resulted in a significant expansion of the market for
rooftop solar PV projects. Appropriate facilitating interventions by the government helped ensure its
overall success. These included soft loans and investment incentives, fiscal incentive programs, tax
incentives, and export promotion programs (refer section titled, Facilitating Private Sector
Participation in Rooftop Solar PV, for more details). For example, the German Renewable Energy Act,
2000 gave priority to solar for access to the grid (transmission and distribution networks), mandating
grid operators to purchase electricity produced from solar and other renewable energy sources.
Planning and permit procedures for smaller-scale PV installations (≤5 kilowatt) are also fairly simple
under existing regulations. Financing of such projects in Germany has also been possible through the
securitization of the tariff stream.




                                                    58
Figure 13: Self-owned rooftop solar PV installations: Grid feed (gross-metering)


                                        Equity infusion
                                   Rooftop and project owner


  Equipment supplier/s
                                                                 Payment for solar
 Equipment supply contract                                        power fed into
                                                                    grid at FIT
                                      Self-owned rooftop
   EPC contractor                                                                                Utility
                                       solar PV project
                                                                 Grid feed of power
 EPC Contract                                                   generated by rooftop
                                                                  solar PV system
   O&M contractor                                            Debt
                                    Debt                  repayment      Attractive FIT incentivizes
 O&M contract
                                          Debt financing                 investments: There is an
                                       Innovations include               appreciable difference between
                                    retail financing schemes,            the FIT and retail tariffs. FIT is
                                       intermediary-driven               designed to cover higher cost of
                                     non-recourse financing              generation from solar on a cost
                                                                         plus basis




Third-Party-Owned Rooftop Solar PV Installations


Rooftop solar PV systems owned by third parties are widespread in the U.S. In this model, large third-
party developers own solar generation systems installed on public or private rooftops. The third party
can either lease the system to the rooftop owner for her/his own use or generate electricity from the
system and sell it to the grid. Third-party developers are typically specialized solar industry players
with better understanding of solar PV systems. They can access specialized financing at lower costs,
better manage technical risks, and make use of economies of scale to take advantage of government
incentives more efficiently. Third-party developers typically manage all aspects related to installation
of the systems, and are responsible for their ownership, long-term operation, and maintenance.


The rooftop owner’s involvement is limited to providing roof space and, in some cases, purchasing
some or all of the electricity generated from the system.


Since such projects involve large third parties, financing is not a significant concern. Large and
established intermediaries are better able to tap into the benefits of incentives and tax credits offered
by the government and finance the balance capital costs through a blend of equity and debt. The third
party then supplies solar energy at a rate below the retail tariff under a power purchase agreement.
                                                     59
Sub-model 4: Third-party-owned, large individual rooftops, no grid feed


Ÿ Description: This sub-model (figure 14) is prevalent mostly in the U.S. Here, the rooftop owner

  enters into an agreement with a third-party project developer on a build-own-operate model. The
  developer sells the electricity generated to the rooftop owner at a fixed price under a long-term
  power purchase agreement. Rooftop owners, thus, avoid the large upfront costs of solar
  development while procuring clean green energy at a levelized tariff over the long term. A well-
  known example of this model is SunEdison LLC’s agreement to supply power to Wal-Mart Stores
  using the company’s rooftops at several locations. Under the agreement with Wal-Mart, SunEdison
  finances, owns, builds and operates the solar energy systems. The solar energy systems are
  leased out to the retailer under a power purchase agreement (at a pre-specified tariff) which
  generally requires no capital outlays from the retailer. Wal-Mart wishes to utilize 100 percent green
  energy for its retail stores. It also gains by paying lower tariffs for its power.


Ÿ Applicability/key consumer segments: This is primarily applicable to large commercial/

  institutional consumers with adequate rooftop space. Time-of-use tariffs can make this sub-model
  particularly attractive to consumers if peak tariffs and consumer loads tend to coincide with solar
  generation hours.


Ÿ Pros and cons: The primary benefit of this sub-model is that it offers the opportunity to rooftop

  owners to lower electricity costs. This sub-model is quite successful in markets which have high
  electricity tariffs and where ‘time-of-use tariffs’ makes it even more expensive during peak hours,
  which coincide with solar generation hours.


Ÿ Tariff methodology, financial incentives, and regulatory regime: These implementation

  models require regulatory permissions for third-party owners to claim available fiscal incentives
  (for example, tax credits in the U.S.) for rooftop solar projects operating without interacting with the
  grid. Under existing laws in India, for such a sub-model to work, either the consumer would need
  to be large enough (connected load in excess of one megawatt or any lower value permitted by
  the appropriate regulator from time to time), or own the system to qualify as a captive consumer.




                                                     60
Figure 14: Third-party-owned large individual rooftops without grid feed


 Investors have no role in project installation and operation                        The rooftop owners enter
                                                                                     into a power purchase
                                                                                     agreement with third-party
                                                                                     rooftop solar PV project to
                                                                                     get power at a mutually
                                                                                     agreed upon rate
                        Investment                               Supply power
                       (capital cost)                             generated
     Project                                     Rooftop                                Solar power consumer
 investor/owners                             solar PV project                             and rooftop owner
                                                                  Payment as
                         Returns
                                                                 per tariff in the
                     (power purchase
                                                                power purchase
                    earnings, rebates,                                               Target audience is
                                                                  agreement
                    and tax incentives)                                              buildings with large
                                                       Project development,          rooftops. Projects
                                                       operation and                 developed on large
   Development fee,                                    maintenance including         rooftops owned by mid
   monitoring and                                      executing PPA and             to large organizations
   servicing fee                                       bringing in investors

                                               Third-party
                                                developer,
                                              integrator and
                                                 operator




Sub-model 5: Third-party-owned, combined rooftop lease with grid feed (gross-metering)

Ÿ Description: In this sub-model (figure 15), the developer implements the project by aggregating

   and leasing out several individual rooftops to reach an acceptable project size. This model lends
   itself well to be developed as public-private partnerships (PPP), undertaken by large and
   experienced developers. Energy generated from these projects is fed entirely into the grid. The
   project developer makes the entire upfront investment to set up the systems, and is compensated
   at pre-determined tariffs approved by the regulator or as per the PPP contract. The supply of
   rooftops is a mix of those identified and provided by the public authorities and private rooftops that
   the project developer has to identify and lease from rooftop owners. Typically, these contracts are
   for 25 years. Rooftop owners who lease out rooftops are compensated through rents, which can
   be fixed per month or incentive linked to generation from the system.

Ÿ Applicability/key consumer segments: This sub-model can be implemented across all

   categories of consumers although developers would prefer to lease out large rooftops to save
   on transaction costs associated with dealing with a large number of small rooftop owners.


                                                        61
Ÿ Pros and cons: The primary benefit of this sub-model is that it leverages the technical skills and

  experience of large and reputable developers. Their involvement demonstrates technical feasibility
  and financial viability of such projects. If the government is willing to offer its own rooftops, large-
  scale rooftop solar projects (for an entire city for instance) can be successfully structured as a
  public-private partnership. This will help establish policy, regulations, and technical standards that
  will encourage a rapid proliferation phase. This sub-model works best in the early stages of rooftop
  development and should ideally jump-start a self-replication phase.

Ÿ Tariff methodology, financial incentives, and regulatory regime: Very often policies,

  regulations, and standards are not fully developed when these projects are conceived. The
  primary objective of furthering such projects is that enabling frameworks get established with
  support from government, regulators, and utilities.

Figure 15: Third-party-owned, combined rooftop lease with grid feed (gross-metering) under a
public-private partnership contractual relationship


 Project developers submit a                                                            Developer enters into a
 financial bid for as the outcome of                   State                            project implementation
 a transparent competitive tender                   government                          agreement with the state
 process (the bid tariff)                                                               government under which
                                                                                        the government pays the
                                                               Generation-based         developer a generation-
                             Project implementation                                     based incentive equal to
                                                               incentive (bid tariff
                                   agreement                                            the difference between the
                                                                   less FIT)
                                                                                        bid tariff and the retail tariff
                             Investment                                       Supply of
                            (capital cost)                                 power generated
                                                   Solar rooftop/s
        Project                                      for project                                       Utility
      developer/s
                                                    installation          Revenue from
                          Returns – Profits
                                                                        power sales at bid
                                                                            price/unit

 Combined rooftop lease                Lease of rooftop        Incentive linked
 with gross-metering under                  area                to generation
 PPP: A project development
                                                                                       Although the installation is
 and support unit undertakes                     Supply of rooftops                    owned by a third party,
 the preliminary identification
                                                                                       the rooftop owner is
 of sites, technical,
                                                                                       incentivized through the
 commercial and regulatory                    Public             Private               generation-linked payment
 assessments, from which the
                                                                                       for the lease of the roof
 optimal transaction structure
 is established, followed by           Buildings identified include government
 the tender process                    owned buildings and private rooftops
                                       given out on a long-term lease




                                                          62
Sub-model 6: Third-party-owned captive generation and consumption, with excess power fed
into the grid (net metering)

Ÿ Description: In this sub-model (figure 16), the rooftop owner leases out the rooftop to a third-party

  investor who invests capital to install and operate the rooftop solar PV system, either
  independently or through a third-party supplier/financier. The energy flow in this model is similar to
  sub-model 2 (under self-owned net metering) where the energy generated by the system is first
  used to service captive loads within the consumer’s premises. Excess power is fed into the grid
  through a bi-directional meter (net meter). The positive net generation received by the grid is
  credited to the owner’s account and adjusted against consumption from the grid over a defined
  settlement period. The rooftop owner benefits from savings in electricity bills while the third-party
  investor is paid by the rooftop owner (either through a lease agreement and/or through a power-
  purchase agreement). In the absence of grid parity, the third party also benefits from financial
  incentives such as capital subsidies or generation-based incentive schemes, renewable energy
  certificates, and/or special tax incentive schemes allowed by governments.

Ÿ Applicability/key consumer segments: The viability of this sub-model is similar to sub-model 2

  and is linked to retail tariffs applicable to the rooftop owner/consumer. It is more attractive to those
  consumers who pay higher retail tariffs. In India, this model would be good for commercial and
  industrial consumer segments where tariffs are high when compared to costs of generating solar
  energy, with minimal or no fiscal incentives from the government. However, for other consumer
  segments such as residential and agricultural, incentives like capital subsidy, generation-based
  incentive, tax incentives or other financial incentives are necessary to attract third-party investors.

Ÿ Pros and cons: The primary benefit of this sub-model is the leveraging of technical skills and

  experience of large and reputable developers to implement and operate rooftop solar PV projects.
  The large-scale development by private developers contributes to demonstration of technical
  feasibility, economies of scale, and financial viability. If the government is willing to offer its own
  rooftops, large-scale rooftop solar projects (for an entire city for instance) can be successfully
  structured as a public-private partnership. Such structures help establish polices, regulations,
  and technical standards that encourage a rapid proliferation phase. Pilot projects will lead to
  establishing clear permit provisions that will allow rooftop solar PV systems to interconnect and
  operate with the distribution grid. It will also establish metering schemes including a net meter.
  However, for the automatic rollout of this sub-model in consumer categories where the tariffs are

                                                    63
   low, other financial incentives need to be offered so as to make a business case for third-party
   developers. Savings for rooftop owners through lease agreements or power-purchase agreements
   may not be sufficient to generate enough returns for private investors.

Ÿ Tariff methodology, financial incentives, and regulatory regime: Very often policies,

   regulations and standards are not fully developed or not developed at all when such projects are
   conceived. The primary objective of furthering such projects is to establish frameworks with
   support from the government, regulators, and the utilities. Once established, these frameworks
   can propel rooftop solar development towards a self-replicating phase.

Figure 16: Captive generation and consumption, with excess power fed into the grid (net metering),
possible public-private partnership contractual relationship

      Returns (savings in
      electricity bills)                  Rooftop owners
      or other benefits                    captive load
      (absence of grid parity)

                                                                Energy          Infusion of excess
                                  Flow of energy
                                                             consumption        energy from the
                                   from rooftop
                                                               from grid        rooftop solar PV
                                 solar PV system
                                                                                system to the grid

    Rooftop owner(s)

                                         Rooftop solar PV
                                            project(s)                     Net meter                  Grid
  Lease           Lease
agreement        payments                                              Net-metering
                                                                        regulations
                                      Capital
                                    investment
   Third-party investor

                                                                                   Project design
   Debt             Debt                                                           and construction
drawdown         repayment                                                         Operation and
                                                                                   maintenance


                                        Financial incentives                               Equipment supplier;
      Debt financing                      (capital subsidy/                                    service and
                                        GBI/tax incentives)
                                                                   EPC payments,              maintenance
                                                                   operations and
                                                                   maintenance costs




                                                        64
Evolution of Models

The exploration of this new market segment generally starts with customer-driven models. Utilities
are generally passive actors, with roles limited to providing net metering and roll out of standardized
and simplified interconnection schemes mandated by regulatory requirements. Utilities have no role
in system operations in these first-generation models. However, with growing solar PV market
penetration, the scale of solar energy generated has an impact on grid operations, grid planning,
and utility profitability. This has led utilities to increase their participation in customer-based projects
through third-party providers of turnkey contracts or specialized services. This transition to second
generation models is highlighted in figure 17. Large markets for decentralized solar project
developments include Australia, Germany, Japan, and the U.S. Of these, the U.S. is the most active
in developing all three options. This is because tax rebates and incentives available in the country
encourage third-party players to enter the market.


Ultimately, the market model reaches a fully integrated utility-scale approach, or third-generation
model that is characterized by utilities being in the driving seat and rooftop solar PV installations
becoming a fully integrated part of their businesses. Examples of this are found in Germany , Japan,
and the U.S.

Figure 17: Evolution of decentralized solar PV models


                                               Second generation                 Third generation fully
          First generation
                                              Third-party-owned and              integrated with utility
         User-owned system
                                                     operated                   scale business models

                                              Key characteristics

 Ÿ Pioneering business model             Ÿ Third-party business model       Ÿ Hybrid business models
                                            addresses market barriers          emerging with greater
 Ÿ Focus on direct ownership of                                                variation in ownership,
                                            such as scale, technical
    systems by building/ rooftop                                               control, and operation
                                            expertise, optimization
    owners
                                                                            Ÿ Movement by utilities to
 Ÿ End user is either the user or        Ÿ Third parties install systems
                                                                               capture more value through
    the utility through feed-in tariff      on residential and commercial      involvement like utility’s own
                                            rooftops, earn lease               feed-in tariff, bidding
 Ÿ Institutions limited to                  payments/tariffs from owners       processes
    financing, designing,                   for use of energy generated.
    deploying, and maintaining                                              Ÿ Power fed into the grid where
    systems.                                                                   it becomes a part of the
                                                                               utility’s supply.




                                                        65
A comparative assessment of the applicability of different models in different market conditions is
displayed in table 5.

Table 5: Comparative assessment of the applicability of different models in different market conditions

                                                                           Presence of
                                                    Attractive    High                     Time-of-   Suitability
 Implementation                                                            tax rebates
                     Sub-model        Metering      feed-in       retail                   day        for project
 model                                                                     and incentive
                                                    tariff        tariff                   metering   financing
                                                                           programs

                      Captive
                                      Not
                      with no         mandatory
                      grid feed

                      Grid feed
    Self-owned        (gross          Gross
                      metering)

                      Grid feed
                      (net            Net
                      metering)

                      Large
                      individual
                                      Not
                      rooftops        mandatory
                      with no
                      grid feed

                      Individually-
                      leased
                      systems         Net
   Third-party-       with grid
     owned            feed (net
                      metering)

                      Combined
                      leased
                      rooftops
                      with feed       Gross
                      into the grid
                      (gross
                      metering)


* The type of financing required may vary according to implementation model.




                                                           66
Solar leasing offers creditworthy customers the benefit of rooftop solar PV without incurring the
upfront costs associated with financing, installing, and operating the panels themselves. For solar
leasing schemes to be effective, well-defined standards are needed to evaluate solar systems and
assess their suitability for financing. The evaluation will look into use of certified systems, credible
and pre-approved installers, appropriate insurance, and operations and maintenance packages.


Solar leasing companies, in developed markets such as California, arrange financing by aggregating
large numbers of small projects to attract potential investors (private equity and commercial lenders).
Leasing companies require scale and efficiency to be viable and have historically invested much
more in customer acquisition than traditional installers. It is thus critical for such companies to reduce
costs of acquiring consumers and installing systems through standardized assessing of credit-
worthiness (for example, leasing companies in the U.S. use FICO19 scores to qualify consumers),
using certified systems, pre-approved installers, etc. The role of public finance to jump start lease
financing options is critical and can help scale up programs significantly. Permits, inspection, and
interconnection-related delays, while acting as barriers to leasing companies, are often more
effectively managed by them, as they have more scale, resources, and incentives to manage these
processes compared to individuals.




19
     FICO scores are credit rating scores assigned to individuals by credit rating agencies based on re-payment history . These
     scores are used to assess credit worthiness of individuals seeking financing by lenders and financiers for various forms of
     product financing (for example: car loans, home loans, and credit cards)
                                                                67
THE INDIAN EXPERIENCE WITH
ROOFTOP SOLAR PV
DEVELOPMENT


Indian presence on the global solar energy scene started in
2008 with the launch of the Government of India’s National
Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), which stressed
the need for widespread diffusion of renewable energy
technologies in India with specific focus on solar energy.
India is endowed with rich solar energy resources. Being a
tropical country, it has significant potential for solar power
generation. India receives on an average 4-7kWh/m2 of
solar energy daily with an average of 250-300 sunny days
in a year. Image 1 shows solar radiation levels in different
parts of India. Images 2, 3, and 4 show solar radiation
levels in different parts of Japan, Germany and the U.S.




                                                                 Photo: Sivaram Krishnamoorthy

                                                     69
Image 1: Solar resource map for India




This map was created by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory for the U.S. Department of Energy.



Image 2: Solar resource map for Japan




Courtesy: SolarGIS Global Horizontal Irradiation Map (c) 2014 GeoModel Solar



                                                          70
Image 3: Solar resource map for Germany




Courtesy: SolarGIS Global Horizontal Irradiation Map (c) 2014 GeoModel Solar



Image 4: Solar resource map for the U.S.




Courtesy: SolarGIS Global Horizontal Irradiation Map (c) 2014 GeoModel Solar



                                                          71
Recognizing the wide availability of solar resources in the country and the range of applications
possible, the government of India identified development of solar energy as a thrust area to enhance
India’s energy security and combat climate change. The Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
(JNNSM) was launched under the NAPCC to significantly increase the share of solar energy in India’s
energy mix. Launched in January 2010, it encouraged a number of states, including Gujarat,
Karnataka, and Rajasthan, to develop their own solar energy policies. Today, JNNSM and the
Gujarat state solar policy are key initiatives leading the way for solar development in India.


As a result of those policy efforts, India has added over a gigawatt capacity of solar energy in the last
three years and has reached an installed capacity of 2,632 megawatt.20 The government of India
plans to add around 20 gigawatt of solar power generation capacity over the next decade. The draft
guidelines for JNNSM’s second phase sets a target of 1,000 megawatt of rooftop projects both at off-
grid and grid-connected levels during 2013-17. MNRE launched a pilot scheme in 2013 for grid-
connected rooftop PV power projects, which is being implemented by the Solar Energy Corporation
         21
of India. The scheme allows system sizes from 100kW to 500kW and aggregation of capacity from
smaller roofs. Under the scheme, 30 percent of the cost is provided as subsidy and 70 percent is to
be met by the consumer, with surplus solar power to be fed into the grid. India has decided to follow
the dual path approach by provisioning schemes and programs that encourage development of large-
scale grid-connected projects as well as small and medium ground-mounted and rooftop-based
projects. Although national and state policies have successfully kick-started the development of utility-
scale solar power projects in India, the small-scale segment is still in a nascent stage of development.


In 2010, the Gujarat government initiated its rooftop solar program and chose Gandhinagar to be
developed as a model solar power city. To achieve this goal, it decided to promote the development
of distributed rooftop-based solar PV projects, and to start with a pilot project in that city. The state
implemented two pilot projects through a public-private partnership (PPP) route to prove concepts,


20
     Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India, April 2014: State-wise solar installed capacity break-up,
     http://mnre.gov.in/file-manager/UserFiles/workshop-Solar-RPO_RECs-Framework-IE-24042014.htm, accessed on June
     20, 2014
21
     Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) was set up on September 20, 2011, as a not-for-profit company under Section-
     25 of the Companies Act 1956 as an implementation and facilitation institution dedicated to the solar energy sector. SECI
     is established under the administrative control of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy   , Government of India. SECI’s
     mandate allows wide-ranging activities to be undertaken with an overall view to facilitate implementation of JNNSM and
     achieve the targets set therein. The Corporation has the objective of developing solar technologies and ensuring inclusive
     solar power development throughout India.

                                                                72
help firm up policy and regulatory frameworks, and develop a potential developer base. These pilot
PPP projects are envisaged to lead market transformation towards self-replication of rooftop projects
in the city, and beyond. Following its success in Gandhinagar, the Gujarat government is in the
process of scaling up the initiative in five cities across the state, namely, Bhavnagar, Mehsana,
Rajkot, Surat, and Vadodara.


Besides Gujarat, no major grid-connected rooftop solar PV projects of megawatt scale has been
implemented in India, despite provisions being made in states’ tariff orders for rooftop solar systems.
However, a few initiatives have been launched recently in this market. Rooftop solar PV deployment
in India is impacted by the lack of distinct policy and tariff frameworks that address specific
requirements of the sector vis-à-vis large grid-connected MW-scale projects. Solar power is primarily
used to meet renewable purchase obligations of distribution utilities, either through a feed-in tariff or
competitive procurement based on auctions.


International experience indicates that rooftop solar PV installations have played a significant role in
solar capacity development. For example in 2011, 60 percent of all solar generation capacity added in
Germany was through rooftop solar projects. Today, German rooftop solar installations number more
than one million. Likewise in Japan, the solar program has grown primarily through rooftop
installations and more recently by incorporating solar cells into the façades of buildings,
complementing or replacing traditional view or spandrel glass.22 Some of the key factors supporting
the expansion of rooftop solar PV installations are:

Ÿ The sector’s ability to proliferate under conducive policy and enabling regulatory environments

Ÿ The absence of land-related issues

Ÿ The ability of rooftop solar PV projects to feed directly into load centers, thus reducing
      transmission and distribution losses and avoiding costly transmission evacuation infrastructure.


The objective of this section is to trace the path being followed by India to develop its solar market,
with rooftop installations in particular, and highlight potential areas of focus for future development.




22
     Spandrel glass is an architectural material used to cover construction materials, disguise features like arches and columns,
     and present a finished, seamless, and sleek exterior to buildings.

                                                                73
National and State-Level Policies

In India, JNNSM has identified rooftop solar PV as one of the three broad categories of solar projects
to be encouraged. It states as follows.


“The Mission will encourage rooftop solar PV and other small solar power plants, connected to LV/11
KV grid, to replace conventional power and diesel-based generators. Operators of solar PV rooftop
devices will also be eligible to receive the feed-in tariff fixed by the central level regulator, Central
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), both on the solar power consumed by the operator and
the solar power fed into the grid. Utilities will debit or credit the operator for the net saving on
conventional power consumed and the solar power fed into the grid, as applicable. A generation-
based incentive will be payable to the utility to cover the difference between the solar tariff
determined by CERC, less the base price of Indian rupees 5.5023 per kWh with 3 percent p.a.
escalation.”


In June 2010, MNRE launched the ‘Rooftop PV and Small Solar Power Generation Program’
(RPSSGP) to provide incentives for both ground-mounted and rooftop-based solar projects. To date,
all installed capacity under this program has been developed through ground-mounted projects, and
unlike grid-connected large utility-scale projects and small-scale decentralized distributed generation
projects for rural electrification, rooftop solar PV installations have seen only limited development.
With JNNSM identifying rooftop as a separate segment, several states have integrated rooftop solar
PV into their state policy frameworks. This is summarized in table 6.




23
     $0.09

                                                      74
Table 6: Select state rooftop solar policies and targets for rooftop solar power generation


     Parameter          Type                Capacity target          Incentives for rooftop owner                 Metering

     Gujarat            Grid-               5 megawatt in            Incentive linked to rooftop                  Gross
                        connected           Gandhinagar24            solar power generation

     Karnataka          Grid-               250 megawatt             Tariff of Indian rupees 3.40 ($0.06)         Net
                        connected                                    per kilowatt hour
     Tamil Nadu         Grid-               350 megawatt             Generation-based incentive of Indian       Net
                        connected                                    rupees 2 ($0.03) per kilowatt hour for
                                                                     the first two years; Indian rupees 1
                                                                     ($0.02) per kilowatt hour for the next two
                                                                     years and Indian rupees 0.50 ($0.01) per
                                                                     kilowatt hour for subsequent two years
     Andhra             Grid-                           -                                -                        Net
     Pradesh            connected
     Uttarakhand        Grid-               5 megawatt               Feed-in tariff of Indian rupees 9.20         Net
                        connected                                    ($0.15) per kilowatt hour
     Kerala             Grid-               10 megawatt              Indian rupees 93,000 ($1541.52)              Net
                        connected                                    per 1 kW system


Source: Respective state government solar policy documents



Despite significant thrust given to rooftop solar in policy frameworks in Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, and Madhya Pradesh, and successful initiatives in Gujarat, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu,
these policies do not outline a clear roadmap. As a result, there is no detailed implementation
framework, including permit mechanisms, technical codes, and commercial arrangements. India’s
rooftop solar PV potential thus remains largely unexploited due to these deficiencies in the enabling
environment.


The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission issued draft tariff guidelines for rooftop solar PV
plants (projects of capacity of less than 2 megawatt) in June 2010. Several state electricity regulatory
commissions issued orders that put the tariffs for large ground-mounted projects at par with those of
small-scale rooftop solar PV projects. However these uniform tariffs do not adequately reflect the cost
difference between the two types of installations and tariff expectations. State regulators have begun
to acknowledge this difference, and have specified differentiated tariffs accordingly. Table 7
summarizes differentiated tariffs in the three states that have recognized this difference, namely
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra.


24
     Additional 25 megawatt is proposed to be developed under the ongoing replication project covering five cities in Gujarat
     (Bhavnagar, Mehsana, Rajkot, Surat, and Vadodara).

                                                                75
Table 7: FIT framework for ground-based and rooftop-based solar project development
(applicable in fiscal year 2013)


                     Large grid-based          Rooftop solar PV           Large grid-based         Rooftop solar PV
  State              solar PV tariff           tariff                     solar PV tariff          tariff
                     (not availing AD)         (not availing AD)          (availing AD)            (availing AD)

 Gujarat             Indian rupees             Indian rupees              Indian rupees            Indian rupees
                     9.64 ($0.16)              11.57 ($0.19)              8.63 ($0.14)             10.36 ($0.17)

 Madhya              Indian rupees             Indian rupees              Indian rupees            Indian rupees
 Pradesh             15.35 ($0.25)             15.49 ($0.26)              14.38 ($0.24)            14.08 ($0.23)
                     (for plants >                                        (for plants >
                     2 megawatt)                                          2 megawatt )

 Maharashtra         Indian rupees             Indian rupees              Indian rupees            Indian rupees
                     8.98 ($0.15)              9.48 ($0.16)               7.69 ($0.13)             8.19 ($0.14)


*AD - Accelerated Depreciation: The Indian government allows for accelerated depreciation at the rate of 80 percent on a
written-down value basis for various renewable energy items under Section 32, Rule 5 of the Income Tax Act. Accelerated
depreciation is limited to solar and, in some cases, biomass projects across India.

Source: Tariff orders issued by respective state electricity regulatory commissions



Rooftop solar projects in India started as captive projects, most availed capital subsidies from the
government. In almost all cases, solar developers played the role of engineering, procurement, and
construction (EPC) contractors, and still do. However, it did not witness the growth of the ground-
mounted segment. More recently, different models where energy is fed into the grid availing benefits
other than capital subsidies have started to emerge. The rooftop solar program of Gujarat is one
such. Here the concept of "feed-in tariff" based on "gross-metering" as an incentive has been
introduced for the first time in India. The project has shown that the private sector can perform the
long-term role of a developer - in addition to engineering, procurement, and construction roles -
when facilitated with the appropriate framework.


Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Uttarakhand have also drafted state-specific
regulations and guidelines including enabling provisions that encourage the private sector to further
this role. Recently, the Forum of Regulators proposed a draft model regulation on net metering. It
provides for a consumer or a third-party player to develop a rooftop solar project without open access
or wheeling charges. A conducive policy and regulatory framework is therefore emerging, which is
attracting more private players to the market. Many private developers, recognizing the opportunity


                                                             76
to diversify into a profitable business, have increased their participation in rooftop solar projects. The
Solar Energy Corporation of India has invited bids in three phases to develop rooftop solar project
across the country under gross metering or captive schemes. This is attracting the private sector.


Hemant Bhatnagar, Senior Advisor in ComSolar, a project under Indo-German Energy Program of
GIZ, says, “Rooftop solar photovoltaic energy is a promising alternative that addresses the increasing
demand for electricity, while reducing dependence on fossil fuel-based generation. Many countries
across the globe, have formulated encouraging policies to promote rooftop solar markets. Germany is
the leader with approximately 65 percent of capacity implemented on rooftops, followed by Japan and
Italy where new markets for rooftop solar facilities are emerging. Major development in the solar
segment in India was witnessed after the setting up of the National Solar Mission. The government
has successfully concluded phase I of the mission and has started formulating schemes for phase II.


“As expected desired attention has been given to rooftop solar, both in grid-connected and off-grid
segments. A few states, including Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Delhi, have started discussing
the formulation of separate policies to encourage rooftop solar photovoltaic projects in their respective
states. Even the distribution licensee of Madhya Pradesh is encouraging the implementation of rooftop
solar projects to comply with solar purchase obligations. Considering the geographic size of the
country India has huge potential for the implementation of rooftop solar projects if encouraging policies
are appropriately formulated and, more importantly, complied with by stakeholders.”


The proof-of-concept stage is most critical to pave the way to sustainable large-scale development.
For this, India can rely on several demonstration and pilot rooftop solar projects that have, in the last
few years, established technical feasibility for both captive and grid-connected systems with the
participation of private sector players. Table 8 presents projects which contributed to proving
sustainability of the concept. Apart from these, nodal agencies in states such as West Bengal, Punjab,
and Gujarat have successfully deployed captive rooftop solar PV systems on government buildings.




                                                    77
Table 8: Private and public sector rooftop solar PV projects in India

                         Developer or       Power-purchase          Capacity
 Project                                                                          Remarks
                         asset owner        agreement or tariff     in kilowatt

 Rooftop                 New Delhi          Tariff based on the     1000          Grid-connected model
 Solar PV                Power Limited      rooftop solar PV                      with FIT and capital
 Project,                                   policy of Delhi*                      subsidy under solar PV
 New Delhi                                                                        policy of Delhi. Developed
                                                                                  on multiple rooftops

 Thyagaraj               Reliance           Tariff under rooftop    1000          Grid-connected model
 Sports Complex,         Industries Ltd.,   solar PV policy                       with FIT and capital
 Delhi                   RIL Solar Group    of Delhi                              subsidy under solar PV
                                                                                  policy of Delhi

 SunPV                   SunPV Energy       Power purchase          2             Grid-connected net-
 Energy Project,                            agreement with                        metering model with
 Bangalore                                  Bangalore Electricity                 capital subsidy. Per unit
                                            Supply Company                        tariff for surplus power
                                            Limited                               fed to the grid is around
                                                                                  Indian rupees 6 ($0.10)

 Mahindra                Mahindra Solar     Capital subsidy         75            Off-grid system for diesel
 Solar Project,                             under JNNSM                           abatement with capital
 Chennai                                    off-grid scheme                       subsidy under JNNSM
                                                                                  off-grid scheme

 SunEdison-              SunEdison          Power-purchase          100           Off-grid system with
 Standard                                   agreement with                        power-purchase
 Chartered Bank                             building owner                        agreement
 Project, Chennai                                                                 (price confidential)

 Pandit                  Gujarat Energy     Power-purchase          15            On-grid system with
 Deendayal               Research and       agreement with                        power-purchase
 Petroleum               Management         distribution licensee                 agreement with
 University              Institute                                                distribution licensee

* This policy was later scrapped



“Rooftop solar is typically the most straight-forward option for solar. I would suggest that stakeholders
in India approach future solar programs with a clear focus on rooftop solar opportunities,” says Todd
Hranicka, Director, Solar Energy, Public Service Electric & Gas Company, Newark, New Jersey. He
told the authors of this paper, "Rooftop solar was one of the most important components of PSE&G’s
Solar 4 All™ Program, which was approved by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities in 2009. We
currently have 17.3 megawatts-DC of grid- connected solar capacity installed on roofs and another
2.4 megawatts-DC installed on solar canopies throughout our service territory. We also have 20.3
megawatts-DC of grid-connected ground-mounted solar capacity in our fleet. For our Solar Loan
Program, the vast majority of the financing that we provided went towards installing rooftop solar
systems.”

                                                        78
Barriers to Rooftop Solar Development in India

Several barriers constrain the development of rooftop solar projects in India. The first phase of
JNNSM did not result in any rooftop solar project in spite of a separate scheme for small-sized and
rooftop projects. This scheme addressed solar PV projects of a maximum of 2 megawatt on ground
or rooftops. The scheme had a maximum capacity limit of 100 megawatt and around 90 megawatt of
projects was installed. The projects were to be connected at 33 kilovolt and similar tariffs were fixed
for both ground-mounted and rooftop projects. The scheme garnered enthusiastic response in the
ground-mounted segment, but almost none in the rooftop segment. Similarly, while solar tariff orders
in several states provide for grid-connected rooftop projects, not many have been taken up. Since the
same technology and systems are used for both ground-mounted and rooftop projects, the lack of
inclination towards the rooftop projects clearly shows that regulatory and grid interconnection issues
are hindrances to deployment.


Non-recognition of the Capital Cost Difference and hence Lack of Optimized Feed-in Tariff

The JNNSM scheme fixed similar tariffs for both ground-mounted and rooftop projects. The tariffs
were based on notified tariffs of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, valid for that year
(2010-2011). The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission specified tariff was for solar PV
technology, irrespective of mounting system, ground or rooftop. The Gujarat Electricity Regulatory
Commission GERC on the other hand, realistically provided different capital costs and tariffs for
rooftop projects.25 The capital costs for rooftop projects was considered a little higher and led to
higher tariffs for rooftop projects.


Regulatory Uncertainty with Reference to Net Metering

The ambiguous regulatory framework and the absence of technical guidelines to connect small-scale
distributed power generation systems into the grid acted as a barrier to extensive deployment of net
metering systems. The net metering arrangement conflicts with some legal clauses in the Electricity
Act 2003, including regulations on captive generation and consumption, open access, and renewable
purchase obligations. These needed to be addressed through a separate regulation on net metering
that was issued in August 2013 by the Forum of Regulators (draft model regulation for rooftop solar
grid interactive systems based on net metering). Moreover, net metering requires implementation
standards for important parameters like voltage, flicker, synchronization, islanding, and protection.


25
     Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission Solar Tariff order date January 29, 2012

                                                               79
The Central Electricity Authority of India issued a draft regulation on interconnection of small-scale
generating systems with the grid late in 2012, which was notified recently. The inability of utilities to
pay for excess electricity being fed into the grid is a big issue. The result is generation that is sized
exclusively to meet individual building demands, not to meet the overall demands of the system.


Lack of Sustainable Business Models

Although the technology for rooftop solar systems is well proven, the market lacks sustainable
business models. Individual households as well as commercial rooftop owners lack knowledge,
information, and financial incentives to install these systems to optimal standards. India lacks pilot
projects developed jointly by public and private sector, to serve as proof-of-concept to encourage
future segment growth.


Gujarat Rooftop Solar Initiatives
Gujarat has a long-term goal of making its capital, Gandhinagar, a solar-powered city. It has already
installed 500 megawatt of solar capacity to benefit from over 300 sunny days per year. Most of this is
large-scale ground-mounted installations, but 5 megawatt is installed on rooftops. Another 25
megawatt is likely to be installed soon across various cities in the state. Gujarat’s rooftop solar
program started in 2010, when the state government embarked on an ambitious mission to structure
and tender a first-of-its-kind grid-connected solar power public-private partnership to minimize the use
of scarce and economically valuable land. Although the concept exists in developed markets (in the
U.S. in particular), small-scale grid-connected rooftop solar projects, such as the pilot in Gandhinagar,
are path-finding solutions in India. It is innovative and addresses the challenges and barriers
preventing the solar rooftop market from developing. The project was financially and technically
structured to specifically address the risks and challenges that currently constrain the market in India,
as illustrated in the figure 18.




                                                     80
Figure 18: Factors constraining the scaling up of solar rooftop market in India and possible
solutions


 Challenge                                  Solution: Public-private partnership structure
 Ÿ No regulatory/policy framework in        Ÿ Private partner acts as an aggregator of small individual
   place yet to implement small grid-          rooftops into a bankable package. Leverages private
   connected kilowatt-scale projects           sector efficiencies in accessing multiple rooftops
 Ÿ No financing market available yet
                                            Ÿ Tap into private sector's operation and maintenance
 Ÿ Little long-term operation and              competencies and economies of scale
     maintenance expertise with the
                                            Ÿ Easier project management
     government and rooftop owners

 Challenge                                  Solution: Gross-metering, generation-based incentives

 Ÿ Lack of policy framework enabling        Ÿ Low implementation risks as compared to net metering
     net metering                              where there was no defined policy framework

 Ÿ No grid parity                           Ÿ Developer will install solar panels on rooftops and connect
                                               power generated by the panels to the city grid and get
 Ÿ Limited financing
                                               generation-based incentive (FIT). Rooftop owners get
                                               generation-linked incentive

 Challenge                                  Solution: Technical due diligence
 Ÿ Lack of conceptual understanding         Ÿ In-depth technical due diligence and technical risk
   among stakeholders                          assessment.
 Ÿ Grid availability and stability          Ÿ Consultation and capacity building at the distribution
 Ÿ Interconnection points                      company level
 Ÿ Technical specifications of equipment    Ÿ Technical specifications of equipment up to international
    for subsidies                              standards


 Challenge                                  Solution: Scale and flexibility
 Ÿ Financial viability, both from debt      Ÿ Larger project size with broader catchment area
    and equity perspective, of small-       Ÿ Potential to scale up
    scale projects
                                            Ÿ Allow for flexible framework, including early exit options

                                            Ÿ Provide for strong payment security


 Challenge                                  Solution: Adequate risk allocation and incentives
 Ÿ Residual risk: rooftop availability      Ÿ Data from the Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space
    (especially small, residential)            Applications and Geo-Informatics
                                            Ÿ Opportunity to transfer system ownership to individual
 Ÿ Limited incentives for small
                                               rooftop owners in the future, giving them access to
    individual rooftop owners (except
                                               preferred FIT
    rentals)
                                            Ÿ Incentives to rooftop owners: rental payment for idle
                                               assets, especially attractive for larger commercial/
                                               industrial rooftops
                                            Ÿ Other incentives for individual owners

                                                   81
The government of Gujarat launched a tender to select two private-sector developers to build, own,
and operate solar PV installations on rooftops in Gandhinagar for an aggregated installed capacity of
2.5 megawatt each, or 5 megawatt in total. To mitigate the risk of rooftop availability, the government
committed to lease public building rooftops to meet at least 80 percent of total capacity. A project
development and management unit was designated to undertake a detailed technical, commercial,
and regulatory assessment for the project, to identify potential public rooftops, design transaction
structures, draft tender documents, and bid out the project. The criterion for competitive bids was the
power sale tariffs quoted by developers. Azure Power and SunEdison each won a 25 year concession
for 2.5 megawatt of installed rooftop solar power in 2012. The projects in Gandhinagar were fully
                                                                                           .
commissioned as of January 2014 and are operational with 4.68 megawatt of installed capacity



The structure for the Gandhinagar project is depicted in figure 19.

Figure 19: PPP transaction of Gandhinagar rooftop solar PV pilot project


                                                    Government
                                                     of Gujarat

                        Project implementation                     Generation-based Incentive
                              agreement                                 (bid tariff – FIT)

                         Investment -                                    Power infusion from
                          capital cost                                   solar rooftop project
      Project                                    Gujarat Rooftop
                                                                                                 Utility
    developers                                   Solar Program
                       Returns - profits                                 Incentive from power
                                                                            sold at bid tariff

                                                                       Incentive at Indian
                  Rooftop lease for 25 years
                                                                     rupees 3/kWh ($0.05)

                                               Supply of rooftops


                                           Public              Private



 Ÿ State government buildings: roads and building            Ÿ Commercial buildings
    department and respective state departments              Ÿ Private houses and apartment blocks
 Ÿ Public buildings like libraries
 Ÿ Government residential quarters




                                                        82
The solar rooftop business model, as structured in Gujarat, allows seamless collaboration between
various stakeholders: policy makers, regulators, individual rooftop owners (lease rentals), solar
module suppliers, project developers (returns on investment), and utilities (meeting renewable
purchase obligations by procuring solar power). Value is created for all of them. IFC was the lead
transaction advisor to the government of Gujarat to help structure this pilot project. Along with
international technical and legal consulting firms, IFC provided advisory inputs on financial structuring
and technical and legal/regulatory aspects of the project to the Gujarat Energy Research and
Management Institute (GERMI) and the Gujarat Power Corporation Limited (GPCL), the bid process
coordinator and the implementing agency for the project respectively. Besides, GERMI and GPCL,
the pilot project had support from the Gujarat Energy Development Agency and the Energy and
Petrochemicals Department, Government of Gujarat.


Consultations were held with the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission and formal approval was
obtained from the commission on the framework and modalities of the program. The various risks,
possible impact on the project, and the mitigation measures adopted are given in table 9.




                                                   83
Table 9: Risks, possible impact, and mitigation measures of the Gandhinagar rooftop solar PV pilot
project


 Risk              Risk details                    Impact on project         Mitigation

 Securing          80 percent rooftops (by         Project may not           Assured roof availability for 80
 adequate          capacity) from institutional    materialize if there      percent of the project capacity for
 rooftops          buildings secured for the       are not enough            the developer: green incentive
                   project and listed in the       rooftops or would be      mechanism for institutional
                   request for proposal.           skewed to include         buildings and residential buildings
                   Securing rooftops for the       only large-capacity       to monetize an otherwise idle
                   balance 20 percent rooftops     plants                    asset (rooftop). Handholding for
                   is challenging and the                                    securing 20 percent rooftops from
                   concept of lease registration                             residential buildings through
                   is not widely popular.                                    initiatives like website and physical
                                                                             shop for prospective customers.


 Identification    Distributed generation          If the distribution       Off-taker identified and all
 of off-taker      rooftop PV projects based       utility is not the off-   technical, commercial and legal
                   on gross metering are           taker, then tariff to     aspects discussed and agreed on
                   economically effective only     be paid for the           with off-taker; off-taker participated
                   when they feed power into       power will be higher      in site visits with potential bidders.
                   the local grid. If the local    on account of losses
                   distribution utility is not     and wheeling
                   the off-taker, there could      charges that may
                   be additional commercial        become applicable.
                   implications.

 Technology        Lack of clear guidelines for    Local distribution        Developed guidelines and
 and               interconnection of sub-1        company may               interconnection schemes working
 interconnection   megawatt generation             impose restrictive        with the distribution company
                   facilities in                   interconnection           (also off-taker) and secured
                   the state electricity           requirements post         regulatory approval before bid
                   distribution code or            award of project.         process.
                   grid code.

 Grid              Localized grid failure at low   Risk of (i) escalation    Availability details at high tension
 availability      tension level may               of bids (in absence       level mentioned for various
                   adversely impact project        of any data on            geographic areas in the bid
                   viability.                      downtime) or              document. Deemed generation
                                                   (ii) adverse impact       provisions included in the power-
                                                   on financial              purchase agreement.
                                                   sustainability in case
                                                   downtime is higher
                                                   than expected.




                                                      84
Risk             Risk details                    Impact on project          Mitigation

Leasing          Lack of established long-       Non-development            Allowed flexibility in leasing
                 term leasing                    of adequate quantum        arrangements - flexible
                 arrangements and                of private rooftops        power-purchase agreement/lease
                 precedence for private          which was a key            arrangements, room for exit by
                 household rooftops.             element for future         developers, the state government
                                                 replicability.             facilitated solicitation of private
                                                                            rooftops.

Regulatory       Lack of approval of the         Process may not be         Key approvals from regulator
                 process and documents by        considered valid.          secured before bid process
                 the regulator.                                             (power-purchase agreement,
                                                                            project-implementation
                                                                            agreement, and project-lease
                                                                            agreement).

Tariff and       Eventuality of bid tariff       The reasonableness         Project competitively structured
incentive        turning out to be               of the tariff could        and marketed to enable
                 substantially higher than the   be an issue in             competitive market discovery
                 FIT proposed by the state       case of very high          of tariffs.
                 electricity regulatory          tariff bids resulting in
                 commission.                     incentives exceeding
                                                 subsidies provided by
                                                 the state.

Project          Two projects of 2.5             Questions on               Approval formally obtained from
structure        megawatt each. May lead         rationale for              the state government and
                 to the risk of two different    accepting two              regulator before the bid process
                 tariffs being proposed for      different tariffs for      was initiated.
                 similar projects.               similar projects.

Commission of    Delay in procurement,           Overall delay in           Provisions for phased
the project in   construction and                project                    commissioning made in bid
one go versus    commissioning of the            commissioning.             documents.
phased           project by the developer in
commissions      anticipation of a decline in
                 prices of modules and
                 inverters. Delay in
                 interconnection of the built
                 capacity would lead to
                 revenue losses for the
                 developer.



                                                    85
  Risk               Risk details                    Impact on project       Mitigation

 Long-term           Use of poor quality panels,     Overall delay in        Incentive to maximize generation
 generation          inverters and balance of        project                 (FIT); range of capacity utilization
 from the            plant by the developer.         commissioning.          factors mentioned in the bid
 project.                                                                    document. Penalty for non-
                                                                             achievement of minimum capacity
                                                                             utilization factor, shifting of rooftop
                                                                             solar PV system provisions.

 Payment             Risk of non-payment of          Adversely impacts       Provision of letter of credit was
 security risk       tariff by the utility to the    the viability and       given. In case of termination due
                     developer.                      thereby                 to payment default, developer is to
                                                     sustainability of the   get termination benefits. Besides,
                                                     project.                the utility has the regulatory
                                                                             requirement to continue procuring
                                                                             solar power to meet its solar
                                                                             purchase obligations.




After the success of the pilot project in Gandhinagar, the government of Gujarat is supporting the
proliferation of the model to five other cities in the state. In this replication, greater flexibility is
available for developers and rooftop owners to transfer ownership of plants to rooftop owners,
therefore moving towards the model used in developed markets. In addition, other states in India,
such as Odisha and Tamil Nadu, are disseminating rooftop solar projects in their cities. Overall, the
government of Gujarat’s initiative illustrates how the implementation of a pilot PPP model can have a
transformational effect on a sector. In particular, it has achieved a number of milestones that will be
cornerstone for the future proliferation of rooftop solar systems in India.

Ÿ It brings together government agencies and think tanks to define appropriate technical

   specifications, interconnection mechanisms, and commercial frameworks to implement rooftop
   solar PV projects based on gross-metering in a local context.

Ÿ It provides the opportunity for rooftop owners to participate in the program without bearing the

   investment costs

Ÿ It puts forward an implementation model, which elicited substantial interest from a large cross-

   section of investors.




                                                        86
Ÿ It provides a sound basis for a competitive tariff discovery process.


Ÿ The public-private partnership approach, when adopted early in the project development lifecycle,

  can bring policymakers, regulatory bodies, and utilities together to devise feasible frameworks for
  the future and benefit from a true market price discovery mechanism that is transparent and
  competitive. It helps establish permit provisions, regulations, and standards based on a
  consultative process. Experience gained from varying implementation models also helps calibrate
  government policies and incentives in sync with preferred implementation model(s) envisaged in
  the self-replicating phase.




                                                  87
FACILITATING PRIVATE SECTOR
PARTICIPATION IN
ROOFTOP SOLAR PV


Public-private partnerships (PPP) can be an effective
means of market transformation in rooftop solar PV,
particularly in emerging markets where developers and
intermediaries are not fully active across the value chain of
rooftop solar development. Effectively designed PPP
projects, that are bankable and sustainable, with adequate
preparatory activities and technical due diligence, provision
of scale and with equitable risk-sharing arrangements, can
generate developer interest in the segment. It also helps
design/streamline policy, regulations, and technical
standards that can make investments feasible and
sustainable. The success of PPP projects can open the
doors for self-replication with innovative business models
and increased participation of third-parties and
intermediaries. This section discusses the key factors to be
taken into account by public authorities while designing
PPP projects in the segment. This is based on lessons
gained from the Gujarat Solar Rooftop Program in India but
has universal application across most emerging markets.
The considerations described in detail in this section are
presented in figure 20.




                                                                Photo: Azure Power

                                                   89
Figure 20: Considerations while designing a PPP project on solar rooftop


       Government/               Technical                      Off-take              Financial
       regulatory risks          feasibility                    considerations        viability


  Ÿ Government’s            Ÿ Rooftop suitability           Ÿ Decision on off-    Ÿ Financial incentives
    commitment to             and availability                taker-utilities
                                                                                  Ÿ Financing options
    financial support
                            Ÿ System                        Ÿ Metering and
                                                                                  Ÿ Bankability/creation
  Ÿ Metering and              configuration and               inter-connection
    energy accounting         specifications                                        of security for
                                                            Ÿ Off-take limit        lenders
    framework
                            Ÿ Grid stability and
                                                            Ÿ Grid availability   Ÿ Risk-sharing
  Ÿ Regulatory approval       outages
    of bid                                                                          mechanism
                                                            Ÿ Deemed generation
                            Ÿ Disposal of panels
    documents/process                                                             Ÿ Termination benefits
                              at end of project life        Ÿ Payment security
  Ÿ Regulatory
                                                                                  Ÿ Availability of
                            Ÿ Safety during
    mechanism for net-                                                              insurance
    metering model -          construction and
    uncertainty on            operations
    applicable tariffs

  Ÿ Electricity
    distribution and
    open access
    restrictions




This section draws from lessons learned in developed markets such as Germany, Japan, and the
U.S. and developing markets such as India. However, barriers to the private sector are similar in most
countries, so these measures are relevant globally, and can be adapted to regulatory regimes and
economic environments of various locations.




                                                       90
Policy Actions and Institutional Arrangements

Clarify Institutional Roles and Responsibilities

Given the state of the market and the limited experience in executing rooftop solar projects,
appropriate policy actions can catalyze the market and move it to a mature self-replicating phase.
One area of focus is project facilitation. Projects should be promoted by clearly specifying roles and
responsibilities of various stakeholders. This will facilitate monitoring and evaluation, and help make
the segment efficient, competitive, and sustainable over the long term. As an example, table 10
illustrates the roles and responsibilities of various public and regulatory agencies involved in the
solar PV industry in Germany

Table 10: Roles and responsibilities of various public and regulatory agencies involved in the
solar PV industry in Germany


 Roles and responsibilities                                Agency/agencies involved

 Policy and legal: Drafting the Renewable Energy           Federal Ministry for the Environment,
 Sources Act (EEG)                                         Nature Conservation, Building, and Nuclear Safety

 Defining incentives structures                            Federal Ministry for the Environment,
                                                           Nature Conservation, Building, and Nuclear Safety,
                                                           Federal Ministry of Finance

 Approval and clearances standards                         Federal Ministry of Transport, Construction
                                                           and Municipal Development

 Defining building codes                                   Federal Ministry of Transport, Construction
                                                           and Municipal Development and local municipal
                                                           authorities

 Definition of grid safety and connection standards        FNN (forum of grid operators)

 Renewable mix in grid studies, specifying fees            Federal Network Agency
 and processes for grid interconnection

 Grid interconnection to PV systems                        Grid or system operators

 Dispute resolution                                        Clearingstelle EEG (clearing point for legal
                                                           questions on the implementation of the German
                                                           Renewable Energy Act)

 Private developers association                            German Renewable Energy Federation


Source: PV Legal Europe




                                                      91
Despite clarity in roles and responsibilities, the European Union continues to focus on possibilities to
reduce legal and administrative obstacles to the planning and installing of photovoltaic systems. The
European project PV LEGAL (started in July 2009 and ended in February 2012) was aimed at first
identifying and then reducing those legal-administrative barriers that affect planning and deployment
of photovoltaic (PV) systems across Europe. The PV LEGAL consortium, after analyzing barriers to
development of PV in each of the 12 participating European countries, identified four main areas in
which barriers hampering PV installations could be classified:26

Ÿ Barriers in permitting procedures

Ÿ Barriers related to grid connection rules and technical standards

Ÿ Barriers in grid connection procedures

Ÿ Barriers related to grid capacity issues.


This kind of comprehensive and structured assessment to identify the roles and responsibilities of
different agencies and a continued effort to identify barriers, analyze their backgrounds, and advocate
their removal from national frameworks is missing in developing countries.


Provide for Clear and Predictable Fiscal Support

Three major solar rooftop markets (Germany, Japan, and the U.S.) have developed because of fiscal
support from the government. This support is varied; regulatory incentives through preferential tariffs,
subsidies for research and development (R&D), investment subsidies, and loans. Among the three
countries, Germany has spent the most public money to develop the rooftop market. It is evident from
Germany’s installed capacity at the end of 2010 that public spending has helped the market grow
substantially. Emerging countries need to plan financial commitments well in advance. Fiscal
incentives go hand in hand with the choice of implementation model. Incentive structures will vary
depending on the model adopted. While Germany continues to have a feed-in tariff mechanism to
incentivize the solar rooftop market, it introduced a new subsidy scheme in 2012 in which the feed-in
tariff for small rooftop systems up to 10 kilowatt was higher (approximately €0.20 per kilowatt hour)
than the feed-in tariff for those up to 40 kilowatt (approximately €0.19 per kilowatt hour). Policy, legal,
and market conditions are generally responsible for determining which incentives are good for which
economy. In the U.S., the legal framework has largely influenced incentive structures in solar.




26
     PV Legal, Reduction of bureaucratic barriers for successful PV deployment in Europe, February 2012

                                                              92
The country followed the Public Utility Regulatory Policies (PURPA) Act to initially implement net-
metering mechanisms. Subsequently, the Energy Policy Act 2005 created an environment to provide
tax incentives to private owners of distributed renewable resources. Japan’s movement from a
system of capital subsidies to a feed-in tariff mechanism reflects the Japanese government's desire
to rapidly expand the renewable energy sector, especially in light of current uncertainty over the
future of nuclear power in the country. Emerging nations need to formulate an incentive structure that
takes market conditions into account, is consistent with the legal framework, and addresses the
desired maturity that must be achieved. Moreover, emerging countries, moving from demonstration
or early development stage to a self-replicating stage will have to adapt to market conditions and be
open to making changes in incentives and/or legal/regulatory structures.


Encourage Participation from Rooftop Owners

A critical issue for third-party developers is the siting and access rights to public and private rooftops.
Developers must negotiate and enter into separate lease agreements with public and private building
owners. The role of building owners is restricted to leasing out rooftops; the owners may or may not
take part in development or operations of the projects. Rooftop rents are therefore prime drivers for
successful rooftop projects over their 25-year life. Therefore, policies should provide for sustainable
rentals in the overall revenue structure to promote rooftop projects. This can be in the form of fixed or
variable incentives linked to electricity generated so that rooftop owners ensure maximum generation
from the panels, through regular cleaning and avoiding unnecessary shadows.



Establish a Conducive Regulatory Regime

Establishing appropriate regulatory frameworks is critical and is often greatly facilitated by pilot PPP
projects, which benefit from the active participation of informed large investors. Regulations could
cover feed-in-tariffs (for gross-metered systems), non-financial incentives such as mandatory
purchase obligations, appropriate standards for metering and energy accounting, grid connectivity
guidelines, and model commercial agreements for exchange of power with the distribution grid. This
section discusses some of these regulations in the context of the Gujarat pilot project. Specific
regulations for the development of rooftop solar projects in India took off only recently, triggered by
central and state government policies identifying specific targets for solar rooftop projects and
provisioning incentives. These considerations are applicable to most developing countries.



                                                     93
Tariff Methodology

Determining a separate tariff specific for small-scale rooftop projects remains the main consideration
for regulators to address in gross-metering-based projects that supply power directly to the grid.
Many Indian states did not have separate tariffs for kilowatt-scale rooftop solar projects but have
since realized the need for tariffs that are different from large ground-mounted projects. In the case
of net metering-based projects, rooftop systems supply power primarily to the owner of the premises.
Excess generation fed into the grid is credited to the consumer’s account, to be adjusted against
consumption from the grid over a defined settlement period (usually a full year to account for
seasonality in irradiance and generation). Most state electricity regulators in India have capped
generation over a settlement period to the rooftop owner’s actual consumption or a percentage of it.
This means that generation in excess of the rooftop owner’s requirements is treated as free power for
the utility. For example, in Tamil Nadu, residential rooftop users are capped at injecting no more than
90 percent of their yearly power consumption in solar electricity into the grid, with excess energy
treated as “lapsed”. Similarly, in Andhra Pradesh, if there is a net export in a billing month, no
payment is made. For PPP projects, clarity on tariff frameworks is an essential first step for investors
to evaluate project feasibility. The Gujarat project was conceived on a gross-metering basis.
It prompted the regulator to address the specificities of rooftop solar projects by designing a separate
tariff for kilowatt-scale rooftop projects.


Non-financial Incentives

Regulators can encourage proliferation of renewable energy sources with several non-financial
incentives, which will socialize specific costs of rooftop solar projects on the distribution grid. These
could be in the form of mandatory purchase by utilities and waiver of wheeling and banking charges.


In India, the Electricity Act, 2003, requires state regulators to specify a percentage of power to be
procured by utilities from renewable energy sources. Following the launch of the Jawaharlal Nehru
National Solar Mission, central and state regulators have carved out a sub-category for solar energy
with a target of 3 percent by 2020. This includes the solar renewable purchase obligation (Solar
RPO). Given that rooftop solar generation is generally more expensive than generation from ground-
mounted solar projects, even with the provision of solar RPO, utilities may prefer ground-mounted
projects. Distribution utilities will therefore follow permit regulations and connect solar systems to the
grid, but will not exercise discretion outside parameters specified by regulations.

                                                    94
Grid Connectivity

Interconnection requirements and guidelines can be classified into three main categories:
(a) voltage levels for interconnection/evacuation, (b) standards for interconnecting equipment such
as inverters, and (c) economic criteria to permit interconnection by utilities. Until recently, no specific
interconnection guidelines had been issued by either central or state regulators for rooftop solar
systems connecting to low voltage or 11 kilovolt. Draft tariff guidelines issued by the Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission for rooftop systems and the report of subgroup-I on grid-interactive rooftop
solar systems have largely guided interconnection till now. Detailed guidelines, standards, and
processes are still to be framed for interconnecting equipment, voltage levels, and phase connection
requirements for varying capacities of rooftop systems. The Gujarat Electricity Regulatory
Commission, through its solar tariff order, 2012, provided clarity for the level of connection for
kW-scale rooftop projects, as shown in table 11.

Table 11: Level of connection of rooftop systems


  Rooftop system capacity                                      Evacuation specification

  1kW-6kw                                                      230V, 1 φ, 50HZ

  6kW-100kW                                                    415 V, 3 φ, 50Hz

  100 kW-1MW                                                   11kV, 3 φ, 50Hz


Source: Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission, Order No 1 of 2012




                                                          95
Availability and uptime of grid at LT (low tension or low voltage) and HT (high tension or high voltage)
levels have to be analyzed on a project-by-project basis to build in necessary safeguards. Frequent
grid outages beyond a level can lead to significant revenue losses to project developers and hence
should be addressed in the regulatory framework with utilities faced with scarce financial and
technical resources, there has to be sound economic rationale to permit interconnections. A utility
should consider if interconnections are duly compensated (economic returns should be more than
or equal to the average economic and financial internal rate of return of utilities across the country),
does not damage any other economic resource like public buildings and infrastructure, is technically
viable, and utilizes capacity well, going forward.


In the Gandhinagar pilot project, several of these aspects were formulated as project specifications
in the request for proposal document in the absence of regulations. Most countries have detailed
regulations and standards to guide interconnectivity of large-capacity (mostly above 1 megawatt)
systems with the grid. However, initiatives must be taken to address distribution and regulation issues
of grid connectivity, specifically for rooftop solar projects. This will also bring clarity on interconnection
infrastructure cost-sharing between utilities and project developers.


Metering Arrangements

Globally, rooftop systems use two broad types of metering arrangements: gross and net metering.
The type of metering arrangement depends on requirements and incentive structures. Net metering
systems can have different configurations of meters with the main meter capable of reading both
export and import of power from the grid (net meter). It could also have a meter to measure electricity
generated by the rooftop system (solar meter) and a meter to measure the consumer’s total
consumption. In India for instance, the Electricity Act mandates that the Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) specify metering standards. Accordingly, the Authority has issued CEA Regulations (Installation
and Operation of Meters) to guide metering arrangements for rooftop solar systems. While this now
specifies type, class, and accuracy of meters to be deployed, it is silent about the numbers and
configuration of meters for net metering systems in particular. This is left for state regulators to
specify, or through contracts of specific projects.




                                                      96
Model Power-purchase Agreement

A commercial agreement between solar producer and distribution utility is critical, as continued
operation of a grid-connected solar system depends on fulfilment of certain obligations by each party.
A model power-purchase agreement is required for gross-meter-based systems to define the
responsibilities of each party during development, commissioning, and operation phases of the
project, with clear sharing of risks and course of action in event of default. In the Gujarat solar rooftop
project, the Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission approved the power-purchase agreement,
which formed a sound basis when moving into the replication phase. In case of net meter-based
systems, a connection agreement between the utility and the consumer is the norm and is often
prescribed as a model agreement by the regulator.



Technical Appraisals to Ensure Technical Sustainability of the Projects

Identify and Secure Eligible Rooftops

Identifying suitable rooftops in an emerging market where urbanization is chaotic can prove
challenging, and must take into account factors such as shade from trees, adjoining buildings, water
tanks, in addition to the varying sizes, heights, rooftop use and ownership (residential, commercial,
or public buildings) patterns. For large-scale distributed rooftop solar projects (covering hundreds of
roofs), various technical and location-specific issues have to be resolved before shortlisting rooftops.
The identification of rooftops can be undertaken through a combination of site visits and secondary
sources such as satellite imagery. Table 12 highlights the broad approach that was adopted for the
Gandhinagar project, which can be adopted in other cities.




                                                    97
Table 12: Possible approaches to overall eligibility assessment


 Key tasks                               Activity description and outputs

 Identification of potential rooftops    Desk analysis.
 through various secondary               Activity to be conducted during pre-feasibility phase.
 sources: satellite data systems,
 online tools (Google maps), global
 information systems (from utilities).

 Identification of potential rooftops    Needs to be conducted partly by visiting the administrative location of
 through consultations with various      the project-specific geographic area. Activity to be conducted during
 stakeholders as well as using city-     pre-feasibility and feasibility phase.
 wide master plans, area-specific
 plans and maps from urban local
 bodies, town planning
 departments, residential and
 commercial layouts. Preparation
 of the first broad list of potential
 buildings.

 Preparation of questionnaire            Technical content for analysis of parameters such as utility consumer
 for data collection.                    numbers, utility interface, connected loads, and consumption patterns.
                                         Non-technical content for analysis of consumer interest and collecting
                                         feedback on commercial expectations, current uses of rooftops,
                                         possible alternate uses, future construction plans, and possible
                                         developments in neighborhoods.

 Detailed physical survey of             Activity to be undertaken at the geographic area by physically visiting
 potential buildings and gauging         each potential building/rooftop. Activity to be undertaken after securing
 of consumer interest.                   buy-in from stakeholders: government departments, utility, residential
                                         associations. For each site: building data to include building address,
                                         utility consumer numbers, ownership, building height, and vintage.
                                         Roof data/measurements to include type of roof, roof orientation,
                                         existing roof installations (tanks and telecom towers), measurement of
                                         total rooftop/terrace area using portable instruments (tape, hand-held
                                         lasers, ultrasonic instruments, global information system instruments),
                                         rooftop plans and derivation of shadow-free areas. Other data to
                                         include utility consumer numbers, interconnection voltages,
                                         approximate connected loads, locations of utility meter, lists of possible
                                         interconnection points (with the utility) and approximate distances from
                                         the roofs (roof to utility meter, utility meter to interconnection point or
                                         points), requirements regarding digging through roads, possible roof
                                         intruders if any.




                                                          98
 Key tasks                           Activity description and outputs

 Verification of positive consumer   Activity can be undertaken at the geographic area or outside,
 interest, cross verification of     depending on cross verification by utility. Short-listed buildings:
 details with the utility/other      address and assessed rooftop plant installed capacity. Interconnection
 concerned departments, and          voltage and distances. Additional information like roof drawings, single
 preparation of final shortlist of   line diagrams could be included if available.
 buildings.




The rooftop area required to install solar systems typically varies from 10 to 18 square meters per
kilowatt, depending on the shadow-free area available. The architecture of the building is also a key
factor due to elements such as parapets or varying roof levels, at times making large parts of the
rooftops unusable for solar installations.


Most information such as building plans and existing rooftop installations is not available with urban
bodies and town planning departments. This can make mapping and identification of appropriate
rooftops very challenging. Individual rooftop assessment studies involving physical visits to each
potential site is cost intensive and time consuming but have to be undertaken, given that data from
secondary sources is inaccurate and cannot be relied on.


Detailed technical surveys are necessary as initial steps in the project preparation. However, in the
long term, urban bodies and town planning departments can take rooftop solar installation across all
ownership patterns through the following steps:

Ÿ Optimize rooftop area by concentrating structures on a particular side of the rooftop, also

   standardize profile elements like parapets and levels across rooftops

Ÿ Establish clear long-term provisions for building heights and types of buildings (residential,

   commercial, or public) to be developed in a particular zone so as to ensure shade-free rooftops
   over the life of the projects

Ÿ Develop online databases of information related to buildings including location, ownership types,

   zoning plans, rooftop areas, and building plans




                                                     99
Develop Robust Technical Standards and Specifications for Rooftop PV Systems

Defining proper technical standards for rooftop projects is important to ensure safe and reliable
operations over the lives of plants. These standards have two broad functions: address the ground
situation and adapt to local grid conditions, and at the same time conform to international standards
and specifications.


Technical standards defined for system design may vary from one location to the other based on
the quality of power supply, and annual uptime based on the operational efficiency of utilities. Given
geographical variations, a proper technical assessment undertaken before a project is actually
implemented will go a long way in understanding specific technical issues likely to impact rooftop
installations. Appropriate strategies can then be developed to mitigate technical challenges.


Technical standards and specifications for various components will also ensure their safe integration
with the grid. For example, safety specifications regarding operations of inverters during grid
interaction need to be customized to local conditions. Inverters are the primary grid interconnecting
components, and have to be robust enough to operate under grid conditions at the tail-end of
distribution networks. Here, flickers and wide variations in voltages, frequency, and harmonics are
common. In emerging markets, a much wider operating range for inverters is required than normally
applicable for European solar applications.27


Therefore, it is important that local grid quality data be analyzed thoroughly on parameters such
as availability, voltage and frequency, duration of power outages as well as adequacy of safety
equipment based on detailed analysis of grid quality. This will help arrive at appropriate technical
standards for inverters and safety equipment.


Various standards, established by the International Electro-technical Commission, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Bureau of Indian Standards, or the American Society for Testing
and Materials and Underwriters Laboratories, for instance, specify norms for panels, balance of




27
     For example, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is the designated agency in India under the Jawaharlal Nehru National
     Solar Mission to outline applicable standards for various solar systems. A task force chaired by CEA was constituted by the
     Ministry of New and Renewable Energy to devise guidelines for solar rooftop systems to interconnect with the grid. Its brief
     is to lay out the scheme to be followed, specifications, metering and safety aspects, along with recommendations on
     standards to be adopted.

                                                                100
system, cables, and interconnections. If the right normalization is in place, then investors and
developers must comply with those standards, thus ensuring a certain degree of reliability and safety
of operation. In addition, it will ensure that panels are exploited for their useful life, which makes the
project more profitable for investors.


As an example, the technical standards, specifications, and interconnection schemes used for the
rooftop solar project in Gujarat, India, are outlined in annexure 1.


Structural Aspects of Rooftops

An important consideration in determining viability of rooftops is structural soundness. The roof
should support the weight of the system, including racks and supports (referred to as “dead load”).
In addition, the roof should withstand the added load resulting from wind blowing under the modules.
The support system of the PV array should be designed and certified by professional structural
engineers to ensure that racks, anchors, and structures are appropriate for the rated wind loads and
safety factors, and also pass appropriate pull tests. This requires drilling an anchor into the deck and
applying tensile force to the rated load capacity.


Structural requirements will depend on the age of the building and building standards of the area.
The module mounting structure should be designed to last a minimum of 25 years without much
maintenance and replacement. At the same time, structures with significant water leaks on slabs or
rooftops should be avoided; neither should construction introduce water leaks into the structure.
Here is an indicative list of key structural aspects to be considered:

Ÿ Occupy minimum space for the given output. Allow easy replacement/maintenance of modules.

Ÿ Withstand wind speeds of up to 200 kmph and comply with relevant Indian wind load codes.

Ÿ Roof should withstand the total weight of the module and module mounting structure (30 kg per

   square meter).

Ÿ Array structure must be grounded with a maintenance free earthing kit.

Ÿ Position of solar module should be a minimum of 500 millimeter above the terrace level with

   proper drainage.

Ÿ Any puncturing/drilling of RCC roof must be avoided.




                                                     101
Grid Integration Challenges

Grid interconnection norms and grid codes lay down detailed standards and specifications for
components like unidirectional inverters, power control units, cables, lightening arrestors, energy
meters, and data loggers. Rooftop projects are spread across several distributed rooftops with
system sizes varying from 1 kilowatt to 1 megawatt. These are connected at the supply point of
230 volts single-phase or 415 volts 3-phase or 11 kilovolts 3-phase or higher.


A key challenge is the distributed nature - a large number of dispersed and small capacity rooftop
systems, each connecting to the grid.


Grid Interconnection and Interaction

Points of interconnections should be defined on a case-by-case basis, or based on some uniform
principle. For example, in a gross-metering system, this should be at the existing common coupling
or the point at which the service line is drawn from the grid. Distribution codes do not directly specify
interconnection points with respect to system capacity (kilowatt to megawatt scale). For each rooftop
system the utility gets involved in specifying the interconnection point. Pre-commissioning testing and
periodic testing of rooftop systems (especially grid-tie aspects of the inverter) by developers as well
as by independent third parties is recommended for safe parallel operation.


Phase Imbalance while Connecting Low Capacity

A large number of residential connections in India are single phase. The rooftop systems on these
buildings would also be small capacity single-phase systems. As these connect to one of the phases
of low-voltage networks, phase imbalances due to varied power getting injected into different phases
of the grid need to be analyzed. This can be resolved simply by injecting power equitably to different
phases in the same grid. For example, if there are 60 plants of up to 5 kilowatt each, these should
channel power to the grid in three clusters of 20 plants to each of the three phases, minimizing
imbalances. Every country has limits on imbalances. The grid operator decides the permissible
imbalance ratio.


Grid Ability to Evacuate Power from Dispersed Small-Capacity Rooftop Solar PV Systems on
All Days

A specific issue arising due to the increase in rooftop installations is the flow of current from low-
voltage to the 11 kilovolt side of the transformer. Normally, all transformers enable power flow in both
                                                    102
directions, a step-up transformer can also be used as a step-down transformer and vice-versa.
Despite that, transformers are manufactured with either step-up or step-down as its primary function,
and the process is distinct for both. As a result, the efficiency of a transformer is likely to get affected
when power flows in the reverse direction. The incidence of current flows from low-voltage to 11
kilovolt is likely to be high at some rooftop clusters (for example, a group of institutional buildings,
with common holidays, connected to a transformer that does not have residential loads drawing
power on holidays).


Availability of Grid

Uptime of the grid and variation of voltage or frequency in the grid will crucially impact power
evacuation. Non-availability of the grid will result in loss of electricity generated. This is especially
important in India where grid availability at the low tension levels is generally not monitored on a
real-time basis. The commercial implications need to be ascertained and inclusion of clauses like
“deemed generation” in case of unavailability of grid beyond a certain threshold may have to be
incorporated.


The issues highlighted above may vary from region to region depending on grid infrastructure and
availability. Standards and specifications for interconnection should be designed after analyzing all
local issues. Rooftop project developers can be mandated to undertake the following steps from the
perspective of grid interconnection at project construction and commissioning stages:

Ÿ Test running of grid-connected rooftop systems, including load trials at site, prior to handing over

   and commencing energy export for metering.

Ÿ Interconnection points to be checked and certified by the utility as well as other concerned

   authorities (like electrical inspectorates) for accuracy and safety.

Ÿ Meter installation and testing to be the responsibility of the utility, and project developers be

   required to submit drawings of grid interfaces for each individual rooftop and get these approved
   before on-site work commences.

Ÿ Commissioning certificate from relevant authorities.

Ÿ Project developers to place danger plates and warning signs at all relevant places as the plants

   are installed on rooftops of occupied offices or residences, as well as educate occupants on
   safety.




                                                     103
Financing

Financing is a major factor restricting development of the rooftop solar sector. The problem is two-
fold: the financial viability of the system is uncertain, and/or financing options are not available.
The first issue can be tackled through financial incentives targeted at the various segments of
stakeholders, established to kick-start development of the sector, with a phasing out over time.
These incentives need to be backed by appropriate policy and regulatory mechanisms to provide
mid to long-term certainty to developers and third-party service providers.


The second problem, which is now prevalent in emerging markets, can be handled by establishing
innovative products, and attracting the commercial lending sector by implementing pilot projects
with large third-party developers. The penetration of solar rooftop projects can be expedited by
establishing an enabling financial environment which addresses the requirements of financiers,
developers, third-party service providers, and consumers. The following section describes financing
options applicable to rooftop solar projects. It outlines the important role of public financing in the
early stages of the rooftop solar development cycle.


In most countries, few home-owners can afford the upfront costs of solar systems. They require self-
financing options, third-party financing models, public financing, or a mix of these. If public finances
are provided when the sector is nascent, the sector will adopt a healthy and sustainable growth
pattern and attract large-scale private sector participation. It can become self-sustaining with public
financing phasing out over time in favor of a deepening commercial financing pool.


This section focuses on the importance of public financing schemes in widening the solar PV market,
with emphasis on what has been done in Japan, Germany, and the U.S.


In the early days of the rooftop solar sector, the lending community did not have the institutional
capacity and capability to properly assess and price risks associated with rooftop solar installations.
In particular, the lack of standardized technical specifications and absence of benchmarks made
technical assessments of installations challenging. Also, fragmentation of the private sector at the
time (small installers for instance), and the lack of certification made it difficult for banks to assess
construction and operation risks. Further, it was difficult to determine acceptable securities to back
repayment obligations for third-party developers and individuals. Security options available to
financiers were (i) a right over the PV system itself, (ii) a mortgage on the property of the home-
owner, and (iii) a right over cash flows resulting from the sale of power generated, provided this was
backed by a long-term power-purchase agreement.
                                                     104
Financing Options for Self-owned Systems

In Germany, financing instruments were created to help home-owners acquire PV systems through
self-financing instruments (system-based or home-based). Some innovative financing options also
utilized a mix of commercial lending subsidized with public financing (as in Japan), or a public
financing scheme only, as in the U.S. Figure 21 provides details on this. In the U.S., a number of
utilities and local governments launched schemes for (a) rooftop owners who did not have access
to traditional commercial financing options and (b) to enhance affordability by reducing interest rates
and upfront fees and relaxing lending guidelines for consumers who did not have existing
relationships with local utilities.

Figure 21: Innovative financing instruments developed in Germany, Japan, and the U.S. to facilitate
development of the rooftop solar market


  System-based financing


 Germany                                                          Japan
 The German rooftop solar financing market emerged                Japanese commercial banks offer low-cost
 when cash flows from the sale of solar power under a             loans for home mortgages if they are
 feed-in tariff became secure and reliable. The role of           coupled with solar rooftop systems. For
 public financing and risk-sharing in the developmental           example, Sumitomo Trust and Banking Co.
 phases (1,000 Roof Program in 1990 and the 100,000               Ltd. in 2008 offered loans at 100 to 200 bps
 Roof Program in 1999) was crucial to build up confidence         below the market rate to finance solar
 among the banking community. Under this impetus,                 installations in Sekisui and Kubota. Here,
 commercial banks developed schemes to lend to project            commercial banks utilize well-developed
 developers based on well-defined standards to evaluate           public financing schemes to provide low-cost
 the PV systems, including certified systems, credible and        financing support for home-owners installing
 pre-approved installers, and appropriate insurance, and          rooftop solar PV systems.
 operation and maintenance packages.



   Home-based financing


   U.S.A.
   Mortgage banks and credit unions in the U.S. leverage the equity investments made by home-owners in
   their properties to obtain financing for home improvements, including solar installations. The key forms of
   this financing include home equity loans, home equity lines of credit, and cash-out mortgage refinancing.
   These instruments are available for financing solar rooftop systems to home-owners with a good credit
   history, significant equity in the property, and adequate income to cover the loan repayment.


                                                          105
  Utility and public financing


  Utility loans

  These are loans for the benefit of utility customers, administered by the utility at the local, municipal, or
  state level. These programs are structured to be either cash-flow positive or neutral, by making the
  electricity savings equal to or greater than the cost of the loan. Utility loans are either linked to the
  consumer (called "on-bill” financing) or linked to the property ("meter-secured" financing). For instance,
  Powder River Energy Corporation of Wyoming offers on-bill financing to its residential customers who can
  take loans of up to $2500 at a 0 percent rate of interest and repay the loan in up to 36 months. The Public
  Service Electric and Gas Company of New Jersey also offers utility-based loans at 6.5 percent for up to
  10 years and covers around 40 to 60 percent of installed system costs. The solar system owner also has
                                                                                                         .
  the option of repaying the loan by signing over solar renewable energy certificates to the loan provider


  Revolving loans

  An example of this is the Montana Alternative Energy Revolving Loan Program. Revolving loans provide
  public financing directly to rooftop owners. The loan is initially funded through public sources such as
  appropriations, public benefit funds, alternative compliance payments, environmental non-compliance
  penalties, bond sales, or tax revenues. Rooftop owners usually prefer these as they bring with them
  benefits such as low interest rates, relaxed lending guidelines, and extended tenors. These revolving
  loans are replenished over time from principal and interest repayments.




Financing Options for Third-party-owned Systems

Alternatively, rooftop owners can have private companies act as third parties to finance and install
systems. These are intermediary-based models, which typically fit well under a stable and long-term
regulatory and incentive regime. The solar PV system is owned by third parties that either lease the
systems to the rooftop owners (called a solar lease), or enter into power-purchase agreements
(PPAs) with rooftop owners for the sale of power generated on rooftop systems directly on-site.
These models have evolved considerably in the U.S. Here, the third party, usually a solar finance
company, designs, purchases, installs, and operates and maintains the system. The rooftop owner
purchases the energy produced on her/his roof at tariffs pre-determined in the PPA, which is typically
more competitive than local utility rates. In the case of a solar lease, there is no PPA but the system
is leased to the home-owner. To make the model more affordable, this is often combined with




                                                         106
incentives. For instance, the solar financing company can have the option of earning tax rebates and
credits from the transaction or selling these leases/PPAs to other investors who then earn tax rebates
and credits. Some examples of large-scale projects developed through third-party financing are listed
here:

Ÿ Almost 1 megawatt of rooftop solar installations was developed on a General Motors facility in

  California.

Ÿ Wal-Mart has been purchasing power from rooftop solar PV installations on their roofs, which

  were developed by SunPower, British Petroleum, and SunEdison. At the beginning of 2008,
  22 Wal-Mart-owned sites were operational.

Ÿ Macy’s used self-financing and third-party-owned financing to develop 8.9 megawatt of solar PV

  systems on 28 stores across California (data till 2007). Eleven of these stores have installations
  owned by Macy’s while the remaining 17 stores have systems set up by SunPower.




                                                 107
 Photo: Anjali Garg




CONCLUSION

Declining costs, combined with improved efficiency and reliability of PV systems, are making
renewable energy attractive in many countries to address the challenges of climate change and
energy security. The renewable energy sector across the world continues to grow, predominantly in
developed markets, and is becoming a vital part of the global energy mix. In particular, there has
been remarkable growth of small rooftop solar installations in some of the most advanced developed
markets. In the U.S., Australia, Germany, Spain, and Japan, rooftop installations contribute a large
share of solar power produced. By early 2012, an estimated one in five homes in South Australia had
rooftop PV, according to the REN21’s Renewables Global Status Report 2013 and approximately 60
percent of Germany’s installed capacity in solar PV was set on rooftops. The positive policy and
regulatory environments established by governments of these countries contributed, to a great extent,
to mainstreaming renewable energy sources in the mix.




                                                  109
The growth of the rooftop solar market in developed markets can be tracked over three phases:
proof-of-concept, market transformation, and mature self-replication. The proof-of-concept phase
focuses on implementation of demonstration projects and/or subsidy-based programs, such as in
Germany or in Japan. They serve to demonstrate technical feasibility of the projects, and help identify
future incentives required to promote proliferation of installations. With the emergence of a well-
structured and healthy private sector, these countries were able to create conditions for a market to
proliferate on its own. These examples also show that the paths followed by each country have
varied in terms of implementation models and market organization, reflecting the policy and
regulatory preferences typical to each country. While Germany and Japan provided incentives initially
by subsidizing system costs, the market in California grew significantly only after tax benefits were
offered. FITs, concessional loans, renewable purchase obligations, and tax rebates are other policy
instruments used.


Globally, different approaches have been used to support the emergence and growth of rooftop solar.
Countries like the U.S. and Germany continue to learn from their experiences and evolve new
business models suited to current environments that support scaling up. Different models are found
appropriate and viable depending on the local conditions - regulatory environment, policy, strength of
the private sector presence, among others. Germany is the best example of successful propagation
of gross metering, in which rooftop solar projects sell electricity directly to the local grid at declared
FITs. Japan and several states in the U.S., on the other hand, have implemented net metering, where
energy is self-consumed before the surplus is sold to the grid. The recent trend in Japan has been to
progressively move towards gross metering with a FIT mechanism.


Several subsidy-driven initiatives were introduced by countries including the U.S. following the energy
crisis of 2001, but these subsidies are being cut down in recent years. Declining costs of solar energy
as well as impact of subsidies on government budgets are the main reasons for these cuts. However,
countries continue to focus on developing rooftop solar programs and are moving towards policies
that are not heavily focused on subsidies and rebates. For example, while the California Solar
Initiative rebate program is winding down, California’s strong net metering policy has become
increasingly central to its continued rooftop solar success.




                                                     110
In India, central and state policies focused originally on large-scale capacity addition through ground-
mounted solar power plants. A few rooftop solar PV systems were developed, mostly on a captive
basis. Grid-connected rooftop solar PV market remained underdeveloped until positive policy and
regulatory frameworks started emerging. The successful implementation of several pilot projects,
mostly using the gross-metering model, including in Gujarat, helped get stakeholders familiar with the
concept and encouraged development of a stronger private sector. Recently, several initiatives were
taken by central and state governments to promote a wider dissemination of rooftop solar projects.
The objective of this new wave of projects is to develop an acceptable commercial framework to self-
replicate rooftop solar projects. For example, West Bengal has initiated a net metering solar rooftop
model promoting self-consumption; Karnataka under the new Karnataka Renewable Energy Policy
2009-2014, seeks to promote rooftop PV with net metering; and Tamil Nadu in its solar policy 2012
has set a target of 350 megawatt of rooftop solar PV to be installed between 2013 and 2015.
Chhattisgarh has recently released a draft tariff document, adding to the list of states that have
announced rooftop solar schemes.


Private sector developers have played a key role in the growth of the rooftop solar market in several
countries including Germany, Japan, and the U.S. The most common of these models are
intermediary-based systems where third-party developers finance, install, and operate the systems
on behalf of rooftop owners. However, large scale proliferation through intermediaries and home-
owners needs to be supported by innovative financing schemes, as few home-owners can afford
upfront costs of solar systems. A policy maker aiming to develop the rooftop solar sector by involving
the private sector needs to conduct a detailed assessment of local risks and develop appropriate
mitigation measures.


For developing countries at the proof-of-concept stage, a public-private partnership approach can be
an effective means to bring policymakers, regulatory bodies, investors, and utilities together to devise
feasible frameworks. It helps establish permit provisions, regulations, and standards based on a
consultative process. Experience gained from various implementation models also helps calibrate
government policies and incentives in sync with preferred implementation models. Ultimately, all
stakeholders, including government, implementing agencies, power off-takers, rooftop owners, third-
party developers, and other private sector participants, must converge to achieve a well-balanced
implementation model.


                                                   111
If enabling policy and regulatory provisions are put in place to empower rooftop owners and project
developers, they can, with the right incentives, serve as a broad base for rapid proliferation, adding
power-generating capacity where it is needed most, at the consumer level. The ultimate aim of
rooftop solar PV-based market development is to reach a stage where projects replicate organically
without depending on a limited set of large investors. A self-replicating stage will see a wide variety of
consumers coming forward and developing their own rooftop projects. Eventually, rooftop solar has
the potential to involve each household as stakeholders in creating a secure and sustainable energy
source.


While a basic enabling policy and regulatory framework is required to jump-start market
transformation, the role of each key stakeholder: government, regulator, developer, financier,
distribution utility, and the rooftop owner is equally important. Summarized below is the role of each
stakeholder in propagating rooftop systems and specific actions needed to address their respective
concerns.


Government and Regulators: Solar energy is a reliable, affordable, and environmentally-friendly
power-supply solution, easily accessed by the greatest number of people. Appropriately planned,
supported by enabling policies and regulations, and properly implemented, rooftop solar PV system
programs can help solve power shortages in many developing countries at the household level. If
adequate solar resources are available, key concerns and issues that a government faces are:

1.   What is the most appropriate implementation model to support? Is it technically feasible?
     What is the financial implication on the budget?

2.   How to ensure long term sustainability of the sector and encourage self-proliferation?


Each of the above is equally important and needs in-depth analysis. Different implementation models
are appropriate and viable depending on local conditions: regulatory environment, policy, strength of
the private sector, among others. Different approaches have been used globally to support the
emergence and growth of rooftop solar (see section Rooftop Solar PV – Implementation Models for
a detailed description of possible implementation models). Countries like Germany and the U.S.
continue to learn from their experiences and evolve new business models that support scaling up in
line with the current environment. Technical, legal, and financial analysis is required to determine the
most optimal incentive scheme to support the sector.
                                                   112
Rooftop solar PV in most parts of the world is driven by fiscal incentives in the early stages of market
development. An enabling policy and regulatory framework with adequate fiscal incentives is
necessary to create a demand pull for rooftop solar investments. As seen in Germany, incentives can
reduce as solar tariffs move closer to retail tariffs, thus limiting the government’s fiscal exposure over
time. Governments have to carefully estimate the quantum of rooftop solar PV deployments from year
to year and make necessary fiscal provisions in line with the policies they outline. As proliferation can
be quite fast once the enabling environment is laid out, governments must carefully calibrate
incentives to match the overall quantum of fiscal support they can provide from year to year. Most
governments with successful rooftop solar programs have opted for an unambiguous implementation
model (particularly the choice between gross and net-metering-based rooftop deployment), as
incentive frameworks can vary substantially between models. Depending on the implementation
model adopted, support to projects could be upfront/one-time or recurring and linked to generation.


Apart from direct incentives, governments and regulators play a crucial role in addressing the risks
that financiers perceive across the value chain, so that commercial financing is widely available as
the market expands. This could be in the nature of ensuring standardization of components and
certification of suppliers and installers, creating mechanisms to address utility defaults, regulations for
inter-connections, metering and payment, as well as regulatory incentives for distribution utilities to
participate. A well-established system of standardization and certification, like in the German rooftop
solar industry, helps innovation in financing and also encourages participation of insurance providers.


Another key role for governments is to communicate the potential and feasibility of solar rooftops.
All stakeholders need to be aware of its opportunities, potential, and viability. For instance, in Gujarat,
the responsible authority developed a communication platform - that included an Internet website,
easily accessible facilitation centers, and extensive media campaigns - to disseminate project
concepts and key benefits.


Rooftop Owners: For a rooftop owner, the key benefits from implementation of a rooftop solar
system are the utilization of idle rooftop space to generate power, reduction in electricity expenses,
and/or additional revenues from the sale of power or from roof rentals. Rooftop solar systems have




                                                    113
become attractive with growing retail tariffs and a sustained decrease in the cost of solar applications.
The key considerations for rooftop owners are given below:

Ÿ Is it financially viable on its own and if not, is there government support available to make it viable?

   Are savings in electricity bills or additional revenues enough to offer the rooftop and/or invest in the
   solar rooftop system?

Ÿ Is the local grid available and stable enough to allow solar rooftop systems?


Ÿ What permissions are needed to install the system?


Ÿ Is there a third party that can install and maintain the system?


Ÿ Are there any financing or leasing schemes available?


Ÿ What are the technical aspects to be considered?



Rooftop owners, who are keen on deploying rooftop solar PV, assess viability on the basis of tariffs -
direct (in case of FIT) or implicit (in case of net-metering-based systems) - and other incentives that
they can avail. Once viability is established, there are two major concerns, financing and simplicity of
installation. Few rooftop owners are willing to bear the upfront costs of owning and installing,
especially in the grid-interactive mode. Availability of systems-based or home-based retail financing
schemes or leasing solutions provided by intermediaries is therefore important. Rooftop owners look
forward to easy and non-discriminatory permit regimes and interconnection provisions, which make
deployment faster and effective. Standards and certification systems are extremely important for
rooftop owners and financiers, as it helps them address technology and performance risks in their
choices. Clarity is needed, especially on permits, technical connectivity issues for grid-connected
systems, and regulatory issues related to net metering systems, if allowed.




                                                   114
Distribution Utility: Utilities are among the most critical stakeholders in any grid-connected solar
rooftop program. Rooftop solar PV are beneficial to distribution utilities where there is a good match
in system peaks and solar peaks, particularly if there is an overall energy shortage in meeting peak
demands. By injecting power at the tail-end of distribution systems, rooftop solar also helps in voltage
regulation and loss reduction in distribution systems. Given the policy and regulatory mandates for
renewable energy emerging in many jurisdictions, rooftop solar can effectively help meet these
targets.


However, the technical benefits offered by these systems are also coupled with some key technical
and financial challenges which become significant as the volumes of installations grow significantly.
Several distribution utilities worldwide are waking up to the power of rooftop solar PV and have been
increasingly vocal in their concerns on net-metering in particular, where consumers are allowed to
obtain credits for supply of solar electricity to the grid and offset them against their consumption from
the grid. With increasing penetration of rooftop solar PV, utilities find themselves with shrinking
revenues and are also faced with the prospect of grid failures due to inherent variability in solar
generation. These are the key considerations from the perspective of a utility:

Ÿ Impact on the local grid and technical feasibility of distributed solar generation feeding

   into the grid?

Ÿ Impact on revenues in case of large proliferation of net metering-based systems?


Ÿ Who is responsible for safety of the system?


Ÿ What will be the impact on transmission and distribution losses, if any?


Ÿ Will it help meet the utility’s renewable portfolio obligation targets?


Ÿ What is the financial impact?




                                                    115
The distributed nature of rooftop solar PV systems challenges the network layout and reliability of
distribution grids. Planning is key. Distribution utilities must consider the possibility of increased
penetration of rooftop solar PV into local grids and make changes to grid infrastructure to be able to
absorb variable solar power fed into it. Use of smarter and dynamic features to improve prediction
and grid response will be needed. Distribution utilities play a crucial role in promoting rooftop solar,
as they allow rooftops to connect with their grids and also pay the cost of this solar power.
Transparent procedures for permits, metering, and interconnection will attract consumers to invest
in rooftop solar initiatives. Incentives like RECs being attributed to the utility, administrative charges
towards facilitating grid connectivity, and off-taking the produced power could compensate for
possible losses in revenue streams. In the long run, it makes sense for the utilities to be willing
participants in this market rather than view themselves as victims of this expanding global
phenomenon. Several utilities in countries like Japan and the U.S. have recognized this and play
active roles as service providers in some form or other to capture a slice of the solar value chain.
They will also need to include the ramping up of this market segment into future power procurement
and supply planning, and will need to undertake sophisticated load forecasting to better manage the
grid and utilize power flows into the system.


Developers and Financiers

Small-scale rooftop solar PV poses challenges to developers and financiers alike. In the case of large
installations (typically megawatt scale), the companies involved in development and implementation
are the solar EPC contractors involved in the utility-scale ground-mounted market segment as well.
Their returns are secured through a power-purchase agreement signed with the distribution utility,
typically supported by a FIT or generation-based incentive policy or through a power-purchase
agreement signed with the rooftop owner where grid tariffs are higher than the cost of power from the
rooftop. Alternatively, trading of renewable energy credits could also secure returns where there are
vibrant carbon markets. Accessing financing for this segment is relatively easier.




                                                     116
However, in case of rooftop segments involving kW-scale projects, smaller integrators are involved as
suppliers and operators or residential rooftop owners are themselves involved as developers with
limited financial strength and credit-worthiness. Financing this segment, which holds the key to wider
solar rooftop proliferation, is the real challenge. Clarity on grid connections, tariffs/incentive
mechanisms, and availability of individual credit rating histories may help commercial banks/financial
institutions to develop financing products.


For solar rooftops to self-replicate and deepen market penetration, issues and concerns of all
stakeholders need to be addressed satisfactorily. On the government and regulatory side, policy and
regulatory frameworks, including incentives, need to be clear and stable to attract investors.
Strengthening the electricity distribution infrastructure and clear permit norms is essential to ensure
maximum utilization of rooftop solar systems. This can be facilitated through utilities with suitable
regulatory support. On the market side, selecting well-analyzed and sustainable business models
with greater access to financing from financial institutions like commercial banks and non-banking
financial institutions will help increase participation of private sector suppliers and developers.
Together, the efforts would help move towards literally placing more “power in the hands of people.”




                                                     117
ANNEX 1

Key Technical Standards: Gandhinagar Rooftop Solar PV Pilot Project

Standards referring to solar cells and modules


EN 50380               Datasheet and nameplate information of photovoltaic module.



Measurements - Reference Cells PV

                       Crystalline silicon terrestrial photovoltaic (PV) modules - Design qualification
IEC 61215
                       and type approval

                       Thin-film terrestrial photovoltaic (PV) modules - Design qualification and type
IEC 61646
                       approval

                       Photovoltaic (PV) module safety qualification - Part 1: Requirements for
IEC 61730-1
                       construction - for personnel safety

                       Photovoltaic (PV) module safety qualification - Part 2: Requirements for testing -
IEC 61730-2
                       for personnel safety



Standards for photovoltaic systems

                       Electrical installations of buildings - Part 7-712: Requirements for special
IEC 60364-7-712
                       installations or locations - Solar photovoltaic (PV) power supply systems


IEC 61727              Photovoltaic (PV) systems - Characteristics of the utility interface


IEC 61683              Photovoltaic systems - Power conditioners - Procedure for measuring efficiency


IEEE 928               Recommended criteria for terrestrial PV power


                       Recommended practice for utility interface of residential and intermediate
IEEE 929
                       PV systems




                                                     118
     Standards for other parts/components of photovoltaic systems


     IEC 60947                Connectors for photovoltaic systems - Safety


     EN 50521                 Connectors for photovoltaic systems - Safety


                              Low frequency cables and wires with PVC insulation and PVC28 sheath -
     IEC 60189-1
                              General test and measuring methods

                              Low frequency cables and wires with PVC insulation and PVC sheath - Cables in
     IEC 60189-2
                              pairs, triples, quads and quintuples for inside installations

                              Environmental testing of specimen to withstand specific severities of repetitive and
     IEC 60068-2
                              non-repetitive nature


     IEC 61683                Photovoltaic systems - Power conditioners - Procedure for measuring efficiency


                              General requirements for empty enclosures for low voltage switchgear and control
     IEC 62208
                              gear assemblies

                              Standard test and measuring methods for PVC insulated cables for working voltages
     IEC 69947
                              up to and including 1100V, UV resistant for outdoor applications

                              Recommended practices and requirements for harmonic control in electric
     IEEE 519-1992
                              power systems




28
     28Poly(vinyl chloride)

                                                          119
Specifications of Inverter/Power Conditioning Unit


 Detailed specifications

 Output voltage                   230V / 415V +10 percent/-15 percent VAC (/ +15 percent/-10 percent)

 Output frequency                 50 Hz +1.5Hz / -3.5Hz (/ +/- 0.5percent) (/+/-5 percent)

 Power factor                     0.95 inductive to 0.95 capacitive

 Waveform                         Sine Wave

                                  AC side total harmonic current distortion < 5 percent
 Harmonics
                                  AC side single frequency current distortion < 3 percent

 Ripple                           DC voltage ripple content shall be not more than 3 percent

 Efficiency                       Efficiency of PCU shall minimum 90 percent at 20 percent load

                                  Maximum losses in sleep mode: 2W per 5kW
 Losses
                                  Maximum losses in stand-by mode: 10W

 Casing protection levels
                                  Degree of protection: Minimum IP-20 for internal units and
                                  IP 65 for outdoor units

                                  Should withstand temperatures from -10 to +60 degrees Celsius

                                  Should withstand humidity up to 95 percent

                                  Completely automatic including wake up, synchronization
                                  (phase-locking) and shut down

 MPPT                             MPPT range must be suitable to individual array voltages in power packs

 Internal wiring                  Copper wires shall be insulated with flame resistant material

 Protections                      Over voltage; both input & output

                                  Over current; both input & output

                                  Over/Under grid frequency

                                  Over temperature

                                  Short circuit

                                  Lightening

                                  Surge voltage induced at output due to external source

                                  Islanding

                                  Manual intervention must be possible through an accessible
                                  emergency switch-off button

                                                     120
Interconnection Schemes: Gandhinagar Rooftop Solar PV Pilot Project

Ÿ All work must be carried out as per the following:


   A.   Indian Electricity Act and rules therein

   B.   Indian Electricity Grid Code

   C.   Regulations of Chief Electrical Inspector

   The successful bidder must place danger plates and warning signs at all relevant places
   as the plants would be on the roofs of occupied buildings of offices or residences.

Ÿ Following are the major components of the proposed interconnection arrangements. Detailed

  specifications are given on following pages for each of these components. Bidder should note that
  these are minimum requirements and bidder must provide more than these laid out requirements
  so as to achieve maximum energy output from various power packs.

   D.   Unidirectional inverter/power conditioning unit

   E.   Cables

   F.   Earthing kits

   G.   Lightening arrestors

   H.   Energy meter

   I.   Data logger

   The bidder must follow at the least all the minimum specifications and requirements as
   stated in the JNNSM document, in addition to the ones mentioned in this bid document.




                                                    121
Ÿ Power conditioning unit/inverter


   a.   Power Conditioning Unit (PCU) shall include a facility to convert the DC energy produced by
        solar array to AC voltage, through DC bus, using its Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT)
        control to extract maximum energy from solar array and produce AC power at 415V AC,
        3 phase, 50 Hz.

   b.   MPPT controller, Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT) based inverter and associated
        control and protection devices shall be integrated into PCU. DC bus can be either integrated
        or can be provided separately.

   c.   The continuous power rating of this individual uni-directional inverter shall be equivalent to
        minimum 80 percent of peak power rating of each power pack array.

   d.   Each individual inverter will have all necessary protections against disturbances in frequency,
        voltage and current of the grid due to internal or external faults, abnormal temperatures and
        islanding. Its prime function will be to protect itself and solar array from any factors as well
        as avoid unintentional islanding.

   e.   Once the PCU has been shut off as a protective measure it must automatically re-connect
        once the normal conditions are restored for minimum of two minutes.

   f.   There will be three modes of functioning, namely, sleep, stand-by and operational mode.
        It will have optimum efficiencies for each mode as given in the specification sheets.




                                                   122
Indications through LED/LCD
                              Inverter ON
display

                              Grid ON

                              Inverter Under/Over Voltage

                              Inverter Overload

                              Inverter Over Temperature

Display on front panel        Accurate displays on the front panel

                              DC input voltage

                              DC current & AC voltage (all 3 phases and line)

                              AC current (all 3 phases and line)

                              Power factor

                              Ambient temperature

                              Solar radiation

                              Instantaneous & cumulative array power

                              Instantaneous & cumulative output power

                              Daily energy produced

                              The PCU/inverter shall be such designed so as to meet
Certifications and
compliances
                              the following standards in addition to the codes listed in
                              IS and other relevant standards

                              Photovoltaic systems - Power conditioners - Procedure for
IEC 61683
                              measuring efficiency
                              Recommended practices and requirements for harmonic
IEEE 519-1992
                              control in electric power systems

IEEE 928                      Recommended criteria for terrestrial PV power

                              Recommended practice for utility interface of residential
IEEE 929
                              and intermediate PV systems

IEC 61727                     Photovoltaic (PV) systems - Characteristics of the utility interface

                              Photovoltaic systems - Power conditioners - Procedure
IEC 61683
                              for measuring efficiency

IEC 62103                     Electronic equipment for use in power installations




                                                 123
Ÿ Typical failure analysis report of PCUs and recommended list of critical components shall be
    provided by the vendor while submitting their offer

Ÿ Provision shall be available in the PCU to display of following parameters on front panel display


Ÿ Anti-islanding protections

    The bidder shall conform to and undertake all precautions and requirements as have been laid
    down by the following standards:

    •   IEC 61727 - PV systems - characteristics of utility interface

    •   IEC 62446 - Grid connected photovoltaic systems - minimum requirements for system
        documentation, commissioning tests and inspection

    •   IEC 62116 - Test procedure of islanding prevention measures for utility-interconnected
        photovoltaic inverters


Besides the above measures, certain precautions prescribed by the CEA shall also be incorporated
into the solar PV system design:

    1. PV systems shall be provided with adequate rating fuses, fuses on inverter input side (DC:
        direct current) as well as output side (AC: alternating current) side for overload and short
        circuit protection as well as disconnecting switches to isolate the DC and AC system for
        maintenances.

    2. Fuses of adequate rating shall also be provided in each solar array module to protect them
        against short circuit.


•   Phase imbalance

    3. Phase imbalance can occur due to varied power injected into different phases of the grid.
        Whenever solar power plants of lower capacities with single phase inverters are used to feed
        power into the grid using a single phase injection point, they tend to induce imbalance. This
        imbalance can be resolved simply by connecting/injecting power to different phases in the
        same grid.

    4. Different countries have different permissible limits for imbalance. For example, Germany
        has a 4.6 kilowatt limit and Australia has a 10 kilowatt limit. These limits are decided by the
        utility/grid operator from time to time based on its analysis of permissible imbalances.

    5. The developer shall have to follow the phase imbalance limits imposed by the grid operator
        and shall also have to follow the guidelines before connecting such limits to the grid.

    6. The injection points for each system to be injected into a single phase

                                                    124
Cable specifications

 Sr. No.         Specifications of cables in the power pack and till grid connection

                 All module interconnection cables and those between solar module and array junction
           1     boxes shall be of flexible type, UV protected cables. These shall be laid along the module
                 mounting structures.

                 Sizes of interconnection for modules and from modules to inverter shall be so selected that
           2
                 loss would not be more than 3 percent.


                 Rest all cables shall be armoured type, of suitable size and can be laid inside the PVC
           3
                 pipes of suitable diameter.


           4     The cable shall be terminated using only the copper lug terminals.


                 All cables shall be copper and the voltage drop calculation shall be submitted by the
           5
                 successful vendor.

                 The cables shall design in such a way that voltage drop shall not be more than 1%
           6
                 in any cable size and length used in solar farm.


                 All cables shall be from a reputed manufacturer and shall meet minimum of IEC 60189/IS
           7
                 1554 IS 694. These also shall meet following standards.


                 General requirements for empty enclosures for low voltage switchgear and control gear
 IEC 62208
                 assemblies.

                 Standard test and measuring methods for PVC insulated cables for working voltages up to
 IEC 69947
                 and including 1100V, UV resistant for outdoor applications


 IEC 60947       Connectors for photovoltaic systems - Safety.



 EN 50521        Connectors for photovoltaic systems - Safety.


                 Low frequency cables and wires with PVC insulation and PVC sheath - General test and
 IEC 60189-1
                 measuring methods.


                 Low frequency cables and wires with PVC insulation and PVC sheath - Cables in pairs,
 IEC 60189-2
                 triples, quads and quintuples for inside installations.




                                                    125
Ÿ Earthing and Lightening Arresters

  All the solar PV power packs including modules and mounting structures and inverters shall have
   proper arrangement for earthing. DC part of the plant shall be singly grounded. Module array shall
   also have lightening arresters as necessary.


Ÿ Energy Meter

  Each power plant will be provided with an energy meter for accurate periodical readings of AC
   energy generated and fed to the grid. This time of day type meter shall be of approved make of
   the off-taker and shall conform to the requirements laid down by the CEA’s (Installation and
   Operation of Meters) Regulation, 2006. This shall be inspected, tested and calibrated at the time
   of installation and also during operation lifetime of power plant.


Ÿ Statutory clearances to be arranged by the successful bidder

  a. Building and architectural drawings approval

  b. Factory inspector approval on drawings, wherever necessary

  c. Electrical system approval (Electrical inspector)

  d. Fire system approval

  e. All statutory requirements for working at the site like labor registration, workman
      compensation policy and employee state insurance corporation.




                                                   126
Photo: SunEdison Energy India Pvt. Ltd. (SEIPL)


                                                  127
 Photo: Azure Power




REFERENCES

Ÿ Tom Nicholas, Central Regional Director, Solar Electric Power Association (2011): Presentation titled “Utility

   Solar Business Models: Expanding New Solar Markets” at the IEA PVPS Task 1 Workshop in Istanbul,
   Turkey

Ÿ VolkmarKunerth, President, Solar Partners International (October 2010): Presentation titled “Solar PV

   Market: Germany, versus USA) at the 3rd Solar Convention Las Vegas
   (http://www.slideshare.net/kunerth/solarpresentation-pv-market-germany-usa)

Ÿ Julia Hamm, Executive Director, Solar Electric Power Association (February 2009): Presentation titled

   “Utility Solar Business Models”, Presentation made at the NARUC Winter Committee Meetings
   (http://www.naruc.org/meetingpresentations.cfm)

Ÿ Mark Bolinger and Ryan Wiser, Berkeley Lab (September 2002): “Support for PV in Japan and Germany”,

   case studies of state support for renewable energy, Berkeley Lab and the Clean Energy Group

Ÿ Freeing the Grid - Best Practices in State Net Metering Policies and Interconnection Procedures, 2011

   Edition (http://www.gracelinks.org/media/pdf/freeing_the_grid_2011.pdf)

Ÿ Draft Tariff Guidelines for Rooftop PV and Other Small Solar Power Projects, Central Electricity Regulatory

   Commission, Ministry of Power, Government of India, 2010




                                                       129
Ÿ L. Frantzis, S. Graham, R. Katofsky, and H. Sawyer - Navigant Consulting Inc. Burlington, Massachusetts

   (2008): “Photovoltaics Business Models”, National Renewable Energy Laboratory Technical Monitor: Robert
   Margolis. Prepared under Subcontract No. KACX-4-44451-08

Ÿ K. Anderson, M. Coddington, K. Burman, S. Hayter, B. Kroposki, and A. Watson (2009): “Interconnecting PV

   on New York City’s Secondary Network Distribution System”, NREL Paper; NREL/ TP-7A2-46902, Prepared
   under Task No. PVC9.92GA (http://www.nrel.gov/tech_deployment/state_local_activities/pdfs/46902.pdf)

Ÿ National Renewable Energy Laboratory (2009): Solar Leasing for Residential Photovoltaic Systems

   (http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy09osti/43572.pdf)

Ÿ Study on Solar Photovoltaic Industry: ISA-NMCC (2008): “Solar PV Industry: Global and Indian Scenario”

   http://www.iesaonline.org/downloads/ISA_NMCC_September_2008_NMCC_website.pdf

Ÿ Katharine Kollins, Duke University & Bethany Speer and Karlynn Cory, National Renewable Energy

   Laboratory (2010): “Solar PV Project Financing: Regulatory and Legislative Challenges for Third-Party PPA
   System Owners”. National Renewable Energy Laboratory Technical Report, NREL/TP-6A2-46723. Revised
   February 2010 (http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy10osti/46723.pdf)

Ÿ Bethany Speer, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (2012): “Residential Solar Photo-voltaics:

   Comparison of Financing Benefits, Innovations, and Options” Technical Report NREL/TP-6A20-51644
   (http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy13osti/51644.pdf)

Ÿ K. Cory, J. Coughlin, and T. Jenkin - National Renewable Energy Laboratory; J. Pater - Summit and Blue B.

   Swezey - Applied Materials (2008):” Innovations in Wind and Solar PV Financing, NREL Technical Report -
   NREL/TP-670-42919 (http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy08osti/42919.pdf)

Ÿ Determination of tariff for Procurement by the Distribution Licensees and others from Solar Energy Projects,

   Gujarat State Electricity Regulatory Commission; January 2012

Ÿ Prayas Energy Group (2012) “Solar Rooftop PV in India Need to prioritize in-situ generation for self-

   consumption with a net-metering approach”, Prayas Policy Discussion Paper November 2012

Ÿ Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission Document; Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of

   India, 2010

Ÿ Guidelines for “Rooftop PV & Small Solar Power Generation Program (RPSSGP)”; Ministry of New and

   Renewable Energy; Government of India, June 2010

Ÿ US Market Trends 2011, Interstate Renewable Energy Council, August 2012


Ÿ Griffith, A.B., M. Higgins, J.M. Turner (2010): “A rooftop revolution? A multidisciplinary analysis of state-level

   residential solar programs in New Jersey and Massachusetts”. Journal of Environmental Studies and
   Sciences, 10.1007/s13412-013-0156-6

                                                        130
About the Norwegian Trust Fund for Private Sector and Infrastructure

The Norwegian Trust Fund for Private Sector and Infrastructure provides grant resources for World Bank Group activities
aimed at mainstreaming the investment climate, providing technical assistance in areas related to governance and
infrastructure services for the poor, and promoting structured cooperation on petroleum sector governance issues. The trust
fund is intended to help develop World Bank Group and client country capacity, promote inclusion of cross-cutting issues
into World Bank and the International Finance Corporation's operations, and to foster cooperation among different units in
the World Bank Group, United Nations, Norwegian institutions and other external agencies and groups.




About IFC

IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively on the private
sector. Working with private enterprises in about 100 countries, we use our capital, expertise, and influence to help eliminate
extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. We provide advice and financing to improve lives in developing countries and
tackle the most urgent challenges of development.
For more information, visit www.ifc.org
International Finance Corporation
Maruti Suzuki Building, 3rd Floor, Nelson Mandela Road,
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi-110070, India
T: +91 (11) 4111-1000, F: +91 (11) 4111-1001
W: ifc.org |    @IFC_SouthAsia |         IFC South Asia
   IFCvideocasts
