                                                                                           Sustainable
                                                                                           Banking
                                                                                           Network




Sustainable Banking Network

Who are we?
The Sustainable Banking Network (SBN) is an informal and exclusive group of banking regulators
and associations that are interested in sustainable banking policies, guidelines and practices. Its
main objective is to facilitate the collective learning of its members and to support them in policy
development to create drivers for sustainable finance practices.

The idea for the SBN arose during the Beijing Green Credit Forum in May 2012, where
participants from 12 countries requested that the International Finance Corporation facilitate a
knowledge network for banking regulators and associations. The Network was formally launched
in September 2012.

Network Activities
The annual SBN meetings, implemented since 2012, are the principal space for dialogue,
networking and knowledge generation. Past meetings have taken place in December 2012 in
Washington DC, USA, in November 2013 in Tokyo, Japan, and in March 2014 in Lagos,
Nigeria. These meetings provide SBN members with a platform to present national initiatives in
the sustainable banking space, to discuss current issues and jointly develop new approaches to
sustainable banking. Furthermore, regulators are invited to participate in IFC-hosted dialogue
events and expert groups, such as the annual Performance Standards Community of Learning, a
meeting for financial institutions that have adopted the Equator Principles. These events provide
the opportunity for dialogue with leading commercial banks worldwide, which plays a crucial role
in the development of regulatory guidance.

Sustainable Banking Policies and Guidelines
To effectively shift to sustainable banking practices, banks require an enabling regulatory context
that ensures a level playing field and provides the right economic incentives. With this in mind, a
number of emerging market banking regulators have started to pioneer the development of such
regulatory guidance, which focuses on more effective management of environmental and social
risks in lending, and support for businesses that are greener, climate friendly and socially inclusive.
The world map on the following pages provides an overview of SBN countries that have issued or
that are in the process of developing such guidelines for banks.
                                               Existing Regulations



                                                                                                                                                                           CHINA
                                                                                                                                                                           China Green Credit Policy,
                                                                                                                                                                           introduced in 2007 laid the
                                                                                                                                                                           foundation for sustainable
                                                                                                                                                                           banking in China. To
                                                                                                                                              MONGOLIA
                                                                                                                                                                           provide more guidance on
                                                                                                                                                                           the implementation, the
                                                                                                                                                                           China Banking Regulatory
                                                                                                                                                    CHINA
                                                                                                                                                                           Commission issued the
                                                                                MORORCCO
                                                                                                                                                                           Green Credit Guidelines in
                                                                                                                                   NEPAL                                   2012 as well as a system to
                                                                                                                                 BANGLADESH
                                                                                                                                                   LAOS                    monitor and evaluate Green
                                                                                                                                                                           Credit in 2014.
                                                                                                                                            THAILAND
                                                                                                     NIGERIA                                                                PHILIPPINES
              COLOMBIA                                                                                                                                      VIETNAM
                                                                                                                        BANGLADESH
              Colombian Green Protocol is                 COLOMBIA
                                                                                                                        Environmental Risk
              a set of voluntary guidelines
                                                                                                                        Management Guidelines
              developed by the Colombian                                      NIGERIA                                   were developed in 2011
              banking association Asobancaria                                 Nigerian Sustainable                                                                    INDONESIA
                                                                     BRAZIL                                             by Bangladesh Bank,
              and adopted in 2012 by                                          Banking Principles were                   in collaboration with
              major commercial banks in                                       launched by the Nigerian
                                                   PERU                                                                 local banks and other
              Colombia. The Protocol provides                                 Banker’s Committee in                     stakeholders. They are
              a voluntary framework for                                       July 2012. Thirty four                    mandatory for banks and
              sustainable finance.                                            financial institutions                    financial organizations.
                                                                              committed to their
                                                                              implementation. With
                                                                              the Central Bank of
              BRAZIL
                                                                              Nigeria’s decision
              In 2014, the Central Bank of Brazil issued a
                                                                              to supervise the
              regulation on Environmental and Social Risk
                                                                              implementation of the
              Management for banks, which complements
                                                                              Principles, the adoption
              various circulars and resolutions on sustainable
                                                                              of the Principles has
              banking issued between 2008 and 2011.
                                                                              become quasi-mandatory.
              Furthermore, a set of voluntary guidelines on
              sustainable banking was launched in Brazil in
              2008 and 2009 (Green Protocols).
                                                                                                               Existing Regulations: Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Colombia, Nigeria
Sustainable
Banking                                                                                                        In Development: Indonesia, Mongolia, Nepal, Peru, Philippines, Vietnam
Network
                                                                                                               Other member countries: Laos, Mororcco, Thailand
SBN Membership

SBN members include banking regulatory bodies, environmental regulators and industry
associations, such as banking associations. The Network is open to all officials or specialists working
in these institutions, who have an interest in environmental and social sustainability issues, as well
as in supporting the financial sector with guidance to manage environmental and social risks and
opportunities.

Current SBN members:
                                                                                                          Sustainable
•   Bank of Bangladesh                                                                                     Banking
•   Central Bank of Brazil                                                                                 Network

•   Central Bank of Morocco
•   China Banking Regulatory Commission
•   China Banking Association
•   China Ministry of Environmental Protection
•   Asobancaria, Banking Association of Colombia
•   Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (Indonesia Financial Services Authority)
•   Bank of Lao PDR
•   Bank of Mongolia
•   Mongolia Banking Association
•   Mongolia Ministry of Environment and Green Development
•   Nepal Rastra Bank
•   Central Bank of Nigeria
•   Superintendence of Banks, Insurers, and Private Pension Funds of Peru
•   Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
•   Thai Bankers Association
•   State Bank of Vietnam
•   Vietnam Ministry of Natural Resources & Environment




     How to Join the SBN
     The SBN welcomes new members and encourages them to share experiences, learn from
     others, and to benefit from Network activities. The network is entirely voluntary and
     participating regulators and banking associations have the freedom to involve to the extent
     that suits their purposes. A defining characteristic of the network is the practicality and
     openness with which members are collaborating to share knowledge.
     For further information about the SBN, please contact Rong Zhang,
     Global Coordinator for SBN at IFC (rzhang@ifc.org).
