Sustainable Management of
the Fisheries Sector in Oman
A Vision for Shared Prosperity
World Bank Advisory Assignment




                     December 2015




World Bank Group   Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wealth
Washington D.C.    Sultanate of Oman
   SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT
OF THE FISHERIES SECTOR IN OMAN
 A VISION FOR SHARED PROSPERITY
              World Bank Advisory Assignment




                     December 2015




World Bank Group          Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wealth
Washington D.C.           Sultanate of Oman
                                                                                                         Contents


Acknowledgements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . v

Foreword.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vii



CHAPTER 1.	 Introduction.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1

CHAPTER 2.	 A Brief History of the Significance of
            Fisheries in Oman. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7

CHAPTER 3.	 Policy Support for an Ecologically Sustainable and
            Profitable Sector. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11

CHAPTER 4.	 Sustainable Management of Fisheries, Starting
            with Stakeholder Engagement .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15

CHAPTER 5.	 Vision 2040: A World-Class Profitable
            Fisheries Sector .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21

CHAPTER 6.	 The Next Generation: Employment, Training and
            Development to Manage and Utilize Fisheries. .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27

CHAPTER 7.	 Charting the Waters: Looking Forward
            a Quarter Century .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 31




                                                                                                                                                     iii
Boxes

Box 1: Five Big Steps towards Realizing Vision 2040.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
Box 2: Fifty Years of Fisheries Development Policy .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
Box 3: Diving for Abalone.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 23
Box 4: Replenishing the Fish.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25


Figures
Figure 1: Vision 2040 Diagram .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Figure 2: Current Status of Key Fish Stocks in Oman.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
Figure 3: New Fisheries Management Cycle .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 29


Tables
Table 1: Classification of Key Stakeholders in the Fisheries Sector.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 16
Table 2: SWOT Analysis from Stakeholder Engagement (October 2014). .  .  .  .  .  .  . 18




iv  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                           Acknowledgements


T
        he authors wish to thank H. E. Dr. Fuad Jaffer Al Sajwani, Minister of Agricul-
        ture and Fisheries Wealth, H.E. Dr. Hamed Al-Oufi, Undersecretary for Fish-
        eries Wealth, and colleagues at the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wealth
(MAFW), for their excellent collaboration during the World Bank’s engagement with the
Sultanate of Oman on the Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector Reimbursable
Advisory Services Program.
      We would also like to thank colleagues at the World Bank, particularly Nadir
Mohammed (Country Director), Jamal Al-Kibbi (Program Manager), and Benoit
Blarel (Practice Manager), and other colleagues who peer reviewed various docu-
ments and provided valuable guidance. In addition, thanks also to the consultants
from TOROA and IDDRA (NZ and UK), and to other consultants, for their brilliant
contribution during the two-year engagement period.
      We would like to thank all the stakeholders in the Sultanate of Oman’s fisheries
sector who we met and worked with during this engagement.



                                                                          Banu Setlur
                                                                     Michael Arbuckle




                                                                                       v
vi  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                          Foreword



Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries Wealth
Sultanate of Oman

The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wealth collabo-
rated with the World Bank over a two-year period in the de-
velopment of a Fisheries and Aquaculture Vision 2040 (the
Vision), a programme of work that involved extensive stake-
holder engagement.
      The Sultanate of Oman’s fisheries and aquaculture
resources are a source of considerable prosperity for all
Omanis. The need to focus on this renewable resource is
even more crucial at the present time, and this is also in line with the ongoing efforts
towards economic diversification in the Sultanate. Importantly, the upcoming five-
year development plan includes fisheries as an important sector in the diversification
process.
      The Fisheries and Aquaculture Vision 2040 is therefore an important and timely
contribution to the Oman fisheries sector, with a goal to create a “profitable world
class sector that is ecologically sustainable and a net contributor to Oman’s economy”.
In achieving this goal, we will need to build the sector in a way that will ensure in-
come levels from the fisheries and aquaculture sector are attractive and competitive
with other sectors of the economy. The Ministry can achieve this by putting in place




                                                                                      vii
policies that will encourage private interests to identify and capture the sustainable
economic potential of our fisheries and aquaculture.
      The Vision and accompanying Implementation Plan set the stage for that future
where over the next five years, the Ministry will redesign the way it operates to
ensure that stakeholders have a voice in the management of the fisheries. In pursuing
this change, the Ministry will embark on a programme of work each year to identify
the environmental and economic risks facing our fisheries, and the opportunities for
improvement. The aim will be to achieve a change to programme of excellence across
the sector.
      Looking forward, Oman will seize this valuable opportunity to diversify its
economy through the fisheries sector by following steps, processes and procedures,
during the implementation process of the Vision 2040.
      We pray to Almighty Allah to guide our efforts and grant us success to fulfill our
vision under the prudent leadership of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos bin Said, Sultan of
Oman.

                                                                    Dr. Fuad Jaffer Al Sajwani




viii  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                              Chapter 1
                                                    Introduction


U
          nder the leadership of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos Said bin Said, the Sultanate of
          Oman has in the past four decades experienced major improvements in health and
          education, while growing into a middle-income country. Development initiatives
have flourished, and the Sultanate was ranked first of 130 countries surveyed by the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP) in its 2010 Human Development Report.
       Oman is putting new energy into efforts to diversify its economy, and ro-
bust job creation is essential for the country’s ambitious and well-educated young
people.
       Fishery and aquaculture are among the most ancient and important sectors to
Oman, with deep cultural and social significance. Before oil was discovered there in
the 1960s, 80 percent of the population lived from agriculture and fishing.
       Omani identity is inextricably linked with fisheries, and there is strong attach-
ment to the sector. But fishing is not economically productive and aquaculture in
Oman is in its infancy. It is conservatively estimated that Oman is forgoing 2.4
billion Omani Rial (OMR) from fisheries under cur-
rent management of the sector. Many fishers are not               The Goal of
involved full time in fishing, and despite significant            Vision 2040
subsidies, remuneration is often low. There is a need             is to create a
to improve economic management of the fisheries                   profitable world-
sector and create viable and sustainable employment               class sector that
opportunities.                                                    is ecologically
       As a starting point, the Sultanate engaged the             sustainable and
World Bank to assist in its effort to overhaul the fish-          a net contributor
eries sector, and has asked the Bank to help devise               to Oman's
a plan for increasing the contribution that fisheries             economy.
make to Oman’s economy and its people. This review

                                                                                          1
Sultanate of Oman

                              52°E                                            54°E                                                            56°E                                                                 58°E                                                 60°E



                                                                                                                                              Khasab           Kumza
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ISL AMIC
                 26N
                                                                                                                                             Bukha                                                                            REPUBLIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REP UBLIC OF                                     26°N
                                                                                                                                      To
                                                                                                                               Ra’s al-Khaymah
                                                                                                                                                                Limah                                                             IR AN
                                                   OMAN
                                                                                                                                              To Fujairah
                                                                                                                                                                        MUSANDAM
                                                                                                                                          To Ra’s            Madha
                                                                                                                                       al-Khaymah
                                                                                                                               To                             To Fujairah
                                                                                                                              Dubai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S ea o f
                                                                                                                                                                 Shinas
                                                                                                                                                                     Liwa                                                               Oma n
                                                                                                                                              Mahadah                      Suhar
                                                                                                                          To
                                                                                                                                              Al Buraymi                                                   AL BATINAH
                                                                                                                       Abu Dhabi
                                                                                                                                                                  AL Saham                                   SOUTH
                 24°N
                                                                                                                                             Al Qabil          BATINAH Al Khaburah                                                                                             24°N

                                                                                                                          AL                                    NORTH As Suwayq
                                                                UN ITED                                              BURAIMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Barka Sib           Matrah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MUSCAT
                                                                                                                                                             Dank
                                                            AR AB EMIR ATES                                                                                                      Ar Rustaq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nakhal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bidbid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MUSCAT Qurayat
                                                                                                                                                                 Ibri
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Al Awabi
                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                      ADD
                                                                                                                                                                                         Nizwa                   Izki         Al Ulya
                                                                                                         To
                                                                                                     An Nashshash      Al
                                                                                                                                  D HAH I R A H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ibra                  Sur
                                                                                                                       Khuwayr                                                                              Al Mudaybi
                                                                                                                                                           ad
                                                                                                                                                        Asw                                                                            Bidiyyah
                                                                                                                                                                                             Adam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ASH Al Kamil Wa
                                                                                                                                      yn
                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                      Al                                            AD                                                      Jaalan Bani
                 22°N
                                                                                                                                                     Jibal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SHARQIYAH Al Wati Bu Ali            22°N
                                                                                                                                                                               D A KH L I YA H                                        ASH
                                                                                                                                                                 usa
                                                                                                                                                                    llim                                                   NORTH                   Al Ashkharah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SHARQIYAH
                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SOUTH




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tarba n
                                                                                                                                Umm as
                                                                                                                                Samim

                                       SAUDI ARABIA
                                                                                                                                                             Barik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Muhut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Filim                Masirah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Khalif
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jazirat
                                                                                                                                                             A L W U S TA                                                           Kalban
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Masirah
                 20°N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20°N
                                                                                                                                               Hayma

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ad Duqm
                                                                                                   Muqshin                                                                                   Al Ajaiz

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ar a b ia n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Madrakah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S ea
                                                                     r




                                                                     w             Dauka                                                                                     Al Khahil
                                                                   ta




                                                               Kha
                                                           Bin
                                               Fasad
                                                                                      D H O FA R
                                                                 Ash Shisar
                                                                                                                                   Shalim                            Sawqirah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SULTANATE OF OMAN
                 18°N
                               To         Al Mazyunah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAJOR FISHING AREAS
                              Sanaw                                                                                                                      Sharbithat
                                                                                                                               Shuwamiyah                                                                                              FISHERY AREAS
                                       To
                                                                               Thumrayt                                                                                                                                                MAIN CITIES AND TOWNS
                                     Shihan
                                                          Mudayy
                                                                                                                       Hasik                                                                                                           GOVERNORATE CAPITALS
                                                                                           Taqah                                                 IBRD 42166 |              GSDPM                                                       NATIONAL CAPITAL
                       R EPUBLIC                                               Salalah              Mirbat
                                                                                                                  Sadah                          FEBRUARY 2016             Map Design Unit

                                                                                                                                                 This map was produced by the                                                          RIVERS
                                                                                                                                                 Map Design Unit of The World
                       OF YEMEN                           Rakhyut                                                                                Bank. The boundaries, colors,
                                                                                                                                                 denominations and any other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MAIN ROADS
                                                                                                                                                 information shown on this map
                                                             0                50           100               150 Kilometers                      do not imply, on the part of The                                                      GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES
                                                                                                                                                 World Bank Group, any judgment
                                                                                                                                                 on the legal status of any                                                            INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
                                                                                                                                                 territory, or any endorsement or
                 16°N                                        0                        50                       100 Miles                         acceptance of such boundaries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Source: Oman National Survey Authority
                       52°E                                              54°E                                                                 56°E




offers a summary of the collaborative efforts involving the Ministry of Agriculture
and Fisheries Wealth (MAFW), the World Bank (WB), and fishery stakeholders.
       Over the past two years under a Phase I engagement, the World Bank team
worked with the government and stakeholders to lay rigorous groundwork for the
development and implementation of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Vision 2040:
“To create a profitable world-class sector that is ecologically sustainable and a net
contributor to Oman’s economy.” Vision 2040 and an accompanying Implementation
Plan establishes a framework and processes to achieve these goals.
       The World Bank convening power backed by the Ministry’s technical and logis-
tical support has proven crucial in developing Vision 2040 and the associated imple-
mentation programs. We explore the results of the work program which is described
in further detail in the following reports:

2  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
Figure 1: Vision 2040 Diagram


                  5. World class proﬁtable and environmentally sustainable ﬁsheries
                     sector




                                 4. Sustainable ﬁsh supplied



        Five Critical
      Process Steps
      to Vision 2040                  3. Stakeholder management agreed




                                  2. Fisheries Management Units set



                        1. Fisheries status deﬁned




1.	   The Program Concept Note describing the agreed purpose and objectives of the
      collaboration between the WB and the Sultanate of Oman
2.	   An agreed Approach Paper describing the way the program of work will be car-
      ried out in developing a Vision to 2040 for the fisheries sector in Oman
3.	   A comprehensive review of scientific literature available on the fisheries sector
      in Oman outlining gaps in research
4.	   A series of 13 stakeholder reports detailing results of workshops held with fish-
      eries stakeholders throughout the Sultanate of Oman, reviewing the importance
      of stakeholder engagement and highlighting key issues relevant to future engage-
      ment strategies
5.	   A series of policy papers discussing major policy issues to be confronted during
      implementation of Vision 2040 addressing issues such as the indicators for mea-
      suring the performance of the sector, funding for future management of fish-
      eries, stakeholder engagement policy and international shared fishery policy
6.	   An analysis of policy scenarios which estimates economic losses being incurred
      under current management of the sector, and opportunities available from im-
      proved management


                                                                            Introduction  3
7.	  A Fisheries Stock Status Report to 2015 providing an agreed, peer reviewed,
     view of the biological status of Oman’s fisheries relative to globally accepted sus-
     tainability benchmarks
8.	 A Fisheries and Aquaculture Vision 2040 document setting goals and a pathway
     for achieving Vision 2040 over a period of 25 years
9.	 A detailed Fisheries and Aquaculture Implementation Plan for the first five years
     of Vision 2040 detailing the manner in which the Ministry and sector will work
     together in the future
10.	 A comprehensive project plan and two project concept notes describing specific
     pilot investment programs in four types of fisheries in Oman; (i) the large tuna in-
     ternational shared fishery; (ii) the economically and culturally important kingfish
     regional shared fishery; (iii) the high value national cuttlefish shared fishery; and
     (iv) the locally important discrete abalone fishery

      During a series of workshops undertaken during 2014, everyone from ministers
to fishers to tribal elders came together with technical trainers from the World Bank



Drying of Abalone




4  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
and the Ministry who conducted detailed analyses on the state of Oman’s fisheries.
Together, they mapped out how the sector works and laid the foundation for the fu-
ture under Vision 2040, as well as a means for its implementation.
      The preparatory work has produced the Sultanate of Oman Fisheries and
Aquaculture Vision 2040; the Implementation Plan of the Fisheries and Aquacul-
ture Vision; and a proposed investment project document. The next stage includes
implementation of the pilot investment project and technical support, as well as stake-
holder co-management of four pilot fisheries. This strategy points to a better future in
fishing higher-value species.
      Phase II, the first five years of implementing Vision 2040, will establish the
policy and capacity for executing global best practices in the fisheries through orga-
nizational development, business development and management training, as well as
planning for new institutions built around key players. Support for abalone fishery
development, for instance, is planned through engagement with stakeholders, im-
proving regulation of the fishery and scaling up of enhancement and compliance re-
lated activities.



Consultation with Stakeholders, Salalah, Dhofar Governorate




                                                                          Introduction  5
  BOX 1: Five Big Steps towards Realizing Vision 2040

  Vision 2040 describes five big steps that are required, to put in place the delicate
  mix of key policies, organizational structures, systems and processes necessary to re-
  alize the Vision 2040 goal. The five steps are as follows, and as depicted in diagram
  below:

  1.	   Defining the status of the fisheries resource to a level understood and accepted
        by all stakeholders - the basic information required to manage Oman’s marine re-
        source must be generated, reviewed and agreed.
  2.	   Defining fisheries management units that will become the foundation of future
        management activities - information to help define appropriate units for manage-
        ment of fisheries needs to be collated and evaluated and actual management
        units determined.
  3.	   Agreeing and establishing effective stakeholder based management regimes
        around defined management units - stakeholder-led management necessarily re-
        quires the identification of stakeholders, and their individual and collective legal
        rights and responsibilities for harvesting and management of fisheries.
  4.	   Developing and maintaining sustainable management systems through stake-
        holder engaged management - ensuring that the supply of fish remains sustain-
        able requires the establishment and adept operation of fisheries management
        arrangements customized to the needs of each fishery.
  5.	   Developing sustainable and profitable value chain - a world-class profitable fish-
        eries sector is economically sustainable with the internal capacity to detect and
        respond to opportunities for, and threats to, the creation and preservation of
        wealth from the use of Oman’s fisheries and aquaculture resources.




6  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                                 Chapter 2
                                   A Brief History of
                                 the Significance of
                                  Fisheries in Oman


O
           man has 3,165 km of pristine coastline that spills into the Arabian Sea, the Indian
           Ocean, the Sea of Oman and the entrance to the Arabian Gulf. Fishing is among
           the oldest professions and activities on the peninsula.
       In their early history, fisheries were small-scale and locally oriented, using a low
level of technology (wooden and sailing vessels) to supply fish for household consump-
tion and markets close by.
       When there was a large catch, salting and drying were the main methods for
preservation. Camels and donkeys were used as transport. The “local council of the
sea” (or Sunnat-al-bahar), comprised of prominent people and experienced fishermen,
was the central institution for coordinating activities.
       The establishment of the modern state of Oman in 1970 brought rapid transfor-
mation. The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries Wealth was established along with
the National Development Bank. New initiatives included the building of new ports,
roads and fishing harbors, increased access to electricity, along with facilities such as
boat yards, fish factories and ice factories. Fishing operations changed with the intro-
duction of marine engineers onshore and the use of cars and trucks, which encouraged
fish trade across Oman with other Gulf countries.
       At this time, foreign workers, mostly recruited in Bangladesh and India, entered
the fisheries sector in some remote villages. The involvement of women in the sector
had started to decline. Finally, the role of the Sunnat-al-bahar changed and its influ-
ence began to wane.
       The history and current challenges of fisheries in Oman were discussed and
analyzed in a series of Stakeholder Workshops conducted with the World Bank, the
MAFW and contemporary fishery stakeholders. This part of the collaboration pro-
gram was based on the premise that to understand the future of fisheries management
and health, we have to understand the past.

                                                                                            7
Port Dibba, Musandam Governorate




      Workshop findings, from 1990 to the present day, show that the expansion and
development of the fisheries sector has continued apace with more new ports and
harbors being established throughout Oman. There is also evidence of commercial-
ization with companies involved in fishing, processing and trading being established
and made operational. Government has also been active in developing new rules for
the sector covering both the catching, marketing and trading of fish.
                                      Significant conclusions came out of the histor-
                               ical analysis, as well as implications for the future en-
                               gagement strategy. The fisheries sector has changed
   But with rapid
                               very rapidly over the past few decades through a pro-
   transformation
                               cess of modernization and expansion. This devel-
   come new
                               opment has been mostly welcomed. But with rapid
   challenges
                               transformation come new challenges that future en-
   that future
                               gagement is poised to address. Some emerging issues
   engagement
                               caused concern, including the decline of local level in-
   is poised to
                               stitutions for fisheries management, the uncontrolled
   address.
                               expansion of fishing effort, the changing make-up of


8  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
Central Fish Market, Barka, South Al Batinah Governorate




                              A Brief History of the Significance of Fisheries in Oman  9
                                    labor—including more legal as well as illegal workers
                                    from Asia.
  The new
                                           Two main implications arose out of this work:
  stakeholder
                                    First, consideration will have to be given to ensuring
  engagement
                                    that all stakeholders have the opportunity for future
  strategy
                                    engagement in activities at an appropriate level; and,
  needs to
                                    second, stakeholders should be increasingly involved
  revitalize these
                                    in decision-making affecting the future of the sector.
  institutions,
                                    The results of the analysis indicate that certain stake-
  employ more
                                    holders are becoming marginalized. There is also strong
  young Omanis,
                                    evidence that there has been a decline in the role and
  and build new
                                    effectiveness of local level institutions relevant to fish-
  and relevant
                                    eries management. In that case, the new stakeholder
  institutions for
                                    engagement strategy needs to revitalize these institu-
  the future.
                                    tions, employ more young Omanis, and build new and
                                    relevant institutions for the future.




10  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                             Chapter 3
        Policy Support for an
 Ecologically Sustainable and
             Profitable Sector


T
        here is a substantial amount of background information and preparatory work that
        shaped the approach of the overall project thus far. These include the Oman Vision
        2020 and the Five-Year Development Program.
      The overarching framework for development policy in Oman has been the Long-
Term Strategy 1995–2020. The pillars of this strategy are to make Oman a diversi-
fied, dynamic and globalized economy; create well-developed human resources; and
promote efficient private sector and sustainable development within a stable macro-
economic framework.
      To replace oil as a source of growth, Vision 2020 anticipated the emergence of
natural gas production and downstream industry, along with a rapid and successful ex-
pansion in construction, real estate, trade, fisheries and tourism.
      The volume of fish exports has also been steadily increasing over the past ten
years—ranging from 62.3 thousand mt in 2002 to 132.5 thousand mt in 2014, ac-
cording to official statistics. In 2011, half of exports
were to the United Arab Emirates, where there is
strong demand. The ratio of fish exports to fish land-
                                                                  Over half (56%)
ings has also been steadily increasing.
                                                                  of Oman’s large
      Oman has been lauded by environmental and
                                                                  pelagic fish and
fishery specialists for its ban on trawl fishing in 2011.
                                                                  68% of Oman’s
The current growth, therefore, is entirely from arti-
                                                                  important
sanal fishing, a sub-sector that has grown in impor-
                                                                  demersal
tance since the ban.
                                                                  species are
      The growth, however, has been somewhat cha-
                                                                  known to be
otic and uncontrolled. Catch has expanded rapidly to
                                                                  fully to over
exceed catch levels experienced before the trawl ban.
                                                                  exploited.
The status of fisheries is now reaching critical levels in

                                                                                        11
Figure 2: Current Status of Key Fish Stocks in Oman

    Landings: Large                   Landings: Important                   Landings: Small
    Pelagic Species                    Demersal Species                     Pelagic Species

                                                                           0%
                                                                                 9%
                                                     30%                                 23%
     36%         44%
                                          60%

                                                       8%    2%                   68%
         20%

                  0%


    Uncertain           Not fully exploited           Fully exploited            Over exploited

Source: Stock Status Report 2014, MAFW.




most of Oman’s key fisheries where economic development potential is at its highest.
Over half (56%) of Oman’s large pelagic fish and 68% of Oman’s important demersal
species are known to be fully to over exploited. Further research is needed to fully un-
derstand the status of remaining fisheries. What is certain however, is that economic
development in these fisheries in the future will need to focus on improving the use
of current catch rather than through increasing production. Production increases in
small pelagic fisheries are feasible, but economic development of these fisheries will
take time.
      Despite a plethora of new ports, fishermen still prefer to land their catch on
beaches in proximity to where they live and make their own arrangements for the
sale of fish which limits opportunity for quality improvement and value addition.
Ports are considered mismatched for potential demand; they are too dispersed for
commercial boats, but also often lack a cluster of services that would attract the ar-
tisanal sector.
      Policy makers in the sector have moved away from licensing industrial scale
vessels for fishing high-value stocks in favor of medium-scale, offshore boats. This
strategy offers the potential for job creation using the Oman brand, but also faces
some challenges if the country is to develop a world-class fishing industry in the long
term. Foremost among these challenges will be the process of restructuring the fleet
in a way that ensures catches are sustainable and provides viable and competitive units
to form a basis for private sector investment and development in the value chain.


12  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
 BOX 2: Fifty Years of Fisheries Development Policy

 The general experience of fisheries development policy over the past 50 years re-
 veals that the interaction between stakeholders is a critically important factor, which
 greatly affects the success of projects. In many countries, fishery development pro-
 grams before 1970 were dominated by government-led, top-down approaches, which
 focused on increased fish production—new harvesting technology and preservation
 methods, along with modern infrastructure, allowed the catch to increase very rapidly.

 Unfortunately, under these production led policies, many fisheries have become over-
 exploited, both economically and biologically, with severe social impacts.

 This approach is now being re-examined globally, along with the realization that policy
 formulation cannot focus only on expanding catch when so many species are de-
 pleted. In the case of Oman, the first priority is to identify all stakeholders and deter-
 mine how best to involve them in reform and change. In that way, economic objectives
 emerge from collaboration and become shared and sustainable goals that concern
 the catch, the community and the environment.




Bluefish




                           Policy Support for an Ecologically Sustainable and Profitable Sector  13
Kingfish




      The fisheries sector still accounts for only a small share of GDP  . Government rev-
enues from the fishery sector are minimal and reported to be US$2.4 million per annum.
In contrast, current government expenditures on fisheries for infrastructure, monitoring
and other services are estimated to be on the order of 50% of gross ex-vessel revenues.
      Fisheries, however, is one of the few renewable natural resource sectors in
                                   Oman that offers a long-term economic contribution
                                   to the economy. It is estimated that the sector could
   The large
                                   contribute an additional 2.4 billion OMR to the sector
   international
                                   from improved management of current catches alone.
   tuna fisheries
                                          Further potential development is also possible
   in particular
                                   from expanding Oman’s interest in international and
   offer the
                                   unexploited stocks. The large international tuna fish-
   single biggest
                                   eries in particular, offer the single biggest immediate
   immediate
                                   opportunity for economic development in fisheries in
   opportunity
                                   Oman. The fisheries sector is also seen as integral to
   for economic
                                   the viability of communities along the country’s coast-
   development
                                   line, and it offers promising linkages to the tourism
   in fisheries in
                                   sector and export promotion, in which Oman could
   Oman.
                                   become a quality brand.


14  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                             Chapter 4
          Sustainable Management
          of Fisheries, Starting with
          Stakeholder Engagement


I
   t is impossible to overemphasize the importance of the stakeholder engagement pro-
   cess. The fishery sector in Oman, in common with many others worldwide, has a wide
   variety of different stakeholders: government, fishermen traders, consumers who pur-
chase and eat fish, and citizens who benefit from national development investments—for ex-
ample, roads and hospitals funded in part by the development of a sector.
       The government of course may design and attempt to implement certain poli-
cies while at the same time non-government stakeholders can influence the outcome
of these actions—either by supporting or resisting.
       The Fisheries Stakeholder Analysis was a pillar of the preparatory phase (Sep-
tember 2013 to February 2015) of the World Bank Program – Sultanate of Oman
Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector, which was undertaken at the re-
quest of, and led by the MAFW.
       Over the course of two years, the World Bank provided a sound baseline and
footprint for the stakeholders in Oman in key locations along the entire coast. The
methodology was developed, finalized and implemented with the World Bank team
and the MAFW.
       Preparatory steps and pilot surveys were completed between April and June
2014 to inform and refine the resulting stakeholder analysis methodology. A series of
meetings, workshops and familiarization visits were undertaken in locations from the
capital of Muscat to Musandum in the North, and Salalah in the South, to observe
coastal conditions and fishing activity, hold stakeholder meetings as well as road-test
methods.
       The first pilot stakeholder workshop was organized within the MAFW in
Muscat during April 2014. A range of people attended these workshops, from fishers,
to secondary fish sellers, government officials and others.



                                                                                       15
Table 1: Classification of Key Stakeholders in the Fisheries Sector
 CATEGORY                KEY STAKEHOLDERS               COMMENT
 1.	 Ministry for        MAFW                           Identified prominently by stakeholder
     fisheries sector                                   analysis; recorded as ‘most powerful’;
     (and link to                                       Responsible for sector, and link to other
     Citizens)                                          government ministries and citizens.
 2.	Primary              Fishermen                      Identified prominently by stakeholder
    stakeholders                                        analysis; recorded as ‘most dependent’
                                                        on sector.
 3.	Service              Traders, Fish factories,       Identified as key stakeholders within the
    providers            Repair workshops,              ‘Institutional Mapping’ analysis.
                         Transporters
 4.	 Government and      National Government,           Identified as key stakeholders within the
     regulators (and     Municipal Council, Wali,       ‘Institutional Mapping’ analysis; National
     link to Citizens)   Sunnat-al-bahar [and           government has overall responsibility for
                         Citizens in turn]              link to Citizens.
 5.	Political            Shura Council members          Identified in specific Governorate
                         (elected members of the        Workshops.
                         lower house of the Council
                         of Oman)
 6.	Government           Government agencies,           Identified as key stakeholders within the
    partners             Oman Development Bank          ‘Institutional Mapping’ analysis.
 7.	Local                Fishermen’s Associations       Identified as key stakeholders within the
    communities                                         ‘Institutional Mapping’ analysis.
 8.	Academic             University, Colleges           Identified as key stakeholders within the
                                                        ‘Institutional Mapping’ analysis.
 9.	Media                Newspapers, TV, Internet-      Omitted from the identification of key
                         based media                    stakeholders, but evidently engaged
                                                        with sector (through regular reports on
                                                        issues and news in Oman)
 10.	Industry            [a future development          None at present in Oman, but may
     and Trade           option]                        emerge in time, two Fishermen’s
     Associations                                       Associations are planned, and broader
                                                        Associations may follow.




      Core concerns emerged from the workshops: Young people are reluctant to
take up a career in fishing. The power of traders and merchants has increased while
Sunnat-al-bahar influence has declined. And need for greater involvement of women
in the sector.
      Information collected during stakeholder consultations suggests that the pool
of uneducated Omanis, who traditionally provide the core of the small-scale inshore
fishing sector, has shrunk dramatically in recent years, and this decline is expected to
continue.


16  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
Stakeholder Consultations




              Sustainable Management of Fisheries, Starting with Stakeholder Engagement  17
Table 2: SWOT Analysis from Stakeholder Engagement (October 2014)
 Al Wusta Governorate - Fisheries Sector – SWOT Analysis - Women
 Strengths                                     Weaknesses
 1)	 abundance of marine wealth                1)	 fishermen do not comply with rules for fishing
                                                   seasons
 2)	 very long coast along Arabian Sea
                                               2)	 inadequate observation team on the coast
 3)	 biological marine ecosystem
                                               3)	 use of forbidden fishing gears
 4)	 presence of government support for
     laborers working in the sector            4)	 presence of foreign labor
 5)	 presence of several fish factories like   5)	 coastal pollution from several companies/
     ice, drying and salting factories             factories
 6)	 importance of coastal women project       6)	 absence of fish market (for public sales)
     (proposed)
                                               7)	 no opportunity for women to work in the
                                                   sector because of stoppage of ‘coastal
                                                   women project
 Opportunities                                 Threats
 1)	 presence of projects that serve the       1)	 increase in number of cyclones and incidence
     region                                        of high waves
 2)	 coastal women project                     2)	 presence of companies/factories resulting in
                                                   coastal pollution and reduction in fisheries
 3)	 many job opportunities are provided           wealth
     in contrast to other regions
                                               3)	 increase in foreign laborers
 4)	 lectures and seminars to educate
     fishermen and increase awareness          4)	 misuse of certain fishing gear resulting in
                                                   decrease in fish stock
 Ash Sharqiyah Governorate - Fisheries Sector – SWOT Analysis - Men
 Strengths                                     Weaknesses
 1)	 diversity of fishing seasons              1)	overfishing
 2)	 long coastline in the region              2)	 pollution and lack of observers
 3)	 increase in number of fishermen/          3)	 dependence on foreign laborers/fishermen
     workers
                                               4)	 absence of fishermen institute/training school
 4)	 presence of turtle sanctuary
                                               5)	 non-compliance by most fishermen with
 5)	 presence of fishing harbors                   fishing regulations and rules
 Opportunities                                 Threats
 1)	 form fishermen association                1)	 low demand for fish products
 2)	 educate fishermen and increase            2)	 marine pollution
     awareness
                                               3)	 weak interaction between fishermen and
 3)	 availability of space for aquaculture         ministry in ongoing projects
 4)	 design projects for private sector        4)	 absence of direct support from government
     involvement/investors in the fisheries        to fishermen
     sector
                                               5)	 increase in foreign laborers/fishermen




18  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
       Although detailed employment data is lacking,
one clear fact is that fewer young Omanis wish to                Analysis of the
enter the traditional skiff sector as full-time fishers.         stakeholder
This is not surprising when remuneration for skiff crew          workshops
can be as low as 200 to 300 OMR per month. While                 revealed
some may be prepared to engage in part-time fishing,             implications
perhaps supporting family traditions, many have alter-           for future
native employment opportunities and aspirations for a            engagement
lifestyle with greater economic reward.                          strategy.
       A wide range of important lessons emerged from
the implementation of a stakeholder analysis study
in Oman. All of the workshop participants undertook a           “Strengths, Weaknesses,



Fishermen, Barka




                Sustainable Management of Fisheries, Starting with Stakeholder Engagement  19
Opportunities and Threats” (SWOT) analysis of the sector. There was a high level of
coherence between the results produced in each governorate and also between male
and female participants, albeit with some variation.
      In terms of strengths, most stakeholders were optimistic about the future of
the sector. Experienced fishers highlighted the abundance and diversity of fish stocks,
including valuable tuna as well as abalone and cuttlefish. There is a large workforce
of experienced fishermen; however, many of them expressed hope for more support
from the government.
      Other opportunities stakeholders identified included outreach to fishers, the de-
sire for an increase in technical capacity, and interest in the development of aqua-
culture. Analysis of the stakeholder workshops revealed implications for future
engagement strategy. Further development requires a new, more complementary re-
lationship, including private sector involvement.
      Efforts to bolster the attractiveness of traditional fishing have taken the form of
subsidies, including for skiffs, outboard motors and fishing gear. Although generous,
the subsidy schemes have not kept pace with claimed need for assistance in the fishing
sector, nor have they raised remuneration within the sector to a level that is competi-
tive with alternative employment.
      The process also revealed that Oman appears to be heading in the direction of a
classic fisheries policy track –developing fish production, where experience from other
countries has already shown the limits to this approach.
      Oman’s own experience from 2004–2014 also shows how such a model could
end up overexploiting the most profitable species, which are then gradually replaced in
importance by less profitable ones.




20  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                          Chapter 5
    Vision 2040: A World-Class
     Profitable Fisheries Sector


I
    t bears repeating that the goal of the Fisheries and
    Aquaculture Vision 2040 is to create a “profitable
                                                              “In achieving
    world-class sector that is ecologically sustainable and a
                                                              Vision 2040,
net contributor to Oman’s economy.”
                                                              we will need to
       Vision 2040 proposes an alternative develop-
                                                              build a sector in
ment scenario in which the fisheries sector will be a
                                                              a way that will
net contributor to the wealth of Oman, rather than
                                                              ensure income
being dependent upon that wealth (mainly through
                                                              levels from the
subsidies) for its development as at present. In Oman,
                                                              fisheries and
as everywhere else in the world, fisheries resources
                                                              aquaculture are
have the capacity to make an important contribution
                                                              attractive and
to economic growth through the investable surplus
                                                              competitive with
that they can generate.
                                                              other sectors of
       “In achieving Vision 2040, we will need to build
                                                              the economy,”
a sector in a way that will ensure income levels from
                                                              wrote His
the fisheries and aquaculture are attractive and com-
                                                              Excellency Dr.
petitive with other sectors of the economy,” wrote His
                                                              Hamed Al-Oufi,
Excellency Dr. Hamed Al-Oufi, Oman Undersecre-
                                                              Undersecretary
tary for Fisheries.
                                                              for Fisheries,
       Vision 2040 looks ahead twenty five years but it
                                                              Sultanate of
does not set out numerical goals for tonnes of fish har-
                                                              Oman.
vested, numbers of jobs, or revenues. Rather Vision
2040 sets out a framework and processes by which
Omanis will determine these outcomes on a fishery by fishery or even community by
community basis. This is not something the Ministry can achieve alone; it requires pol-
icies that encourage private partnerships that can capture economic potential.

                                                                                     21
                                          Oman has a rich mix of fisheries with differing
      Rather Vision               management demands. These range from high value
      2040 sets out a             large pelagic fisheries shared amongst coastal states
      framework and               and foreign flagged nations, to low value straddling
      processes by                stocks such as lantern fish shared with neighboring
      which Omanis                countries, to a complex mix of inshore demersal and
      will determine              pelagic stocks fished domestically. It follows that the
      these outcomes              responsibilities for management of fisheries that might
      on a fishery by             develop between the MAFW and stakeholders will
      fishery or even             differ depending on the biology of the fisheries and the
      community                   social and economic characteristics of the fishing ac-
      by community                tivities themselves.
      basis.                              Vision 2040 establishes a work program for the
                                  first five years; from 2020 onwards it is expected that
                                  the MAFW will have management and capacity in
place to fulfill economic and sustainability goals of fisheries management.
      In the first five years of implementation, four fisheries will be targeted as pilot
projects to establish stakeholder-based management, with each of the four fisheries
representing a distinct type of harvesting as outlined below:

1.	     A local discrete shared fishery – The abalone fishery is a high value, single stock
        with defined biological and geographic limits within a sub-area of the Exclusive
        Economic Zone of Oman (EEZ). It therefore represents a type of fishery that is
        ideally suited for a high level of engagement of stakeholders (or fishers) in man-
        agement from an early stage.
2.	     A national shared fishery – The cuttlefish is also high value but the biological
        range is such that management decisions for the fishery will necessarily encom-
        pass the whole EEZ of Oman. The institutional arrangements for stakeholder
        engagement will therefore be more extensive and opportunities for devolving
        management will be fewer than in the abalone fishery. This implies a greater reg-
        ulatory role for government in the short term. It is expected that the types of ar-
        rangements established for cuttlefish will be applicable to other inshore stocks,
        but further work would be needed to properly define management units in these
        complex, often multispecies, inshore fisheries.
3.	     Regional shared fishery – The kingfish is a regionally distributed fishery—largely
        within the EEZs of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states. Agreement


22  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
  BOX 3: Diving for Abalone

  Diving for Abalone is a cherished tradition in Oman, which is unique to Dhofar Gover-
  norate. This has a very high unit value and has led to overexploitation, which in turn
  resulted in the MAFW to put in place a closed season. The loss of this valuable and
  sustainable fishery needs to be urgently addressed. The most significant landings
  data may in fact be for 2011 because they demonstrate the impact of rebuilding the
  stock. The 2012 data suggests that the benefits were lost very quickly. Under new
  management and enhancement arrangements, it may well be possible to replete the
  stock back to exceed harvest realized in 2011; the abalone fishery is a prime candi-
  date for the development of a pilot fishery, moving towards a stakeholder-based re-
  gime.



      among neighboring states is needed to establish effective management. The
      kingfish fishery also offers considerable opportunity for generating increased
      economic value through improved management not just to Oman, but to other
      GCC states that share the biological distribution of kingfish.
4.	   International shared fishery – Large tuna fisheries offer a singular development
      opportunity for Oman. Fished within country waters and on the high seas, the


Hatchery reared Abalone Ready for Seeding into the Wild Fishery




                                      Vision 2040: A World-Class Profitable Fisheries Sector  23
Abalone shell




      fishery attracts coastal state fishers as well as fishers from foreign flagged na-
      tions. Oman’s current interests in these fisheries are modest given its important
      status as a coastal state and its commercial advantage as a potential fisheries hub
      for the wider GCC. A program of development of Oman’s interest in these fish-
      eries is proposed through a public private partnership arrangement.

       Concept Notes for projects to develop Oman’s interests in the regional kingfish
fishery and large international tuna fisheries have been developed and detailed invest-
ment projects have also been documented to pilot the Vision 2040 framework in the
abalone fishery (in Dhofar) and cuttlefish fishery (in Ash Sharqiyah).
       The pilot studies build on an extensive body of global evidence concerning ma-
rine fisheries’ management and reform. Lessons learned from several countries as far
afield as New Zealand, Chile, Mexico, and Namibia clearly show that rather than
being a net drain on a national economy, sustainable fisheries can create an economic
surplus and be a driver of economic growth. The wealth generated may then be the
basis for creating additional economic opportunities.
       In the kingfish and tuna fisheries, investments will focus on defining and securing
Oman’s interests in these fisheries and engaging stakeholders in the process. For the
kingfish fishery, this will involve defining Oman’s share of the regional stock and es-


24  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
  BOX 4: Replenishing the Fish

  The status of fish stock and the ability to sustain fisheries is one of the most critical
  considerations for the futures of these investment projects. Responsible management
  requires effective and continuous monitoring of the state of populations of key fish
  stocks. In addition, effective management of Oman’s fisheries necessitates our so-
  phisticated understanding of fish biology and ecosystems. The preliminary research
  underscored the need for ongoing research, monitoring and assessment of stocks—
  given that most of the fish stocks assessed are overexploited.




tablishing robust regional and national management arrangements. For the large tuna
fisheries, there is a significant economic opportunity for Oman in securing a share of
the Indian Ocean fisheries that appropriately recognizes Oman’s coastal status.



Indian Oil Sardine                            Pharaoh Cuttlefish




Emperor fish                                  Lobster




                                       Vision 2040: A World-Class Profitable Fisheries Sector  25
High value fish including tuna, kingfish, abalone and others




26  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                           Chapter 6
            The Next Generation:
        Employment, Training and
         Development to Manage
             and Utilize Fisheries


T
         he pillars of this project are young Omanis. Invest-
         ment in a modern and world-class fisheries sector       While fishing will
         in Oman is centered on a highly skilled and pro-        always play an
fessional labor force. While fishing will always play an         important part
important part in Omani life, it is expected that future em-     in Omani life,
ployment opportunities in the fisheries sector will focus on     it is expected
building technical, management and business expertise.           that future
The overarching employment goal will be to create more           employment
opportunities for employment within sector at competi-           opportunities
tive rates of remuneration so that employment in the fish-       in the sector
eries sector is a desirable career for young Omanis with a       will focus
good education. The next generation of educated Omanis           on building
will be the science and management experts as well as the        technical,
business and technical leaders in this sector.                   management
       Within the MAFW there will be a focus on re-              and business
designing core systems and enhancing the capacity                expertise in the
of staff to deliver effective management and support             fisheries sector.
stakeholder lead initiatives. An organizational capacity
and capability improvement program will include re-
cruitment and training. Stakeholders will need to build new skill and technical ca-
pacities in managing their fisheries. Improved profitability will mean building business
capacity. The skills and development opportunities for young Omanis span all aspects
of management from research to policy, as well as each link in the value chain at the
professional and technical levels.
       In the first year a Policy and Strategy Unit will report to the Undersecretary of
Fisheries. This unit will develop and try out new policy positions. It will also build a


                                                                                     27
University Graduates




Photo courtesy of Oman tours.



dedicated investment program for increasing Oman’s interest in Indian Ocean large
tuna fisheries. The engagement would take the form of a public-private partnership
and may encompass investments in offshore harvesting and onshore processing at
the Duqm fishing Port facility. Capacity development in fisheries research to ensure
Oman has a solid baseline understanding of the scientific status of fisheries will also be
made along with upgrading outdated licensing and monitoring systems.
      MAFW has already embarked on a strategy to enable greater fisheries stake-
holder participation in fisheries management. Improved communication and consulta-
tion with stakeholders are the first steps in this strategy, and this process has already
begun. There is opportunity to expand this work to integrate with the responsibilities of
                                  other line ministries using up-to-date digital technology;
                                  widespread access to digital technology allows for
                                  easy cost-effective communication with stakeholders,
   An important
                                  including conveying proposals for management reform
   area of
                                  and surveying stakeholders about issues and concerns.
   investment
                                        An important area of investment will be the
   will be the
                                  establishing of an integrated compliance program,
   establishing of
                                  which will be critical to the development of fisheries
   an integrated
                                  management. The commitment by Oman to in-
   compliance
                                  crease stakeholder input and participation in the fish-
   program….
                                  eries sector is an important step toward maximizing


28  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
Figure 3: New Fisheries Management Cycle
(Showing ‘Outputs’ or Services that will be produced by the MAFW on an
annual basis)

1. POLICY FRAMEWORK
                                                                    Outputs (services)
                                                                    provided

                             6. Nature and extent                   1. Policy developed &
                                of services                            monitored
 5. Stakeholder                                                     2. Stakeholders
    agreements                                                         engaged
                                                                    3. Fisheries status
                                                                       reported
                                                                    4. Fisheries risk
                     2. Sector                                         assessments
                    Engagement                                         reported
                                     7–9. Fisheries                 5. Stakeholder
4. Fisheries risk                         services                     agreements
   assessments                                                         established
                                                                    6. Nature and extent
                                                                       of services
                                                                       determined
                                                                    7. Compliance
             3. Fisheries status                                       realized
                                                                    8. Regulatory
                                                                       processes
                                                                       delivered
                                                                    9. Investment projects
                                                                       completed




Central Fish Market              Women sorting and packaging fish




  The Next Generation: Employment, Training and Development to Manage and Utilize Fisheries  29
Sultan Qaboos University Graduates




Photo courtesy of SQU.



voluntary compliance. The Sultanate will be making a corresponding commitment
to invest in enforcement of rules agreed with stakeholders to ensure that manage-
ment investments are effective and lasting. This will involve cross agency coordina-
tion through a “whole of government” approach.
       Over time, increased levels of collaboration between government agencies will
be expected along with improved role definition. Work will initially focus on how best
to deliver frontline fisheries enforcement services in Oman. These services can be
delivered by the fisheries management agency (MAFW) or other dedicated enforce-
ment agencies such as the Omani Coast Guard. The Coast Guard already has the re-
sources, infrastructure, enforcement powers, and trained personnel to deliver. There
are strong cost-efficiency arguments for giving the Coast Guard responsibility to de-
liver fisheries law enforcement services--subject to MAFW specifying the nature and
extent of those powers.




30  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
                                                                                           Chapter 7
                         Charting the Waters:
                            Looking Forward
                           a Quarter Century


T
          he broad program of work over the 25-year ho-
          rizon begins with a five-year ‘set up’ period to es-  …customized
          tablish the policy and operational framework,         arrangements
develop capacity and effective management systems, and          for individual
carry out (and learn from) four pilot studies. At the end of    fisheries in a
five years, a full plan for the development and management      way and at a
of all fish stocks in Oman will be established.                 pace that has
        The Marine Science Center has already em-               the support of
barked on a new program of work aimed at completing             stakeholders.
an annual fisheries status report on all important or po-
tentially important fisheries in Oman. National and in-
ternational capacity will be added to the Center to carry out programs and the growing
research team will provide technical support and use to update fisheries research. The
Fisheries Status report will be reviewed annually with stakeholders.
        Risk assessment analyses will be completed for all fisheries to underpin stake-
holder based management decisions. Supporting systems will be designed and imple-
mented and training and recruitment programs for staff and stakeholders will gradually
be implemented over the five-year program.
        Between 2020 and 2040, opportunities to increase sector profitability will be
gradually realized as stakeholder management measures are implemented, and poli-
cies to reduce compliance costs and reliance on government financial support are
realized.
        Details of the fisheries management arrangements, and the risks and benefits
that eventuate will depend on the biological and economic characteristics of individual
fisheries and the aspirations, preferences and capabilities of the stakeholders in those
individual fisheries. The outcome of the stakeholder engagement process will be the


                                                                                      31
Proposed Duqm Fisheries Industrial Zone, Al Wusta Governorate




Mirbat, Dhofar Governorate




32  Sustainable Management of the Fisheries Sector in Oman – A Vision for Shared Prosperity
establishment and maintenance of customized arrangements for individual fisheries in
a way and at a pace that has the support of stakeholders.
       By 2030, all stakeholder-based management will be in place where opportunities
to improve economic sustainability performance are possible. By 2040, the sector will
be internationally competitive and a net contributor to the economy of Oman.
       The wooden Dhow is emblematic for tourists and locals alike, of the enduring
beauty and natural capital of Oman’s coastal communities, while new monumental
ports have displayed the government’s commitment to modernization and investing in
hard infrastructure.
       Looking forward, the World Bank supports stakeholders and government in re-
newing four high-value fisheries and creating the new management structure to guide,
regulate and enforce fishery management. Vision 2040 is a framework for evolution,
based on bottom-up development of fishery-specific management arrangements and
institutions.




                                 Charting the Waters: Looking Forward a Quarter Century   33
         1818 H Street, NW
         Washington, DC 20433




All photos are courtesy of World Bank and MAFW
(except where otherwise stated).
