TOWARD A REGIONAL APPROACH TO DISASTER
          RISK FINANCE IN ASIA
             DISCUSSION PAPER

                MAY 2016
Contact
Olivier Mahul,
Global Lead, Disaster Risk Finance
Program Manager Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program
The World Bank Group
omahul@worldbank.org
Asia is at high risk of catastrophic disaster and climate shocks that cause
damage and erode welfare and economic gains.

Financial protection strategies have been recognized by countries and
their development partners as important tools to protect countries
from these e ects and to thereby support them in reducing poverty
and increasing shared prosperity.
There is currently an active international dialogue on establishing
a regional initiative for disaster risk nancing (DRF) for Asia.
The topic of an Asian disaster risk nancing facility has been raised in various forums, including the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Asia-Paci c Economic Cooperation (APEC),
the G-7 InsuResilience Initiative, and the Vulnerable 20 Group of Ministers of Finance (V20).

This note aims to connect international dialogue with experience on the ground to provide a basis
for consultation with countries, donors, and private partners.
               C H I N A

         2008
               Sichuan Earthquake
               69,195 dead
               $148 billion



               MYANMAR                                                                PHILIPPINES
         2008




                                                                                2013
               Cyclone Nargis                                                         Typhoon Yolanda
               138,366 dead                                                           6,340 dead
               $4 billion                                                             $12.9 billion



               NEPAL
         2015




               Earthquake
               Over 8,635 dead
               $10 billion




              INDIAN OCEAN
        2014




              Tsunami
              Over 230,000 dead
                                                  THAILAND                             JAPAN
                                            2011




                                                                                 2011
              $15 billion
                                                  Floods                               Earthquake & Tsunami
                                                  815 dead                             15,894 dead
                                                  $45.7 billion                        $300 billion

Asia has seen some of the deadliest and costliest disasters in history. The nature of hazards faced across the
region varies significantly, with flood as the most persistent hazard. Analysis indicates that average annual
economic losses from Asian flood disasters could surge to US$500 billion or more by 2050. Half of all ASEAN
member states have experienced at least one severe flood event costing over US$100 million in the past decade.
Countries also face potentially devastating droughts, tropical cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic
eruptions.
These di erent hazards generate di erent nancing needs in the
aftermath of a disaster.
While some governments may deal principally with costs for response and recovery after rapid onset disasters,
others may need to fund livelihood assistance and food security responses to ood- or drought-damaged
crops, while others still may be dealing with reconstruction of critical infrastructure after earthquake, ooding,
or storm damage. Some countries have to be prepared to deal with many di erent types of response costs.
Di erences in economic development further amplify the di erent
post-disaster nancing needs.
The nature of costs arising from disasters varies according to the type of population, asset, or economic
activity exposed.

                                                                         Countries with higher levels of economic
                                                                         development will have higher values of
                                                                         assets exposed, and are often concerned
                                                                         with large losses that occur through
                                                                         damage to infrastructure and economic
                                                                         disruption.

                   The 2011 Thailand oods, for example, caused an estimated US$47 billion of damage and losses,
                   of which 70 percent came through the manufacturing subsector. While post-disaster assistance
                   for households was required, the largest nancial challenges faced by the government related to
                   reconstruction of physical assets after the initial emergency period, and to the signi cant drop in
                   revenues due to manufacturing interruptions.



                                                                         Conversely, countries with large
                                                                         populations of vulnerable poor may be
                                                                         focused on post-disaster assistance that
                                                                         supports livelihoods, such as social safety
                                                                         nets.



                    The biggest single contributor to losses from the 2005 earthquake in Pakistan came from damage
                    to private housing, which accounted for almost 50 percent of the total cost of reconstruction.
                    Although there was damage to infrastructure and costs through economic sectors, the bulk of the
                    costs arose from the large humanitarian response to aid the 3.5 million people rendered homeless.
                                      Why DRF?
                                      To respond immediately and e ectively following a disaster—and
                                      to minimize the human, economic, and scal costs that increase
                                      rapidly when response is delayed or inadequate—Asian countries
                                      need access to su cient money and e ective mechanisms for use
                                      during an emergency. A strategy for nancial protection against
                                      disasters allows governments to increase their nancial capacity to


              $
                                      respond to disasters, and can improve nancial inclusion for a ected
                                      households and businesses by giving them nancial tools to aid
                                      recovery.
                                      Such nancial mechanisms can also reduce the impact of
                                      disasters on social and economic development. They can smooth
                                        nancial shocks and prevent governments and populations
                                       from resorting to adverse coping mechanisms that disrupt
                                       development progress and livelihoods. Through these positive
                                      impacts, strategies for nancial protection against disasters can
                                      help to protect welfare and economic gains, thereby contributing
                                      to poverty reduction and shared prosperity.

A strategy for nancial protection against disasters needs to encompass both sources of nancing and
mechanisms for e ective disbursement of nancing in-country.
Securing Money for Disaster Response
Di erent post-disaster needs require di erent nancing mechanisms; an instrument that provides rapid
liquidity to support emergency operations may not be appropriate for funding longer-term, large-scale
reconstruction of damaged infrastructure. For example, a reserve fund nanced through the budget could be
cost-e ective for dealing with frequently recurring ood events; but pre-funding larger losses from more
extreme events through such a fund would incur high opportunity costs of ring-fencing large reserves for
infrequent use. Insurance, on the other hand, can be costly to fund more frequent but lower-impact events,
since premiums increase with the expected frequency of payouts; but for less frequent, catastrophic events,
insurance can be an e ective way to increase nancial capacity beyond the national means.



                                                                                      Mechanisms that retain risk
                                                                             (e.g., budgetary mechanisms and credit that
                                                                           keep risk in the budget or on the balance sheet).



                                                                                  Mechanisms arranged ex-ante that
       Countries have various nancial                                              disburse funds quickly (such as
         options available to them for                                                   contingent credit).
       dealing with post-disaster losses,
          each suitable for di erent
            contexts and priorities.
                                                                                       Mechanisms that transfer risk
                                                                              (e.g., insurance or international assistance).



                                                                               Funding sources sought after disaster
                                                                          occurrence that may take longer to mobilize, but
                                                                           may provide a large volume of funds (such as
                                                                               reconstruction loans and grants from
                                                                                      international partners).
A more detailed introduction to DRF is provided in the paper “Financial Protection Against Disasters: An Operational Framework for
Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance” (World Bank, 2014).
Disbursing Money E ectively
It is equally important to ensure that resources for disaster response reach the people who need them the
most, when they need them the most. Responsibilities for post-disaster spending may be shared between
central and local governments, such that state- or municipal-level entities may lead the nancial response on
the ground. Structuring of subnational disaster risk nancing is therefore as important as mobilization of funds.



                  The government of Mexico acknowledges the importance of both in its fund for natural
                  disasters (FONDEN), which is governed by clearly de ned rules on allocation of post-disaster
                  funding for recovery and reconstruction at the federal and state levels.


                  The government of Ethiopia uses a social safety net (the Productive Safety Net Program)
                  to deploy contingent nancing mobilized at the national level down to a ected households.
                  In the event of a catastrophic drought, the safety net program can reach additional a ected
                  households using locally held contingency budgets and a federal-level contingent nancing
                  window.


                              $       $

                                  $
                                              $




                                                      $
                                                  $
                                              $       $

                                          $




                                                                  $    $

                                                              $
                                                                   $
The   private sector plays an important role in absorbing post-disaster costs and in
ensuring that households receive nancial assistance after a disaster.



                                                    $
                 $




                                                                                        $
                         The private sector’s importance was exempli ed after the 2011 Thailand oods.
                         According to World Bank estimates, domestic insurers absorbed losses of around 25
                         percent of TB 1.4 trillion total economic losses (approx. US$40 billion). One key
                         government response to the disaster was to establish a national Natural Catastrophe
                         Insurance Fund as a back-stop for insurers. The fund was designed to help insurers
                         cover costs should another major natural disaster event strike.



                         The government of Turkey has also focused on using the private sector to provide
                         disaster-a ected households with nancial assistance. The Turkish Catastrophe
                         Insurance Pool is a national program of a ordable earthquake insurance that
                         functions as a public-private partnership. It was established following the
                         devastating 1999 Marmara earthquake, and now covers millions of homeowners
                         in Turkey.
Low insurance penetration, however, hampers such a response
through the private sector in many Asian countries.

Figure 1. Non-life Insurance Penetration as a Percentage of GDP in Asia (selected economies)




                    Figure 2

Source: Based on 2014 data from Swiss Re Sigma and 2013 and 2014 data from AXCO.
Disaster Risk Finance in Asia
Several Asian countries are already active in strengthening their nancial resilience and any regional initiative
should build on existing work. Some countries have already been working on national strategies to better
manage the cost of disasters.

Annex I provides a summary of progress made by a subset of Asian countries, as identi ed through ongoing
World Bank engagements. This summary is not meant to be exhaustive and should be expanded following
further consultations with countries and other (donor and private) partners.




      Knowledge gained through World Bank support to countries, dialogue in the region, and recent disasters
   suggests that countries’ current priorities for use of nancial instruments can be placed in three broad categories:




              1
 Access to rapid disaster response
                                                         2
                                               Property catastrophe risk
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                           Property catastrophe risk
   nancing (and deployment of                 insurance for public assets.                insurance for private assets.
    rapid response funds at the
      subnational level and to
            households).

Rapid response nancing here refers to nancing released within days or weeks of a disaster occurring.
This feature tends to be o ered by contingent instruments such as the World Bank’s contingent credit (Cat DDO )
o ering, insurance products such as the Paci c Catastrophe Insurance Pilot, contingent grant windows
such as the federal-level contingent nancing window linked to the Ethiopia productive safety net
program described above, and donor emergency response facilities.
1. Rapid Response Financing
Access to rapid response nancing is a priority issue for economies at risk of severe shocks, such as large
earthquakes and tropical cyclones (e.g. Indonesia, the Philippines, Nepal, Myanmar); but it is also important
for economies that are exposed to recurrent ooding but have limited resources to respond (e.g. Myanmar,
Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Sri Lanka).


                        The Philippines has already implemented and used disaster-contingent credit
                        instruments with the World Bank (a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option, or
                        Cat DDO; US$500 million) and with the Japan International Cooperation Agency
                        (JICA) (SECURE; US$500 million); it has just nalized a second World Bank Cat DDO
                        (US$500 million) and also is evaluating sovereign catastrophe risk insurance as an option.



                        Indonesia has carried out analysis to develop a national strategy for       nancial
                        protection against disasters, including a possible disaster reserve fund.



                        Myanmar, Cambodia, and Lao PDR are in the early phases of
                        exploring sub-regional pooling of risk similar to the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
                        Insurance Facility (CCRIF) or the Paci c PCRAFI catastrophe insurance program.



                        Sri Lanka has recently put a disaster-contingent credit product in place with the
                        World Bank (Cat DDO).




                        Nepal learned from the devastating April 2015 earthquake of an identi
                                                                                            ed gap in
                        rapid response nancing and e ective mechanisms to deploy funding once it
                        is received.
                                Post-disaster rapid response nancing may be mobilized for very di erent
                                purposes across countries. For some, rapid response nancing is valuable as
                                bridge nancing that helps to avoid budget disruption. For others, it allows
                                urgent action (e.g., emergency services, nancial assistance to a ected
                                populations) in the face of severe budget constraints. How such nancing is
                                used will largely be determined by the size of the economy and by budget
                                 exibility.




Countries may opt to connect rapid response nancing instruments to
subnational disaster risk nancing mechanisms, such as local-level disaster
funds in Pakistan and the Philippines, or the scalable social safety nets used in
Ethiopia. Subnational-level strategies for nancing disaster risk are particularly
relevant in Asia, given the region’s increasing urbanization and megacities.
For example, strategies at the municipal level can be designed to make
allowances for the uneven distribution of exposure within Asian countries.




Some of the larger economies (e.g., the Philippines, Pakistan) are focusing on programs for subnational
disaster risk nancing that better structure how funds ow to provinces or local government units. The
government of the Philippines is in advanced technical preparation of a program of subnational catastrophe
risk nancing that will allow local government units to better structure liability and scal transfers, including
through a joint catastrophe insurance fund. The government of Pakistan has legislated for the creation of
provincial funds for disaster risk management (DRM) administered by provincial governments. Technical
work is currently planned to operationalize at least one of these subnational funds. The idea of state-level
  nancial mechanisms for emergency response to complement state disaster funds has been proposed for
India as part of technical discussions, although this is in very early stages of consideration.
2. Public Asset Insurance
Catastrophe risk insurance for public assets is a focus for a growing
number of countries as they invest in new infrastructure and
buildings. In Indonesia and Vietnam, for example, governments are
beginning to develop public asset insurance programs. Property
catastrophe risk insurance for public assets has already been utilized
in the Philippines, and the government is seeking to increase
insurance uptake even further.
3. Private Insurance
Property catastrophe risk insurance for private assets is becoming a
focus for countries where a growing middle class and small businesses
are at risk of property damage from disasters. Thailand, for example,
set up a National Catastrophe Insurance Fund to shore up the domestic
insurance industry following the devastating 2011 ooding. The
Philippines is also in the early stages of exploring ways to reach more
households and businesses with catastrophe risk insurance through
the insurance market.
Toward a Regional Disaster Risk Finance
Facility for Asia




A regional facility for disaster risk nance for Asian countries could contribute substantially to nancial
resilience in the region.

International experience shows that regional collaborations have opened up access to nancing sources that
would not otherwise be available to countries, and have helped countries to smooth the volatility of the cost
of disasters and to better structure their nancial response. Initiatives such as the CCRIF and the Paci c PCRAFI
insurance program have also demonstrated that regional platforms on disaster risk nancing and insurance
have the potential to confer bene ts well beyond increased access to nancing. These regional initiatives
have also served as forums for sharing of knowledge and good practice, as vehicles for shared investment in
public goods to support understanding of risk, and as engines of political momentum—driving engagement
and progress on better managing disaster and climate shocks.
Any regional risk nancing solution should build on and strengthen the
national priorities of individual Asian countries.
Figure 2 shows an initial assessment by World Bank sta of where countries are currently focusing their
engagement in disaster risk nancing and what their needs are.

Figure 2. Identi ed Country Priorities on Disaster Risk Financing




Source: World Bank-GFDRR Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program (2015).


 Any proposal for a regional risk nancing platform should be evaluated against such priority areas and
revised jointly with countries in order to provide improved access to the following:

    •       Rapid disaster response nancing for the national government, complementing existing resources.
    •       Rapid disaster response nancing for subnational entities.
    •       Insurance of public assets to transfer risk from the government to dedicated risk carriers.
    •       Private property catastrophe insurance markets that provide access to a ordable and sustainable
            catastrophe risk insurance for homeowners and enterprises.
In Asia, such a platform should be exible enough to accommodate the di erent post-disaster nancing
needs arising from the heterogeneity in natural hazards, exposure, and vulnerability across the region. The
platform would have to accommodate the needs of both large and small economies (see box 1).

Such a platform could prioritize the needs of countries dealing with ood,
given that ooding is the most prevalent hazard in the region, but would also have to address the needs of
countries struggling with losses from infrequent severe shocks such as earthquakes and tropical cyclones. To
add value to countries’ e orts in building nancial resilience, it would need to serve countries focused on
assisting vulnerable rural populations as well as countries focused on reconstructing homes and infrastructure.



 Box 1: Small versus Large Economies: Financial Capacity for Major, Infrequent Events

 Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are highly exposed to losses from earthquake, tropical cyclone, and
   ooding, but their experiences in seeking to access external nancial capacity for post-disaster spending have di ered
 depending on their size. Mexico—an upper-middle-income country with a relatively large economy—sought to
 transfer a large amount of risk and was able to do so through a single approach to the international markets. Mexico’s
 fund for natural disasters (FONDEN) is therefore backed by an excess-of-loss reinsurance program that provides in
 excess of US$400 million of nancial capacity, while a catastrophe bond provides US$300 million of additional capacity.

 For smaller countries seeking to place smaller amounts of risk, a single approach to the markets may not be feasible or
 cost-e ective. The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility has helped Caribbean countries and more
 recently Central American countries to access external nancial capacity for post-disaster spending arising from
 hurricanes and earthquakes. Sixteen Caribbean countries have pooled their risk in CCRIF, which is essentially a joint
 reserve mechanism that accrues premiums and joining fees from countries and pays out to members when a disaster
 occurs. As an aggregator of risk, the facility has been able to access risk-bearing capital on the international markets in
 the form of both reinsurance and catastrophe swap contracts. Although individual country policies with CCRIF are
 typically of the order of tens of millions of dollars, the reinsurance and catastrophe swap program provides over
 US$100 million of coverage. Countries have bene ted from lower premiums, from the diversi cation bene ts of risk
 pooling, and also from shared transaction costs. The facility was originally established with the technical assistance of
 the World Bank, and with initial funding of more than US$60 million from donors to provide claims-paying capacity in
 the early years.
The success of any regional risk nancing facility will depend in equal
measures on political and institutional arrangements as its technical
foundation.
Any proposal for a regional risk nancing facility will need a strong regional partner
organization to support the political and policy coordination between participating
governments. This could take various forms. For example, a regional organization could serve
as a convening body to ensure coordination, could host a small technical secretariat for
policy coordination while the facility maintenance is outsourced to specialist service
providers, or could establish a regional facility as an a liate body of the regional organization.
An appropriate organization or organizations and their respective roles will need to be
identi ed in consultation with interested governments.
A regional facility for Asia should build on existing work at the national
level to develop strategies for nancial protection against disasters and to
ensure e ective deployment as well as mobilization of funds.
Financing mobilized within a regional facility must be connected to mechanisms in-country that disburse
funds, such as scalable social safety nets/cash transfer schemes or subnational disaster risk nancing
mechanisms like those planned in Pakistan and the Philippines. And any regional platform should o er
opportunities to develop resilience beyond mobilization of funds—by serving as a platform for capacity
building, common investment, and dialogue.

Figure 3. Possible Interaction between National DRF Strategy and a Regional Facility
                                        INTERNATIONAL
                                          INSURANCE           INTERNATIONAL
                                           MARKETS              COMMUNITY


                                                  ASIA REGIONAL RISK
                                                  FINANCING FACILITY




                                                  NATIONAL DISASTER
                                                    RISK FINANCE
                                                      STRATEGY
                                   For example:

                                                      National DRM
                                                          Fund
                                       Social                           Public asset
                                      protection                         insurance
                                       system                             program


                                                                Subnational
                                                Property       governments
                                            insurance pool    insurance pool


The proposed structure would enhance national strategies ( gure 3), and funds mobilized through the facility
could pass through national reserve funds and potentially into local-level disbursement mechanisms such as
scalable social protection networks (as in Ethiopia) or down to subnational government entities (such as cities
or provinces). Groups of subnational entities such as cities could also approach the platform directly as part of
a national strategy, for collective coverage.
Desired outcomes from a regional facility should include:
          Improved understanding of risk. Standardization of risk data and policy terms across countries
          is key for the establishment of a regional facility. This initiative can provide an incentive for
          economies to work together to better understand their risks and to invest in risk data, which can
          then also serve to inform risk reduction and prevention. This could also lead to the development of
          global public goods, such as regional risk databases and regional cat risk models, to support the
          establishment and operations of such a facility.
          Comprehensive financial protection. A regional facility could be an umbrella to national
          strategies, o ering additional options for nancing to supplement national capacity, and working in

 S        complement to mechanisms in-country to disburse nancing (such as cash transfer schemes) and
          thereby reach a ected households and businesses. This regional mechanism could be used to drive
          the design and implementation of comprehensive national strategies.

          Improved financial disaster planning. A facility could promote the development/improvement
          of national contingency planning to allow for a timely and cost-e ective use of funds post disaster.

          Reduced reliance on disruptive budget reallocations or uncertain humanitarian
          assistance. A facility could provide rapid funds in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. The
          facility could include a joint reserve mechanism alongside risk transfer to access international
          market capacity.

          Cost savings through diversification of catastrophe risks. Through catastrophe risk pooling
  $       across countries with di erent risk pro les, such a facility could achieve signi cant diversi cation
          bene ts, re ected in lower costs for risk nancing. Lower cost for participants will come from
          diversi cation through pooling, not from cross-subsidization. Risk-based pricing would be applied
          for participants.


      $
          Access to financial capacity in the international markets. A facility could provide a
          platform for access to international (re)insurance or capital markets for individual countries looking
          to place large amounts of risk or for clusters of smaller economies looking to achieve economies of
          scale by working together. A vehicle for insurance of public assets could also be considered.
Proposed Structure for a Regional Disaster
Risk Financing Facility for Asia
Figure 4 shows a possible structure for such a facility. It combines individual approaches for larger economies
with joint approaches for smaller economies. As well as the individual nancial components and technical
assistance facility shown, the facility would also comprise a forum for key stakeholders (such as Ministries of
Finance) to participate in knowledge-sharing and to foster political momentum in the eld.




      Figure 4. Proposed Structure for a Regional Disaster Risk Financing Facility for Asia

             INTERNATIONAL (RE)INSURANCE/CAPITAL MARKETS


               PLATFORM FOR RISK TRANSFER TO
                  INTERNATIONAL MARKETS
                                                                                          TECHNICAL
                                                                                          ASSISTANCE
                 JOINT DISASTER                                                            FACILITY
                INSURANCE FUND


                   NATIONAL DISASTER RISK FINANCE STRATEGY


         ASIAN COUNTRIES BY INCREASING GDP
The joint disaster insurance fund would be best suited for smaller economies, with uncorrelated but similar
risk, looking to gain from the bene ts of risk pooling. A model similar to that of the CCRIF, where countries
enter into an insurance contract with the facility and pay a premium for access to rapid liquidity as bridge
  nancing post-disaster, could be considered.

The risk transfer platform could function as a clearinghouse for transferring sovereign disaster risk in Asia to
the international markets. It would allow large economies to approach the market directly and smaller
economies to approach the market as a group, as the Paci c countries have. Standardized contracts could be
used as well as a standardized process for readying countries for transacting. An approach for collectives of
subnational entities (such as cities) to this platform could also be considered.

The technical assistance facility would be the home of public goods such as catastrophe risk models that
would support the above components. It could also assist countries with their national strategies for nancial
protection, and speci cally with mechanisms for disbursing funds in-country to better reach a ected
households and businesses.

A transparent, rules-based disbursement mechanism could be an attractive option to allow
international partners to “pre-commit” post-disaster aid, thereby making the disbursement of funds quicker
and more predictable for countries and allowing governments to plan ahead. This could also be considered
as a platform component.

A regional platform for disaster risk nance in Asia could confer signi cant bene ts to the region. Many
discussions—between countries, donors, and development partners and within regional economic
platforms—are already taking place on how to improve nancial resilience in Asian countries. The
heterogeneity of countries’ needs and di ering levels of existing engagement in this area should form the
basis of a transparent and open dialogue on disaster risk nancing for the region. The next step in establishing
any regional facility is to engage with individual countries to assess their priorities and needs.
 N E                      X            T                S           T            E            P           S
The collaboration between the World Bank Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program and the Rockefeller
Foundation aims to bring together ongoing discussions, identify key questions, and explore options for the
institutional, nancial, and operational design of a regional facility.

Activities will be carried out over the course of this year toward an outline for a potential regional mechanism,
to identify challenges to be addressed in the establishment of such a mechanism, and propose a roadmap for
its implementation:

a. Country demand assessment and policy dialogue. Review of existing national initiatives; consultations with
potential participants to assess demand, readiness, barriers, and political will; and targeted outreach bringing
together decision makers and champions to support the necessary political will for implementation.

b. Catastrophe risk data assessment. Review to evaluate available catastrophe risk data on which parametric
contracts could be settled; evaluate available catastrophe risk models for priority countries and perils, which
could be used to support placement of indemnity or parametric contracts; and evaluate the need for
investment in building the required risk data tools for such a facility.

c. Insurance market consultation. Assessment of private sector view on challenges to –and feasibility of–
increased provision of risk transfer products in developing Asian economies, given the ndings with respect to
catastrophe risk data availability, especially through a regional vehicle.

A nal report will bring together the ndings from these activities, matching country needs with technically
feasible solutions to propose a structure for consideration by potential participants and international partners.
This will also contain a roadmap for implementation.
Annex 1. Progress in Disaster Risk Financing in Select Asian Countries




                          .
This note was developed under a partnership between the Rockefeller Foundation and the Disaster Risk
Financing and Insurance Program (DFRIP) to explore options for supporting the establishment of a regional
disaster risk nance facility in Asia. The Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program is a joint program of the
World Bank’s Finance & Markets Global Practice and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GDFRR), with nancial support from partners including the Rockefeller Foundation, the Swiss State
Secretariat for Economic A airs, the UK Department for International Development, the European Union,
the Government of Japan, the Government of Germany, and the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency. DRFIP has provided advisory services on disaster risk nancing and insurance to more
than 60 countries worldwide. The program works along four priority areas to support four main bene ciary
groups: governments, farmers, homeowners and SMEs, and the poorest and most vulnerable.

For more information visit www.worldbank.org/dr .
