                         1



                       2016




The Equitable Access
Initiative
The Equitable Access Initiative                                                                                                             2


Final Report 30 June 2016

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................... 3
Executive Summary........................................................................................... 4
Chapter 1: Key Findings and Recommendations................................................. 7
 1.1   The use of GNI in Health Policy ................................................................................. 7
   1.2 The Equitable Access Initiative (EAI) – Developing a new framework ........................... 9
   1.3 Findings from the EAI Expert Analytical Groups ............................................................ 9
   1.4 A conceptual framework to guide classifications in external heath financing ............... 10
   1.5 Health Classifications ..................................................................................................... 10
   1.6 Equity and Human Rights in a Classification Framework for Health ............................ 11
Chapter 2: Classification by Health Need and Income ...................................... 13
 2.1 Income classification and health policy ..........................................................................13
   2.2 Measuring health need .................................................................................................. 14
   2.3 Limitations of a single-criteria classification framework ...............................................15
   2.4 Classification by health need and income ..................................................................... 16
      2.4.1. Using a single composite indicator for classification: GNI adjusted by health need17
      2.4.2 Complex Formula based Classification ................................................................... 19
      2.4.3 Differentiated Classification by Income and Disease Burden ................................ 20
      2.4.4 Towards nuanced classification to inform operational decision-making ............... 20
Chapter 3: Domestic Financing Classification .................................................. 21
 3.1 Key indicators beyond GNI ............................................................................................ 21
   3.2 Classification by domestic health financing characteristics .......................................... 22
      3.2.1 Mapping Health Priority and Current Government Fiscal Capacity ....................... 23
      3.2.2. Key Findings ........................................................................................................... 24
      3.2.3 Policy Implications: Differentiated policies ............................................................ 25
   3.3. Classification by Health Financing gap ........................................................................ 25
      3.3.1 Implications ............................................................................................................. 26
Chapter 4: Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research ........................ 28
 4.1. Limitations .................................................................................................................... 28
   4.2. Further Research .......................................................................................................... 29
Chapter 5: Relevance for other areas of Development ..................................... 30
Chapter 6: Conclusions and Recommendations ............................................... 31
 Annex I: Summary of the EAI consultative process ............................................................ 34
Annex II: Table of country rankings ................................................................ 36
Annexe III: Equitable Access Initiative Expert Panel and Technical Working Group
Members ......................................................................................................... 39
                                                                                                             3
Acknowledgements

The Equitable Access Initiative Report represents a collaborative effort by nine convening organisations -
Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance; The Global Fund; UNAIDS; UNICEF; UNDP; UNITAID; UNFPA; WHO; and the
World Bank - together with a high-level Expert Panel and Technical Working Group1, chaired by Pascal Lamy
Donald Kaberuka.

For driving the analytical work that was central to the Initiative and this report, the conveners express thanks
to the analytical teams from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, the University of Sheffield/Imperial
College, the Blavatnik School of Government (University of Oxford), and the Institute of Health Metrics and
Evaluation (University of Washington).

For the successful conclusion of the Initiative, the EAI team is deeply grateful for the financial support and
engagement from the Wellcome Trust and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

For the drafting of the report, the Initiative is grateful for the inputs from the many partners who participated
in consultations, and in particular to Dr Jesse Bump (Harvard University), John McArthur (Brookings
Institute) and Mr. Rodrigo Salvado (Gates Foundation) for their invaluable contributions, support and
feedback throughout the Initiative.

A special mention is also extended to the EAI team: Mr. Dominik Zotti (Project Lead; Senior Advisor, Global
Fund), Dr. Michael Borowitz (Chief Economist, Global Fund), Aditi Srinivasan (Lead Analyst, Report Author),
Harsit Agarwal (Lead Data, Financial Analyst), and Ana Baracaldo (Coordinator).

Note

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of any specific EAI convener or Expert Panel.




1
    List and designation of Expert Panel and Technical Working Group members available in the Annex
                                                                                                             4
Executive Summary
For two decades, the World Bank has classified countries as low-, middle- or high-income based on Gross
National Income (GNI) per capita. As a standardised and simple proxy for factors such as wealth, the capacity
of governments to provide services to their citizens, and national levels of development, GNI has been an
influential yardstick to determine the eligibility of lower income countries for concessional external financing
from multilateral and bilateral partners.

For decades, the classification was straightforward. A majority of newly independent countries receiving
external financial development support were low-income countries — the countries that had the greatest needs
were also the poorest. But in recent years the rapid increase in economic growth and inequality around the
world, coupled with the rebasing of GNI by some countries, and fresh domestic economic pressures among
many funding bodies and donor agencies, is creating new complications. Countries that until recently were
considered low-income risk losing external support as they grow into middle-income status, even though they
are still home to most of the world’s poorest citizens with unmet health needs.

Presently, 105 countries are considered middle-income, but many are characterized by high-levels of inequity
and are home to more than 75 per cent of the world’s poor. From a global health perspective, the largest share
of disease burden is now concentrated in middle-income rather than low-income countries, a reality that GNI
per capita alone cannot capture. As a result, there is an increasing concern over the potential mismatch
between GNI per capita and the extent of a country’s health needs suggesting that policies based on income
classification alone overlook important dimensions of development, such as poverty and inequality.

The recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the final communiqué from the Financing
for Development summit in 2015, call for achieving ambitious development and health goals with an explicit
focus on equity. The SDGs embody a renewed commitment to equality, non-discrimination and “leaving no
one behind” and this requires an explicit focus on the poorest and most vulnerable. One of the unique features
of the SDGs is in their relevance for all countries regardless of economic standing. But there is also a renewed
commitment to “shared responsibility” in investing toward a more equitable and egalitarian world, and
achieving these goals through a human-rights based approach that is rooted in giving all people the
opportunity to achieve their right to life and dignity. For external health financing this could mean a greater
focus on the social determinants of health, reducing health disparities and the rights of vulnerable groups and
key populations.

Given such rapid socio-economic and political change, and continued global health commitments, there is
need for a debate that while GNI continues to be relevant, it may be inadequate as the principal basis for
classifying countries and their eligibility for external financial support for development.

The Equitable Access Initiative (EAI) was launched in early 2015 by the heads of multilateral organizations
engaged in global health: GAVI, the Global Fund, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNITAID, the World
Bank and WHO. The purpose was to consider alternatives to GNI as a framework to assess countries’ need for
external financial support for health. Currently, the convening organizations use GNI in different ways to
determine key policies, including eligibility and co-financing policies.

A high level panel was established with co-chairs Pascal Lamy, former head of the World Trade Organisation,
and Donald Kaberuka, former head of the African Development Bank. At the first EAI Expert Panel Meeting
in February 2015, Panel members and the nine convening organisations were in agreement that the World
Bank’s GNI per capita country classification system, designed for World Bank lending decisions, was being
used far more broadly in health-related decisions. The conveners of the Initiative commissioned four expert
academic groups to develop options for a new health framework.

Based on the analyses of the four analytical teams and the co-convenors, as well as extensive consultations,
this report explores a health framework that can account for health need, income levels, and health funding
considerations, which could inform different stages of decision-making by the convening organizations’
governing bodies or other bilateral and multilateral organizations involved in external financial support for
health.


Key Findings

The analyses find that policymaking should not rely on a single variable to inform complex health financing
polices on the eligibility for and the prioritisation of investments. It is proposed that policymakers consider a
more comprehensive framework for decision making that accounts for countries’ position on a health
development continuum, based on the analysis of countries’ needs, fiscal capacity and policies.
                                                                                                               5
For instance, eligibility policies should not only consider the level of wealth in a society, as measured by GNI
per capita, but account for health need relative to income as well as mitigate the effects of discrete thresholds
that render a country ineligible for support once it passes a certain GNI per capita level. Further, in order to
prioritize investments, a government’s resources and policies to meet this health need should be taken into
account. Finally, the analyses highlight the need to account for equity considerations, particularly within
country inequity, suggesting that context-specific analyses are relevant when assessing the level and type of
support to be provided.

Based on the analyses and findings of the EAI analytical work, a conceptual framework to guide policymaking
in external financing for health is proposed that accounts for the following considerations:

Recommendations
       To inform complex external health financing decisions such as eligibility and the
        prioritisation of investments with a multi-criteria framework that takes into account income
        levels and health needs, in addition to domestic capacity and policies, where relevant.
       To inform eligibility policies by health need relative to income, and to design complimentary
        policies that allow for a planned gradual transition, in order to mitigate the risk of a country losing
        gains in health when external financing decreases rapidly in spite of significant health needs and/or
        limited fiscal space.2
       To consider domestic fiscal capacity characteristics when prioritising investments and
        to develop policies that favour improved health outcomes and increased domestic finance.
Long-term actions
       To consider greater investments in data collection systems towards developing a more nuanced,
        comprehensive framework that captures sub-national equity considerations, including the needs of
        key populations and vulnerable groups, through better quality and more reliable data that support
        the inclusion of relevant indicators.

Way Forward

A key issue that goes beyond what is explored in this report, would be to consider health impact and efficiency
indicators in guiding operational and programme decision-making and to promote incentives that improve
health outcomes and reduce health needs. This would be another critical element for a more comprehensive
and strategic approach.

The Initiative in general and the report in particular is not focused on the implications of these findings and
recommendations for specific eligibility, allocation, or co-financing policies, since this is beyond the purview
of a multi-convener Initiative, nor on implications for high-income countries. The analysis, findings and
recommendations may serve however as a starting point for discussions on these policies. It is recommended
that as a first step, this report - and where relevant, the individual analytical groups ’ reports - be shared with
the governance bodies of health and development organisations to inform policy and strategy deliberations.

Finally, while the analysis and recommendations are specific to health, the fundamental approach and
characteristics could have relevance for other areas of development. The idea of accounting for need relative
to income levels and fiscal space could be relevant to any lens that focuses on the socio-economic dimensions
of development, including agriculture, education, health, nutrition, gender, and social inclusion. Further, the
recommendation that thresholds and sharp cut-offs in assistance should be avoided could apply to any
development area where there are high levels of need across the income spectrum and limited domestic
capacity to address it.

It could therefore be of significant value to consider how a more refined and comprehensive framework that
in addition to income levels, accounts for need, fiscal capacity and policies across key development sectors
could be developed. While some countries may have relatively equal standing across areas of development,
assessing each sector by similar factors could contribute to a more coherent analytical framework to help
understand countries position along the development spectrum, and to provide better guidance for domestic
and external finance towards achieving maximum impact.

2While there was consensus among EAI members that where discrete thresholds are used that render a
country ineligible for support once it passes a certain GNI per capita level, the risk of negative impacts on
overall health financing should be mitigated by allowing for a gradual and planned transition; an additional
recommendation to avoid discrete thresholds for low- and middle-income countries was not supported by
the entire EAI.
                                                                                                            6
Since many health organizations, multilateral and bilateral, have limited expertise or mandate in areas related
to fiscal policies and domestic financing capacity characteristics, the analysis highlights the importance and
need for a wider collaborative approach among development partners to jointly develop the analytical tools to
inform such policies. Similarly, investments in global public goods such as national data systems and data
quality require greater coordination and alignment in order to avoid duplication and achieve efficiencies.

Again, these issues highlight the need for stronger partnership and collaboration across development
organizations to maximally support countries as they move along the development continuum.
                                                                                                                                            7
Chapter 1: Key Findings and Recommendations
1.1 The use of GNI in Health Policy
The successors of the Millennium Development Goals, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) mark a
watershed moment in development financing: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development identifies that
all UN stakeholders, including State and non-State actors, have an equal and shared responsibility towards
achieving these goals through a human-rights based approach that is rooted in achieving the right to life and
dignity for all. The SDGs are also much more explicitly rights based than their predecessor the MDGs.

While the operationalization of the SDGs is centred on paying ‘attention to the voices of the poorest and most
vulnerable’3, the premise of the health-related SDG is “to ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at
all ages”, whether in low-, middle-, and high-income countries. For external health financing this could mean
a greater focus on reducing health disparities through rights-based approached to health which address the
social determinants of health.

Against this context, there is a need for a more nuanced framework that allows financing to respond to the
different health needs of people, and is better tailored to the realities of different countries across income
groups.

Historically, GNI per capita has played a predominant role in informing development policy as multilateral
health financers and development agencies4 have followed the World Bank’s lead in using the metric and
income classification to inform key policies. Institutions that disburse about 75%5 of available external
financing for health, base their eligibility, allocation and co-financing6 policies on the metric (Table 1).

Table 1 Use of GNI in multilateral organisations' policies
                                                                                               Co-
                               Eligibility           Allocation Formula
                                                                                               Financing
                               GNI
                                         Health      GNI per       Disease        Perform      GNI per        Comments/      Other
                Organization   per
                                         Need        capita        Burden         ance         capita         indicators
                               capita
                                                                                                              Allocation: DTP3 for
 Health




                Gavi                                                                      
                                                                                                              performance
                                                                                                              Allocation: Potential
                GFATM                                                                             Government
                                                                                                              Spending
                                                                                                              Allocation:
                UNAIDS
                                                                                                              Population
 Multilateral




                                                                                                              Allocation:
                UNFPA                                                                     
 Financer




                                                                                                              Population
                UNICEF                           
                UNITAID                            
                                                                                                              Allocation:  CPIA,
                IDA                                                                                           PBA, and Population
                                                                                          
                (World Bank)                                                                                  Eligibility: Credit
 Multi-Sector




                                                                                                              worthiness
 Financers




                                                                                                              Eligibility: Credit
                IBRD                                                           
                                                                                                              worthiness
                UNDP                               


An advantage of GNI per capita is that it is a simple and widely available statistic. But it is coming under
increasing scrutiny for its use as a basis to inform health policy, in part because of questions over its ability to
represent countries’ actual needs. In the past decade, rapid economic growth and statistical revisions led to
many countries’ transition to middle-income status. The 105 countries presently classified as middle-income

3Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda        for Sustainable Development:
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld
4Including the Asian Development Bank, African Development Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, International Fund for
Agricultural Development, The Global Fund and Gavi.
5http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/documents/s19590en/s19590en.pdf
6Eligibility policies define the criteria based on which countries can access concessional financing and grants; Aid allocation are the
explicit or implicit set of rules used to determine the amount of aid, and in certain cases the type of aid, that a country receives; Co-
financing policies are partnership agreements with government recipients of external health financing which define the level of
domestic public resources that a government would allocate either to co-invest in externally funded programs, or to co-invest more
broadly in the health system.
7 Performance is currently only considered for co-financing allocation
                                                                                                           8
are characterized by high-levels of inequity and are home to more than 75 per cent of the world’s poor. 8 The
classification masks significant variation among countries, including widespread differences in levels of
development and basic human needs.

A consequence of this transition to middle-income status has been the potential loss of financial and technical
support from multilateral and bilateral partners. Countries including Ghana, India, Nigeria, Pakistan, and
Vietnam will likely lose between 25 and 40 percent of their total official development assistance due to
transition from major development finance institutions. 9 At risk of losing external support, many middle-
income countries—and their populations—may find it more difficult to achieve or sustain gains toward
internationally agreed development benchmarks including the health-related targets of the 2015-2030
Sustainable Development Goals.

From a global health perspective, the largest share of disease burden is now concentrated in middle- income
rather than low-income countries, a reality that GNI per capita alone cannot capture. The potential mismatch
between GNI per capita and the extent of a country’s health needs suggests that income based metrics should
be complimented by health indicators to guide international decision making in health and development.

Efforts to develop different country classification frameworks have however come in for criticism. Some fear
that using alternative indicators may not be suited to replace GNI, posing challenges of data collection,
measurement, weight, and that they may ultimately prove more complex to implement. Some have proposed
that the best response would be simply to lift or change the existing eligibility thresholds. Several organizations
have already put transitional arrangements in place to soften and slow the impact of the loss of external
financing for countries in transition.

Generally, the calls for a wider debate over the relevance of GNI per capita as the central yardstick for external
health investments, have emphasised that income metrics are not designed to capture disease specific
considerations, account for the different disease-burden across countries, or accurately reflect a government’s
capacity to address health needs. The common driving motivation is to avoid a resurgence of disease that could
undermine past progress and be detrimental to fostering improved outcomes in health and development.

    Box 1. The Search for Alternative Measures

    The growing reflection on the limitations of income metrics to measure human development has
    triggered considerable research on alternatives. Since 1990, the UN Development Programme has
    produced its own Human Development Report, which includes rankings for countries based on
    measures for children and young people including HIV, malnutrition, exclusive breastfeeding,
    antenatal coverage and immunisation; and, for adults, of physicians, health spending, and age-
    standardised death rates and obesity.

    French President Nicolas Sarkozy established the Commission on the Measurement of Economic
    Performance and Social Progress in 2008 to examine the limits of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
    as an indicator of economic performance and social progress, and to consider what other measures
    should be used to assess the quality of life.” Chaired by Joseph Stiglitz and advised by Amartya Sen,
    the Commission’s final report called for better information and richer measures to guide economic
    policy. Among other recommendations, it highlighted the need to shift emphasis from economic
    production to well-being; to emphasise the perspective of the household; and to give more
    prominence to distribution within countries.

    Subsequent analyses have followed, including the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
    Development’s “Better Life Index” report in 2015, which captures material well-being and quality of
    life indicators. “National averages tell only part of the well-being story,” it said, highlighting
    disparities within countries and the importance of metrics that are not traditionally collected.

    The Social Progress Index 2015 highlights the need to achieve economic and social progress for
    inclusive growth. It measures social progress independent of GDP and is meant to serve as a
    complementary tool, highlighting the importance of outputs rather than inputs. Most recently, the
    World Bank established a Commission on Global Poverty on how best to measure, monitor and
    combat poverty, which is due to report in 2016.




8 There are however clear differences in poverty rates between LICs and MICs: for instance, extreme poverty incidence rates in LICs are
extremely high as a whole (about 47% in 2012) compared to LMICs (around 18%) and UMICs (around 5%).
9 “The role of aid to middle-income countries: a contribution to evolving EU development policy”. London: ODI, 2011.
1.2 The Equitable Access Initiative (EAI) – Developing a new framework                                      9

Against this background, the Equitable Access Initiative was convened in 2015 to explore the strengths and
weaknesses of GNI, and the potential for developing alternative and complimentary measures to inform
policies. At the first EAI Expert Panel Meeting in February 2015, Panel members and the nine convening
organisations were in agreement that the World Bank’s income country classification system was being used
far more broadly to inform health-related decisions very different from the question of access to soft loans to
which it was originally applied.

It was acknowledged that the use of such a classification system overlooked key considerations such as the
highly-varied distribution of disease, poverty and inequality within countries, as well as the capacity of the
health system. Based on the recognition that countries along a development continuum vary in terms of health
need and capacity, a framework not purely based on income may be better suited to ease transitions, identify
suitable health interventions, and provide incentives for mutually accountable partnerships.

The objective of the Initiative has been to develop a new health framework for analysis that takes into account
a broader set of economic and health indicators to help inform international decision making in health. To
conduct the analytical work, a Request for Applications was widely disseminated by the Equitable Access
Initiative, and a Technical Evaluation Committee comprising experts from the convening organizations
selected four analytical groups to independently explore the issue.

This report focuses on the points of agreement and elements that emerge from the analyses of the four
analytical teams commissioned by the EAI, as well as inputs from the EAI consultation process, in addition to
further analysis by the co-convenors, without delving into the work of any one group. The next section
highlights the main findings of the four analytical groups. The full reports of the analytical teams, which
discuss the methodology, approach and findings of each group, are available as accompanying documents to
this report.



1.3 Findings from the EAI Expert Analytical Groups
To investigate alternatives to decision making based on income as the central criteria, the EAI commissioned
four expert analytical groups to independently explore the issue. This section discusses the concepts adopted
by each. The four teams were based at the University of Oxford, the University of Sheffield-Imperial College,
the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH), and the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME)
at the University of Washington.                The findings of each group can be found at
http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/equitableaccessinitiative/.

There is a common point of departure across the four groups. All the teams recognised limitations to using a
single indicator classification system in health policy, and each proposes modifications by complimenting the
GNI/capita metric with additional indicators relevant to health and financing.

Considering that a classification based on multiple indicators could guide better decisions, the groups explored
different health-based frameworks that take into account country health needs, inequalities, access, financial
protection and spending. In broad terms, the ideas are along a spectrum that on one end emphasises current
realities such as the health burdens countries face and the resources available (Oxford and Sheffield), then
moves to more normative questions of which indicators to choose and how different indicators could be taken
into account (NIPH), and finally to pragmatic questions of the funding gap to reach a particular health goal
(IHME).

Although their approaches differed, there were significant points of convergence between the proposals,
including: the use of disease metrics to capture health need; accounting for inequity in income and health; and
accounting for a government’s capacity to domestically finance health. They explor ed the development of a
continuous classification framework rather than discrete groupings of countries based on thresholds. Several
used aggregate health measures such as Disease-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) to account for health access,
financial protection, and health system quality.

The methods proposed by each team generated results that differed significantly from those based on GNI
alone, showing that GNI is a poor reflection of health needs and government capacity. However, all four
models provided relatively similar results, which suggests that health needs and capacities may be captured
by a variety of indicators.
                                                                                                         1
The proposed frameworks would help better understand the health needs and capabilities in a country context.
The needs assessment framework by IHME also lends itself to understanding the financial need in a health 0
focus area towards achieving a particular target, while accounting for efficiency considerations.

Some groups provide additional data/sub-indices which could allow policymakers to analyse local
characteristics, including sub-national variations, and identify specific policy responses. The framework of
IHME is based on estimates of actual resources required rather than proxies, and can inform policies to
incentivise more domestic financing.

1.4 A conceptual framework to guide classifications in external heath financing
The analytical work and consultations highlighted that complex policies such eligibility and the prioritisation
of investments should not rely on a single criteria for decision making. Different criteria and related indicators
are relevant depending on the policy objective and stage of decision-making. The findings, models, and
recommendations proposed by the four groups, in addition to the input from consultations, and further
analysis by the co-convenors, can be structured into an overarching conceptual framework to guide
classifications in external financing for health (Figure 1). The individual findings and specific frameworks
developed by the expert analytical groups are available on the EAI website10.




Figure 1: Conceptual Framework to guide classifications in External Financing for Health

External health financing has been guided by the principles of improving health outcomes in countries that
have the least financial and structural capacity, both in terms of domestic resources and technical capability,
to respond to key health needs.

These principles are operationalised through two broad sequential decision-making stages: establishing the
eligibility of countries to access external financing based on ‘need’; second, to prioritise where the largest
investments need to be made, and what type of assistance (technical or financial) should be provided based
on need, and domestic health policies including health financing. The prioritisation process also plays a key
role in determining the partnership terms that external financers may have with country governments.11 The
analytical work emphasises that coordination among key development partners is however critical in order to
comprehensively respond to the challenges linked with limited domestic fiscal capacity for health specifically,
and development more broadly.

1.5 Health Classifications
Historically, GNI per capita has been used in classification frameworks to understand the level of wealth or
financial need in a context. The analyses however demonstrates that the understanding of ‘need’ in health
policy should be governed by additional considerations such as the disease burden. Burden of disease metrics,
such as the Disability adjusted Life Years (DALY) or Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) help quantify the
level of disease and provide a common denominator.

10See http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/equitableaccessinitiative/
11This could include the dialogue on the policy changes needed to make certain health services available to key populations and
vulnerable groups, or an agreement on the areas for domestic investment to maximise the disease response.
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                           1
The first classification the analytical work explores is therefore informed by both income and health metrics,
and accounts for levels of income relative to the disease burden a population should address, which could be
particularly relevant for eligibility policies.

The second classification relates to process of prioritising investments, taking into account that external
financing is often considered more relevant where the country’s public domestic capacity is lower. Policies for
external health financing should therefore consider the capacity and policies to address domestic health needs,
as well as incentivize improved health outcomes and increased domestic finance.

Policies often rely on income per capita metrics to approximate a government’s capacity to invest in health,
but the analyses demonstrates that the metric is a better measure of the level of wealth in a society, rather than
the resources available to a government for investments in health. The resources available to a government
are typically smaller than the GNI levels suggest, and based on a range of factors and policies, including tax
revenue, debt levels, levels, etc.

The analyses therefore recommend informing prioritisation decisions with the additional criteria of health
financing policies and characteristics. Understanding health need and level of income against these strategic
choices would differentiate between governments that may be at the same income level, but have different
capacities and policies to respond to health needs

A classification along characteristics of domestic financing policies could be informed by the i) budgetary
prioritisation of health, measured as a percentage of a government’s expenditure dedicated to health; and ii)
the current fiscal capacity, measured as the current government revenue minus debt service as a percentage
of GDP.

A broad policy implication of such a classification would be that it could help prioritize investments, without
creating what is often referred to as “perverse incentives” – the risk that external health financing could lead
to a decrease in domestic public expenditures on health – through the development of co-financing policies.
In addition, it could facilitate a policy dialogue with countries and cooperation among development partners
on how to increase the fiscal space of governments where relevant for greater investments in health.

1.6 Equity and Human Rights in a Classification Framework for Health
The analytical groups also emphasised that across the two classification frameworks and decision-making
stages, equity12 and the health needs of key populations and vulnerable groups should be cross-cutting
concerns. In consultations, stakeholders have emphasised that despite economic growth in many countries
the specific health needs of key populations and vulnerable groups are not being met, a significant human
rights concern.

While the analytical work attempted to include inequity measures13, the poor quality and unreliable data
prevented their inclusion in the overall framework and analysis. In the absence of reliable health inequity
indicators, health financing multilaterals have also considered using measures such as the Multidimensional
Poverty Index, and the inequality adjusted Human Development Index to include an overall income inequity
measure. A better understanding of inequity, particularly in health access and outcomes, would however also
require more detailed sub-national analyses and to account for legal and social barriers, for which there is
often no regular and reliable data collection.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development identifies that ‘data for several of the targets remain
unavailable,’ calling for, ‘strengthening data collection and capacity building in Member States, to dev elop
national and global baselines where they do not yet exist.’14 A report15 on the monitoring of the SDGs identified
that that the greater focus on data could potentially allow policy-makers to measure and quantify multi-faceted
concepts such as equity that were considered quantitatively immeasurable some years ago. SDG target 17.18
is specifically focused on enhancing capacity to collect data "disaggregated by income, gender, age, race,
ethnicity, migratory status, disability, geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national
contexts."16



12 Defined as a concern with the distribution of resources, services, and outcomes across individuals, groups, and populations.
13 The Gini Index, Inequality in Life Expectancy, and Income share held by the bottom 40%.
14 P. 57 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld

15 Indicators and a Monitoring Framework for Sustainable Development Goals: Launching a data revolution for the SDGs
http://unsdsn.org/resources/publications/indicators/
16 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300
It is therefore recommended that in addition to the work being undertaken to capture equity of health      1
outcomes in a single indicator, such as inequality-adjusted Life Expectancy, or DALY by wealth quintile,   2
external financing for health should consider greater investments in data collection. Policies informed by a
more nuanced classification framework that accounts for inequity could also guide incentive setting for a more
equitable approach towards external financing for health.
                                                                                                               1
Chapter 2: Classification by Health Need and Income                                                            3

2.1 Income classification and health policy
In the last two decades the use of Gross National Income (GNI) has taken on a specific role in international
development: that of indicating countries’ stage of development and access to concessional financing. The
advantages of using the metric to identify countries with the greatest financial need is based on it being a
simple, and regularly updated measure that is considered a good proxy for factors such as wealth, the capacity
of governments to provide services to their citizens, and national levels of development. Simply put, the metric
has been considered a good indicator of the level of development and social well-being in a country.

However, it is increasingly apparent that improvements in national economic data do not always translate
into a universal rise in individual health and welfare, do not reflect disease challenges, and the aggregate
picture can disguise substantial inequalities. GNI per capita does not fully take into account inequality,
governments’ capacity and policy choices towards their citizens, or structural factors that underlie
substantial variations in outcomes between people within countries.

Among multilateral health financers a common principle underlying financial assistance has been to improve
health and population outcomes in countries that are least financially and structurally capable, both in terms
of domestic resources and technical capacity, to respond to key health needs. The implication is that external
financing should not play a significant role in well-functioning systems were there are adequate resources to
meet its health needs.

Drawing on those principles, and the high correlation of income metrics with most health status indicators,
eligibility policies have traditionally been based on income metrics as a central criterion. While other criteria
relating to health needs, aid effectiveness, or inequality in outcomes are also used, these have typically been
considered at decision-making stages downstream from the eligibility process.

In the past decade, with increasing concern that the benefits of macro-economic growth may not necessarily
translate into better and equitable health outcomes, the ability of income classification to reflect important
dimensions of development, such as poverty, inequality or health need has also been questioned. In certain
cases, long due statistical revisions have resulted in countries transitioning overnight to middle-income status.

Another concern is that the income categories themselves are too broad and consist of countries that are
sometimes at very different points along the development continuum. The Middle-income Countries category,
which currently ranges from GNI per capita levels of $1,045 to $12,736, presently consists of a 105 countries
that account for the largest global share of poverty and disease with varying levels of development, inequity,
political stability, and social issues.

As demonstrated in Figure 2, between 2005 and 2013, forty-eight countries changed income categories, of
which 15 moved from low-income to low-middle income status; and 22 countries from lower-middle income
to upper middle-income status. Currently, based on 2015 income category thresholds, there are 18 low-income
and low-middle countries whose present GNI per capita values are +/- 10% from the existing thresholds.
During EAI consultations, stakeholders have stressed that countries which are just across the lower middle-
income country threshold have far more in common with low-income countries than with upper middle-
income countries.
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                          4




Figure 2: Transitions across income groups 2005-2013

In this context, a key concern around the discussions on transitions from one income group to another is the
consequence of the potential decline or stop in financial and technical support from multilateral development
and health partners based on income related eligibility criteria irrespective of the overall health need, and the
rights of vulnerable groups and key populations.

The decline in assistance can also coincide with higher domestic costs for delivering key health services, since
several concessional pooled procurement and trade agreements are selectively meant for low-income
countries. Further, in some countries support and service delivery to vulnerable groups and key populations
is entirely externally financed.

As a result, there are concerns that in the absence of mitigating policy changes, certain governments and
populations may see a loss in health gains and a resurgence of disease. This suggests the need for a reflection
on more effective benchmarks by which to nuance assessments for eligibility. In health policy, this has
triggered a discussion on complimenting the income metric with indicators that measure the level of health
need in a country, in order to better capture different disease or health-specific aspects.

2.2 Measuring health need
Measures of disease burden, which are used in epidemiological research to identify population attributable
health risks, are a valuable starting point. Disease burden17 can be measured using a variety of indicators such
as mortality, morbidity or financial cost. These allow the burden of disease to be compared between different
geographical units, and also makes it possible to predict future health care needs.

In health policy there are several widely accepted indicators of disease burden and summary measures of
average population health, that facilitate comparison of the burden of different diseases and take into account
both death and morbidity in a single measure and enable comparative assessments of broad epidemiological
patterns within and across countries and different time periods. Of these, the HALE, QALY18 and DALY19 have
been mostly widely used to quantify the level of health need in a context, and how this health need is spread
between different income and social groups. These measures are most widely used and expressed in terms of
the DALY/QUALY/HALE rate per 100,000 people since this allows for comparing health loss across different
population sizes. However, these can also be expressed in terms of total number of HALE/QALY/DALYs lost


17   Defined as the impact of a health problem on a given area.
18 Quality-Adjusted Life-Years (QALY) take into account both quantity and the quality of life generated by healthcare interventions. It is
the measure of the life expectancy corrected for loss of quality of that life caused by diseases and disabilities. Some health interventions
do not prolong life but do significantly improve the quality of life. A year of normal health is given a QALY of 1 whilst a year of complete
functional impairment (e.g. death) has a QALY of 0.
19 Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY) are a measure of the burden of disease and reflects the potential years of life lost due to premature
death (PYLL) and equivalent years of 'healthy' life lost by virtue of being in states of poor health or disability. These disabilities can be
physical or mental. One DALY can be thought of as one lost year of 'healthy' life.
                                                                                                              1
by the population, and the per capita or per person health loss. The latter is less frequently used since the per
capita values tend to be very small decimal values.                                                           5

The most well-known assessment of disease burden is the Global Burden of Disease (GBD. The first study in
1990 by the World Bank and World Health Organization devised the concept of DALYs and sought to quantify
the health effects of more than 100 diseases and injuries for eight regions of the world, generating estimates
of mortality and morbidity by age, sex and region. The GBD Study is currently updated by IHME, which in
2015 released estimates of the leading causes of death in the world for 2013.

Figure 3 uses the case of South Africa to illustrate how burden of disease metrics like the DALY reflect both
the mortality and morbidity in a population and can further be broken down to identify health needs by cause,
risk factor and age structure. An advantage of the metric is that different health programmes can segment the
burden of disease to compare investments across disease foci.




            Figure 3: The DALY loss in South Africa by Cause (2013)

The first GBD report highlights the practicalities of measuring disease burden on a local and national scale,
indicating that burden of disease metrics would allow policymakers in prioritizing actions in health, planning
for preventive action, assessing performance of healthcare systems, and plan for future health needs. There is
on-going work to capture the DALY loss among specific socio-economically vulnerable groups that can
demonstrate the extent to which a health system is equitable in both access and health outcomes.
However, despite the value of considering burden of disease metrics to quantify health need, the analytical
work conducted by the EAI demonstrates that a classification system based on a single indicator - be it a health
burden metric or an income metric – would be insufficient to inform policies in external financing for health
that aim to prioritise contexts with the highest disease burden and the lowest financial ability to respond to
this disease burden. This can be demonstrated by looking at a subset of countries from across the income
spectrum that have varying degrees of disease burdens.

2.3 Limitations of a single-criteria classification framework
The following section attempts to illustrate how a classification system based on a single criteria, whether it is
Income or Health need, may overlook important considerations when informing eligibility policies. An
eligibility policy is generally characterised by the existence of a single threshold based on which countries are
                                                                                                                1a
identified as being ‘eligible’ or ‘not eligible.’ Thus the actual absolute GNI values or disease burden values of
country matter less than the threshold that is applied in the policy20.                                         6

While the analytical work of the EAI did not explore any specific thresholds, to illustrate the implications of
policies based primarily on a single indicator, the following discussion examines the implications of an
eligibility policy based only income per capita using World Bank thresholds21, and a policy based only on
disease burden, measured by DALYs22, where the threshold is the median DALY value of the sample used to
categorise countries into ‘high’ or ‘low’ burden .23




Figure 4: Implications of single-criteria eligibility policies

The above Figure 4 examines the implications of an eligibility policy informed by a single indicator. In a policy
based only on an income metric, countries shaded blue and yellow (e.g. South Africa, Swaziland, and
Botswana), which are middle-income economies but have a large proportion of the global communicable
disease burden, particularly HIV, would potentially be ineligible and receive lower priority. This indicates that
a framework determined by per capita income could ignore countries that have a disease burden likely too
high to be addressed only with domestic resources given its national income level.

In the case of an eligibility policy that only accounts for Disease Burden, countries shaded red (e.g. Nepal,
Bangladesh, Vietnam, and Philippines) that have a lower disease burden, but may not have the needed
resources to respond to the present level of the epidemic, risk being made ineligible. In the absence of both
domestic and external resources, it is likely that there would be a further increase in disease. As a result, a
framework that only accounted for disease burden could overlook low-resource countries where the
population and domestic system may be inadequately resourced to respond to its health need.

2.4 Classification by health need and income
The EAI analyses demonstrates that in order to adequately respond to both principles of external financing
for health in policies, it is preferable to interpret income per capita relative to the level of disease burden in a
country. A policy that consists of a classification by both a health metric and an income metric would help to
better differentiate between countries at the same income level, or in the same income category, but with
different health needs.

Used to inform eligibility, this would potentially offset the likelihood of a sudden drop in financing in high
disease burden countries. For example, countries such as South Africa, Swaziland, and India that have a much
higher disease burden relative to the level of income would potentially continue to be eligible in spite of their
income level given their significant health need.




20 For example, in a case where an eligibility policy is based on a threshold of 300 GNI per capita, the change in the absolute level of the
indicator (e.g. from 150 to 200 GNI per capita), or a change in its rank (from 5 to 1), is likely to matter less than if the country is above
or below the 300 GNI per capita threshold.
21 Implications were explored for the threshold being at the LMI cut-off point and the UMI cut-off point.
22 Using the example of DALYs rate attributable to “communicable, maternal, perinatal and nutritional conditions”.
23 The DALY range for the sample of countries selected is 17647 DALYs to 87948 DALYs, with the threshold for low to high burden
being 34639 DALYs (the median).
At the same time, a classification by both health need and income cannot adequately inform the nature1of
                                                                                                             7
support to be provided, whether financial or technical; for example, in countries with a relative higher income
where the disease burden is high relative to income, but there may be adequate domestic resources to meet
this need. While NIPH explored the possibility of including fiscal space characteristics in a classification to
guide external health financing, the group found that while general and health-specific financing are important
considerations, including fiscal capacity indicators in a classification that would inform eligibility can be
problematic because of the resulting incentive
structures. It is then recommended that these more
complex decisions would need to be guided by more
nuanced criteria at the level of programmatic
decision-making, downstream from eligibility
decisions24

The analytical work identifies two modalities of
operationalising such a framework: based on
developing a single composite metric, or developing                                                                                       an
index that accounts for multiple criteria. While there                                                                                   are
many other ways, based on the analysis from the EAI                                                                                     and
consultations, the analytical work focused on
developing a simple, easily understood, and reliable
framework.

However it has also been emphasised that where possible, health need must be accounted at a micro-level,
and reflect the sub-national variation in health outcomes in order to avoid overlooking vulnerable groups.
Given current data limitations, the groups did not endorse any particular metric or method of capturing this
variation, and the analyses instead suggests nuancing eligibility policies based on qualitative assessments and
decision-making processes that explicitly factor-in the barriers faced by vulnerable groups. This also points to
the need for greater investment in and alignment with national data systems, towards strengthening the use
of quantitative equity indicators in decision-making.

It has been suggested that once better data on in-countries inequities in health service delivery is available,
the EAI model could be revised to specifically identify how domestic inequities in health access, service
delivery, and outcomes could be factored in external health financing decisions.

In the analytical work for the EAI, the groups have focused on illustrating their findings on rankings rather
than specific eligibility thresholds. However, where possible, a brief discussion of possible thresholds to
consider has been included in.




2.4.1. Using a single composite indicator for classification: GNI adjusted by health need

The modality of factoring both health need and income per capita would be to adjust the GNI per capita value
with a measure of burden of disease. 25 This would better demonstrate populations’ or subpopulations’ health
needs relative to their level of income, by penalising the absolute value of the income measure in countries
that have a high disease burden

This method was explored using different general health outcome indicators, and disease specific indicators
to adjust GNI. Illustrating one approach of adjusting GNI with the DALY rate 26 attributable to communicable,
maternal, perinatal and nutritional conditions 27, there are two key findings when considering the inclusion of
health need for an initial classification of countries.

24 While this is briefly explored in the next chapter, a thorough analysis would require covering most or the entire decision-making
process, and involved an in-depth discussion of the allocation of funds, which the analyses did not address.
25 One straightforward method for adjusting GNI per capita with a health-need indicator was employed by the NIPH team. It used

common mix-max normalization giving each indicator identical range [0, 1], used equal weights for the indicators as a starting point,
and used linear aggregation to combine indicator-weight products. The NIPH team emphasizes, however, that choices of these kinds
can influence the final implications of the different classification frameworks. For e.g. instead of assigning equal weights of 0.5, the two
indicators could be differently weighed to reflect a different prioritisation of income and disease burden.
26 . In the examples discussed, both income and health need indicators have been equally weighed, which could be modified depending
on the objectives of the classification.
27 An effective, functioning healthcare system is likely to have lower levels of DALYRs lost due to these preventable and treatable

conditions. However, updated DALY data is not available in some countries.
First, adjusting GNI in this way considerably changes countries’ positions when compared to classification 1  by
income, and specifically improves the ranking of countries with unmet health needs. Figure 5 demonstrates     8
this using a sample of countries from different income categories. If a country’s adjusted rank moves up (e .g.
from 20 closer to 1) this indicates that the country has greater health need than its income level would suggest,
and could therefore receive greater policy priority (highlighted in yellow). A country may receive
lower policy priority (highlighted blue) if it ranks downward (e.g. from Rank 1 to Rank 20) as its health
need is lower than its GNI would suggest.




Figure 5 Considering both income and health interprets available wealth relative to the level of health need

The key implication is that a framework incorporating both income and health need dimensions will tend to
give more priority to countries that have a higher disease burden, between two countries at the same income
level. This can further be illustrated by looking at the re-ranking of countries across income groups (Figure 6).




Figure 6 Adjusting GNI by a Health Need Indicator

Some Upper Middle-income countries change ranking considerably. South Africa, a country with a high
number of premature deaths, and high morbidity due to HIV/AIDS and TB in younger age groups, moves up
from 112 to 68 in the ranking. Swaziland moves from 60 to 12, given its high levels of morbidity and mortality
from HIV/AIDS. The full list of country re-rankings is available in Annex 2.

With the current method of adjustment that places equal weights on income per capita and DALY rate,
compared to an income only classification system, this would result on average in higher priority ranking for
middle-income countries over low-income countries. This is because in the current global context, a number
of middle-income countries have a significantly higher disease burden relative to income. Low-income
countries (LICs) on average drop in priority ranking by 5 places, while upper-middle countries (UMICs)
increase on average by 3 health-need ranks when moving away from GNI per capita alone.

The second finding is demonstrated in Figure 7. The choice of health need indicator used to adjust GNI would
have a limited effect on the ranking i.e. prioritisation of a country, or potential eligibility of a country. However,
the choice of health need metric could influence assessments of how much external support a context requires.
For example, irrespective of the disease burden metric considered, countries that move up in ranking 1
                                                                                                     (in
                                                                                                     9
yellow) would be identified as having a higher need than their income level suggests. At the same time,
depending on the focus on a particular health priority, e.g. on child mortality (U5MR) or Health System
Quality, the level of priority given to a country could change.




Figure 7 Implications of the choice of Health Need indicator

These findings demonstrate that a classification framework accounting for both income and health need is
flexible and can be tailored to a disease-focus area or organizational priority, allowing for a differentiated
prioritization of countries in different health areas. At the same time, the analyses endorse the use of a general
burden of disease metric that captures both mortality and morbidity and are comparable across diseases, as is
the case with metrics like HALE and DALY, which can further be broken down to identify health needs by
cause, risk factor and age structure. This would allow organisations with different disease foci, and those with
more general focus on health to compare investments.

Furthermore, such a classification framework could also be applied to understand the variation in health need
relative to income at the subnational level. The University of Oxford has demonstrated this using the case of
India and Nigeria, by focusing on the variation between different states to suggest that external health
financers consider moving towards sub-national analysis for rankings where the data are available, and
perhaps argues for a concerted effort to improve such data collection.

While the implications of a framework where GNI adjusted by a Health Need indicator has been explored in
terms of rankings, the analyses endorse the development of income and health need specific thresholds. One
suggestion is to move away from absolute thresholds, as used in the World Bank income classification, and
instead develop relative thresholds based on the policy focus of different institutions.

Finally, while the income metric is the starting point of the proposed framework, it does not preclude putting
less weight on GNI per capita than the health-need indicators. The actual weighting and prioritisation of one
criteria over another is also a value choice that institutions will have to determine.

2.4.2 Complex Formula based Classification
An alternative option would be to combine multiple indicators in a formula or an index that accounts for
different considerations around income, including the dispersion of income, and the different dimensions of
health need including access, and service delivery. Potential methodologies and approaches used to derive
theses formulae are available in the reports from the analytical groups.

The University of Oxford proposes a complex formula that draws from the Dalton inequality index formula,
which has been used in policy to determine which wealth group in a country contributed most to the observed
inequality. The group modifies the formula to capture the level of ‘health inequality’, as measured by the
DALY rate lost per capita, and thus penalises countries where there is an observed inequality in health
outcomes.

Another approach, proposed by the University of Sheffield/Imperial College draws from the principles of
Universal Health Coverage, and posits that a more nuanced way of quantifying income and health need. The
group argues for interpreting financial need not in terms of income per capita but in terms of the level of
financial protection that a population has. This refers to the ability of people to access health services without
the risk of being impoverished by the cost of these services. To measure health need, two dimensions are
                                                                                                              2
identified as being important: the level of health need, as measured by the rate of DALY loss due to all causes,
and the ability of the population to access basic primary health services. The latter criteria would be useful0in
further differentiating between countries based on the quality of their health systems. The final output is an
index that compiles these measures of financial risk protection, level of health need, and quality of the health
system.

2.4.3 Differentiated Classification by Income and Disease Burden

A third policy alternative that has been operationalised by certain multilaterals, classifies countries based on
both income and health need levels separately towards developing differentiated eligibility criteria for
different income and sub-income groups. Countries above a certain income threshold could be differentiated
based on the disease burden that the system has to respond to, or only be eligible for certain forms of support,
linked to their stage of development and nature of the epidemic.

For example, low-income countries and lower middle-income could be made eligible without specific
restrictions regarding disease burden. On the other hand, depending on the focus of institutions and the type
of support provided, upper middle-income countries could be considered eligible in cases where the disease
burden is significantly high, and there is a need to partner with the government on the domestic response.

Crucially, any such classification would need to ensure that the decline in funding to countries as they move
along the income classification is gradual and planned, in order to ensure that key health services are
maintained. This is particularly relevant for the period between when external financing levels decline, and
the government absorbs externally funded services into its budgeting processes.

2.4.4 Towards nuanced classification to inform operational decision-making

The determination of eligibility is followed by the process of assigning and determining what countries require
greatest investment. This process is operationalised through different policies, specifically allocation and co-
financing policies.

The analyses demonstrate that at the priority-setting stage, using income and health need alone to guide
decision-making is insufficient. Certain countries that would receive greater priority because of higher health
needs relative to the income levels of their population, may have the necessary public resources to meet this
need domestically.

Conversely, certain low disease burden countries that would receive low priority due to the lower health need
relative to income, are known to be largely dependent on external financing to fund their health systems, due
to the lack of available domestic public resources. In a decision-making system that only accounted for income
and health, these countries would receive lower investment priority, a “double penalty” whereby neither
adequate domestic government nor external resources are channelled to meeting the population’s he alth
needs.

The analytical work and consultations highlight the on-going debate on whether external financing for health
should be considered when domestic policies do not lead to adequately addressing health need given the
potential resources based on a certain income level.

In order to prioritise investments, it would therefore be relevant to better understand the level of income and
health need against the government’s current health financing practices and strategy, as well as domestic
policies. In a robust health system, a government is understood to be the primary driver of core public health
outcomes, and thus accounting for the fiscal policies and capacity in a country becomes relevant when
identifying countries that effectively have greatest need.
                                                                                                                                         2
Chapter 3: Domestic Financing Classification                                                                                             1

Priority-setting practices in external health
financing is an umbrella term for a number of
policies including: the allocation criteria, the
incentive-funding policies, and the co-
investment or co-financing policies of an
organisation.

Together this category of policies influence a
number of key processes, including: the
speed and timing of a country’s transition
from eligibility status and the projected time
horizon for external support; and the
modality of external support to use, whether
financial    support,     technical   support,
advocacy, or a combination.

Following the use of an eligibility framework
that considers both income and health, the analyses suggest that only considering the two criteria would be
inadequate for institutional priority setting practices, which include a range of decisions for which other
indicators become relevant.

Given these wider set of considerations, the analyses support incorporating a classification based on domestic
health-financing policies as a third fundamental criteria in the overall conceptual framework, which considers
the level of income relative to health need via-vis a government’s fiscal capacity to invest in health, and the
level of priority it gives to health within its budget.

Differentiation based domestic health financing policies could help to further differentiate between certain
contexts, while enabling policies that encourage greater domestic investments in health where possible and
needed, or ensuring that the health needs of key populations or vulnerable groups are being met. For instance,
low-income countries with a low disease burden may have a greater reliance on external financing to address
their health needs, due to the lack of available domestic resources. Simply de-prioritising these countries
could lead to a “double penalty” whereby neither domestic nor external resources are cha nnelled to meeting
the population’s health needs. At the same time, policies could better address high disease burden in countries
with relatively higher income, which may have the domestic resources to respond to a high disease burden,
but do either not prioritise health investments in their budget or have limited fiscal space.

It should however be noted that responding to health financing characteristics and discussions on fiscal space
in general, are often beyond the scope of individual multilateral health financers who tend to have a more
health area or disease specific focus. Thus at best, this stage and process of classification could help guide
design and coordinate individual co-financing and incentive-funding policies towards collectively encouraging
policy change in certain countries, while encourage coordination between development partners on a policy
dialogue to increase fiscal space for health investments where relevant.

3.1 Key indicators beyond GNI
Historically, the GNI per capita metric has been widely used as a proxy for a countries capacity to invest in
health. However the analyses demonstrate that the metric is not designed to capture poverty and inequality
levels, and is a better quantifier of the level of wealth in a ‘society,’ includ ing the private sector, rather than the
level of resources available to a government.28 Government fiscal capacity is typically much smaller than GNI
per capita levels suggest, depending inter alia on the levels of government revenue capture and external debt
obligations.



28 Furthermore, GNI does not differentiate between the types of health expenses in a system: WHO guidelines differentiate between
public health expenditure and private health expenditure. The latter includes payments such as private insurance, charitable donations,
and direct service payments by private corporations, and direct household out of pocket expenses (OOP). A system that is dependent
largely on out-of-pocket payments creates discriminatory access because the costs disproportionately impact the economically weakest
sections of a society. This is reflected in the highly unequal distribution of health outcomes, since the economically well-off sections will
have better access and health than the poorer sections. In the last two decades, emerging economies have also made commitments to
reduce the level of private health spending, and increase public spending towards equalising access to key services. This is reflected in the
African Union’s 2001 Abuja Declaration where member governments pledged to spend 15% of their government’s total budget on health.
By taking into account current government revenue capture and government health expenditure, a health         2
                                                                                                              2
financing classification could help prioritise contexts that have greater financing need while identifying levers
for increased domestic health financing. It can also assist in clarifying the type of support, whether financial
or technical, that a context requires.

To quantify a government’s current effort to meeting health need, Government/public expenditure on health
(GHE) is an easily understood, reliable, and regularly updated indicator. The metric quantifies all the recurrent
expenditures29 a government has made in preventative and curative health services, family planning activities,
nutrition activities, and does not include provision of water and sanitation. 30 Effectively, this indicator also
captures the policy preference of a government, based on its choice to invest more or less in its health systems.

At the same time, there are certain limitations to using GHE, linked to the lack of uniformity in how
governments’ account for health spending in their expenditure tracking. Broadly, there is no standardised
differentiation between expenditures that are categorised as health expenditures, and there is significant
spending that impacts health but is not counted as such. For instance, several government make expenditures
in health through social protection programmes that focus on specific marginalised groups but are not
captured in health budgets. However, given the work in recent years undertaken by WHO to standardise
National Health Accounting processes, the analyses endorse the uptake of the indicator to guide decision-
making.

Understanding the current level of spending alone would present an incomplete picture however, since the
metric cannot capture if the government is actualising its full capacity to invest in health. However, unlike
GHE which measures current investment, there is no one agreed upon indicator or method to quantify what a
government should and could spend. The next section therefore identifies two potential approaches, one using
Current Government Fiscal Capacity, and the other using the Potential Government Fiscal Capacity, estimated
using a more complex Data Envelopment Analysis method.

3.2 Classification by domestic health financing characteristics
The first model is a simple classification that attempts to demonstrate how much a government leverages in
resources from the economy for potential investments in public goods, such as health, and how much of these
resources are actually invested in health. It therefore focuses on two levers: how much a government is able to
invest, as determined by the level of revenue capture net interest payments for debt; and, how it prioritises
health spending in its budget.

It would be important to view these as policy choices by governments in light of a countries’ position along the
income spectrum, as well as its specific epidemiological profiles. For example, it is important to differentiate
between the health spending and policy prioritisation of two LICs with different disease burdens, just as it is
be important to compare the level to which an MIC country can domestically fund its health system compared
to an LIC. For this reason, the health financing classification framework visually differentiates between
countries with different disease burdens, as well as income categorisation.

In addition, while it is useful to review government expenditure in terms of proportional spending, it is also
important to interpret this share in absolute dollar values. For certain low-income economies, allocating a
certain percentage as per existing literature and benchmarks could still be insufficient in absolute terms to
event meet basic care packages in response to the health need.




29 Unless one adds the capital investments to it specifically.
30While these services are not provided by the health sector, they are considered to be population service directly relevant to health, in
particular public health.
3.2.1 Mapping Health Priority and Current Government Fiscal Capacity                                                         2
                                                                                                                             3
     Box 2: Key Definitions
     Health Priority can crudely be measured by the proportion of a government’s total
     expenditures (general government expenditure) that are recurring expenditures on health, net of
     external financing (Government Health Expenditure (GHE)-Development Assistance to Health
     (DAH)/General Government Expenditure (GGE)- Official Development Assistance (ODA)).

     Some policymakers may prefer including external assistance since this provides a picture of the
     total financing available. However, a classification system focused on domestic financing policies
     would be distorted if it took into account external financial support as, effectively, part of a
     government’s expenditure.

     The analyses also explored using per-capita health spending measures to quantify health priority
     (in PPP or otherwise) but found these problematic to use and interpret, unless per capita
     measures were developed after taking costing and procurement costs into account. For example,
     a country that could spend much higher per capita due to extremely high drug and equipment
     prices. These are efficiency considerations which as the analyses indicate are important, but
     difficult to account for in classification processes. Based on these considerations the ratio was
     considered, since it is dimensionless and equally applies to a per capita understanding.

     The Current Government Fiscal Capacity can crudely be measured by calculating what
     proportion of a country’s GDP the government collects as revenues through tax and from other
     sources, net of the annual interest payments it is required to make. It must however be noted
     that this is one of the many ways that Fiscal capacity can be estimated, and that the indicator
     measures what the government is currently capturing, without focusing on what resources could
     potentially be leveraged.




Figure 8 Health Priority and Current government fiscal capacity

Figure 8 illustrates this classification.31 The Health Priority axis focuses on how a government prioritises
health spending in its budget and has two thresholds - at 15% based on the Abuja target; and at 8% which has
been recommended in academic literature for emerging economies, with the caveat that anything lower than
8% would adversely impact the health outcomes of a population. 32 The Fiscal Capacity axis focuses on the
effective government resources currently being captured and has one threshold at 20%, which is the average
current level of government capacity of the sample group, consisting of 106 countries.

As detailed in the earlier section, for decision-making in health, it is important to consider how much a
government prioritises health, against the level of health need and income. Figure 9 and Figure 10 focus on
separately mapping the health priority and current government fiscal capacity by disease burden. The
mapping of health financing characteristics has been split into a ‘High Burden’ and “Low Burden’ lens.



31   The chart focuses on LIC, LMIC, and UMICs, and does not include conflict and fragile states, nor small island states.
32   http://www.who.int/health_financing/documents/revenue_raising/en/
Here, the burden is measured by a country’s DALY loss rate for maternal, natal, and communicable diseases,2
since these should typically be low in well-functioning health systems. The cut-off point for high to low 4
burden is 32,000 DALYr, which was the median of the sample. This could however also be divided into three
categories also: High, medium, and Low burden. Further, the map also visually differentiates between low-,
middle-, or high income countries, per the World Bank classification.




       Figure 9 High Disease Burden: Comparing Health Priority and Current Government Fiscal Capacity




Figure 10 Low Disease Burden: Comparing Health Priority and Current Government Fiscal Capacity



3.2.2. Key Findings
Figure 9 demonstrates that several key middle-income countries with high disease burdens are spending less
than the 8% threshold, with the average level of health priority being a little over the minimum 8%. On the
other hand, in Figure 10, low burden countries on average allocate higher budgetary priority towards health
at about 12.5%.

While both high burden and low burden groups on average leverage the same level of resources from the
economy (20%), in particular high burden countries that capture significantly less in government resources
may be able to increase their resource base to leverage them towards greater health spending i.e. even at the
same health priority level.
Finally, the income levels of the different countries will have a pertinent role to play in the policy        2
implications: Policies for high income countries with the available fiscal space but low priority on health in5
spite of a high-disease burden, may want to incentivise greater domestic expenditures towards health. On
the other hand, countries that already leverage a high proportion of the economy in revenues and also
prioritise health spending may require external support to address their health needs.

3.2.3 Policy Implications: Differentiated policies

An understanding of these two levers i.e. factors that influence domestic health financing, generates a
classification based on an assessment of government fiscal space and levels of health expenditure and
investment in a particular year (or an average across a certain years). This can be particularly useful in guiding
co-financing agreements. For example, where the level of priority given to health in a government’s budget is
low in spite of high fiscal space and high disease burden, policies towards reallocating domestic investment to
health are relevant.

There is a long history of attempting to identify how much a government should ideally leverage from the
economy as public resources. Efforts to enhance fiscal capacity, that could lead to greater health investments,
could be achieved through direct and indirect taxes, level of capital receipts, and debt levels. These discussions
are however beyond the purview of individual multilateral health financers alone, and are policy dialogues
that larger sector-wide financers like the World Bank and IMF engage with governments on, for example on
how to increase tax revenues from direct and indirect taxes. Many health organizations, multilateral and
bilateral, have limited expertise or mandate in this area pointing to the essential need for a coherent and
collaborative framework to support countries to achieve maximum development.

In external financing for health, these classifications (high priority - low fiscal capacity; low priority - high
fiscal capacity, etc.) could particularly help to inform co-financing policies, as illustrated in the table below in
Table 2 on an example for a Middle-income - High burden country:
          Health      High Health Priority                             Low Health Priority
          priority
 Current
 Government
 Fiscal Space
 High       govt.         High level of avaliable public resources, collected     High government revenue but a low
 fiscal space             taxes and high public commitment to invest in           budgetary commitment to health.
                          health.
 Policy Response          To provide incentive funding, rewarding the             To develop policies which incentivise the
                          government’s effort towards increasing domestic         government to re-direct available resources
                          fiscal capacity and chanelling investments into         into health. E.g ‘Matching’ policy, where
                          health. It is also important to examine if the health   external investment are matched by
                          spending is high due to inefficencies.                  government investment.

 Low govt fiscal          Low effort towards increasing fiscal space by           Low effort to increase fiscal space, national
 space                    generating sufficient revenue through taxes, but        budget not prioritizing health.
                          high priority given to health in the national budget.
 Policy Response          Incentivise governments towards increasing fiscal       Encourage greater expansion of public
                          space and public revenues from the domestic             fiscal. Incentivise government to channel
                          economy and chanelling leveraged investments            newly generated resources towards
                          into allocatively efficient expenditures in health.     investments in key health need areas

Table 2 Middle-income- High Burden: Classifying countries by Government Fiscal Capacity and Health Priority33
It is important to note certain caveats: This classification only considers two policy dimensions whereas a
comprehensive domestic health financing assessment and classification would need to account for micro-level
data on cost of delivering services, procurement, the quality of the health system, and the population specific
characteristics of demand for health services. Second, the discrete thresholds described to measure
government priority are value judgements. For example, the threshold at which a government is identified as
giving ‘lower’ or ‘high priority’ could vary depending on the policy question and organisation conducting the
classification.

3.3. Classification by Health Financing gap
An alternative dynamic model suggested by IHME is to develop a forward-looking classification based on the
gap that exists between what a government is currently spending or is expected to spend on health overall or
a health focus area, and what it could potentially spend on health, given its level of development.


33   For definitions and indicators considered, please refer to Box 2.
                                                                                                                                       2
There are three elements to the IHME framework:                                                              6
First, the Needed Resources, which is the level of expenditure required to reach a specific health outcome goal.
In the case study on maternal health describe below, the need is estimated using existing estimates of health
burden with a prospective target based on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Second, the Current Spend which refers to current government expenditure that targets a specific health focus
area, such as spending on the prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS, or child immunizations. IHME has also
worked on developing a methodology to estimate the expected spend in the future, the modalities of which are
detailed in the full group report.

The third element, Potential Spend34 identifies the amount of resources that a government is expected to be
able to pay. These estimates are also referred to as a country’s ability to pay or its fiscal space, and indicate a
health spending benchmark against which a country’s current spending could be compared.
In situations where calculating need is impossible because of data limitations or lack of explicit goals, potential
spend can itself be used as in indicator of where more funds are needed.

Because of the prospective nature of these forecasts, potential spending estimated in terms of the amount of
spending per person, as a function of GDP growth and other macroeconomic factors, while the Abuja target
has been used to estimate potential spend.

Understanding the potential to spend on health specifically, or a health focus area makes the framework
“incentive compatible”: stakeholders can differentiate between health needs that could be financed local ly and
the surplus health need that external partners should focus on.

This framework can be tailored to health focus areas, or for a specific disease lens, with some caveats: The
amount of data needed to execute on this framework is substantive, and may not be available for every focus
for each stakeholder. Additionally, while the availability and quality of cause specific and costing data is
improving, it still needs substantial improvements to be considered comprehensive.




Figure 11: Comparing Current Government Spending and Potential Government Spending (Maternal Health)


3.3.1 Implications

Focusing on the need, as well as current and potential spending to maternal health for specific countries,
Figure 10 illustrates that in an exclusively GNI based classification system countries could be prioritized or
deprioritized in a way that does not reflect the role of government priority setting in achieving health
outcomes.




34   One possible method of estimating potential spend for health using data envelopment analysis has been explored by IHME. It
extrapolates how much a country could potentially invest based against a benchmark of the expenditure of the best performing income
peers. The estimate of potential spend also includes other factors such as GDP growth, inflation, unemployment, the share of government
expenditure given to health and the export to debt ratio. It draws on objectives such as the Abuja 15% target to identify if countries have
reached their capacity to domestically invest in health.
                                                                                                            2
In figure 11, there are certain countries classified as middle-income by GNI per capita, which face significant
resource gaps even if the government increased health investment to their maximum potential spending. On    7
the other hand, certain low-income countries with weak health systems which are dependent on external
financing, demonstrate greater potential to increase their spending and to partially close the gap towards
meeting the maternal health goal if domestic investments were increased.

Thus, by highlighting the actual need for resources for a particular health area, and the amount expected to
be spent by the government on that health area, critical financing pitfalls can be highlighted that may not be
evident when only considering measures of economic development and overall levels of health financing.

Second, the analytical team highlights that understanding a country’s potential to invest could determine
whether policymakers will focus on advocating for greater government investment, or provide financial
assistance. For example, between Nigeria and Chad, policymakers may consider accessing financial assistance
for Chad, with a focus on achieving efficiencies in its current investments, since it is estimated to be at the
limit of its fiscal capacity. In contrast for Nigeria policymakers may consider collaborating with technical
partners towards realising its existing potential to meet health needs domestically.

The ability to classify countries by health financing characteristics or the health financing gap can thus play a
valuable role in guiding operational policy and decision-making, by helping policymakers identify areas of
urgent need i.e. where the gaps may be the largest, how to leverage additional resources, as well as to identify
the health focus areas that need most investment in a context. By referencing dynamic health financing needs,
this framework could also identify areas where upfront spending can have greater health impact and result in
cost savings over time.

In the context of declining global resources to support emerging economies, this is particularly useful as it
differentiates between contexts that do have the domestic potential to respond to the health needs in the
system, from those that may need financial assistance in the interim while exploring more innovative financing
mechanisms.
                                                                                                              2
Chapter 4: Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research                                                   8

4.1. Limitations
Overall, the analyses did not explore classifications by setting particularly thresholds and grouping countries
accordingly, but instead highlighted the use of different indicators in terms of changes in rankings, in order to
derive policy implications that suggest more recommendations applicable for both health and development
organizations with different priority areas and foci.

While any classification framework depends on both the choice of underlying metric, and the choice of
thresholds to group countries along common characteristics, recommending a specific thresholds or grouping
of counties was beyond the scope of this multi-convenor initiative. The initiative did not analyze the impacts
of discrete funding thresholds on beneficiary country health outcomes, nor did it directly address the types of
policies that might be appropriate to mitigate the impacts of eligibility transition. Because these issues were
not addressed, a recommendation to avoid discrete thresholds was not supported by the entire EAI, while the
recommendation that where discrete thresholds are used mitigation policies should be used to smooth the
transition was adopted. The findings and recommendations however can inform the deliberations in different
bodies of the co-convenors, and form the basis for more specific analysis based on organisation’s individual
priorities and preferences.

Further, while it would be particularly important to include additional indicators for equity, as well as health
needs of key population and vulnerable groups, in a classification framework for health, there is limited
reliable, triangulated data available. The analytical groups identify that the proposed simple framework should
be complemented with a more discretionary assessment of within-country inequalities in health and income
to the extent permitted by the data; context specific in-country analyses are particularly relevant when
assessing the level and type of support to be provided

Both of the proposed classification frameworks struggle to deal adequately with incentives. The basic problem
is that if poorer levels of an indicator imply higher priority for external support , countries’ incentives to
improve on this indicator may be reduced. This is a problem for health-need indicators and inequality
indicators to the extent that greater health needs and greater inequality imply higher priority. This could also
be a problem for capacity indicators that are highly dependent on government policies and effort. For example,
Health Priority represents the effort being undertaken by the government, but do not represent an external
circumstance that is imposed on countries.

Against this background, it is recognised that incentives need to be addressed primarily in ways external to
the framework for classifying countries. There are many ways of doing this, and there is a brief discussion of
these options in the health financing classification section. However, a more comprehensive discussion of the
policy responses and options is beyond the scope of this report.

Regarding limitations of the conceptual framework, the three policy options to capture level of health need
relative to income are static, in that these are based on cross-sectional data such as a single year’s data point
or a retrospective average across certain years. These cannot capture the temporal element or trends, which
could provide very useful insights when making policy decisions.

In case of the Prioritisation of Investments, when mapping countries by Health Financing characteristics,
countries have been classified into different categories e.g. high priority- low current government fiscal
capacity) based on thresholds that were defined in literature on health financing. However, it is likely that
these thresholds evolve, and are updated, as well as are customised by focusing on specific country groupings.

Second, an assessment of fiscal capacity should ideally be based on the potential for raising revenue (which is
typically higher for MICs than for LICs in the short term). The Health Financing gap (by health focus area)
framework proposed by IHME uses the DEA method which would need to be further explored. The amount of
data needed to execute on this framework is substantive, and may not be available for every focus for each
stakeholder. Additionally, the availability and quality of cause specific and costing data is improving; but it
still needs substantial improvements to be considered comprehensive. For anything beyond the most basic
estimation, some modelling will be needed.

Finally, the analyses of Health Financing classifications are largely based on current health and economic
outcomes, which are limited in that there is no reflection on the underlying country-specific constraints that
give rise to these outcomes. In order to be comprehensive and capture the complex dynamics at the country
level, a number of broader micro-policy factors other than domestic health-specific financing become relevant,
                                                                                                               2
including considerations of cost-effectiveness, the efficiency of a system in delivering services, and the quality
of national service delivery and surveillance systems.                                                         9
It is important to recognize that any classification framework would be insufficient to respond to the need for
this level of detail in classifying countries, and this would need to be addresses in operational policies. The
potential use of impact indicators, explored by NIPH and University of Sheffield, allude to the need for policies
to address these considerations. Prioritizing and allocating resources across health focus areas, countries, and
subnational units is complex and should be based on objective data and objective targets.

Finally, it is important to note that one of the unique features of the SDGs is their relevance for all countries
regardless of economic standing. However, an analysis of high-income countries is beyond the scope of the
conveners and this Panel.


4.2. Further Research
For the Health Financing component, as noted by the analytical groups, when considering a country’s current
fiscal capacity, the efficiency and effectiveness 35 of investments may also be considered. This could help to
inform the need for technical assistance that could enable greater efficiencies in leveraging investments, rather
than relying on increased fiscal space or domestic/external finance alone. It is thus recommended that further
analysis be undertaken to better understand how efficiency and effectiveness concerns can be included in a
framework for external financing for health.

The Primary Health Care Performance Initiative (PHCPI) supported by the Gates Foundation, is focused on
identifying better key performance indicators for primary health care and endorses using more advanced
indicators which differentiate impact at a more granular level. More generally, research is required into the
use of household surveys and the scope for mobile technology to help rapidly develop, collect and analyse a
broader range of indicators, and for these to inform decision-making systems.

This initiative did not directly investigate the impact of specific eligibility policies on health outcomes during
and after the transition period. Similarly, it did not investigate best-practice transition policies that might
mitigate adverse impacts of transition. In order to further inform policies on the use of a health
development continuum perspective, such studies might be appropriate.

Finally, overall the groups also explored classifications focused around equity: on inequality in life expectancy,
use of the Gini index for income, the income share held by the bottom 40%, the skilled birth attendance rate,
DTP3 immunization coverage, and out-of-pocket payments for health services. Analyses by the groups indicate
that measures of expected impact should be considered at the programme and project levels, in the assessment
of applications and during the implementation phase.

Further recommended indicators to consider in a health classification include the level of conflict, institutional
quality and recent improvements in health-service coverage or health outcomes.




35Effectiveness is about what interventions are prioritised and is measured through outcome and impact indicators, while efficiency is
focused on how interventions are implemented and focuses on outputs achieved per input. Efficiency is different from effectiveness in
that it is only concerned with costs.
                                                                                                                                  3
Chapter 5: Relevance for other areas of Development                                                                               0

In recent years, emergencies like the Ebola crisis reflect the increasingly complex challenges that health
financers face: emergencies transcend national borders, and are intrinsically linked with global security and
governance issues, making it harder for financers to focus on the country alone as a unit of investment.
EAI consultations highlighted the need that global health decision-making frameworks account for this
changing reality and include criteria reflecting the “core functions” of global health.[1] The Global Health 2035
report contends that “to meet the challenges of the next generation”, international collective action must
increasingly focus on global functions: “provision of GP Gs [global public goods] (especially R&D),
management of externalities, and leadership and stewardship”. [2]
The conceptual framework developed through the Equitable Access Initiative is relevant in and can be tailored
to these conversations that focus on broadening the unit of investment from the national to the global.
It can further find applicability to areas of development outside the public health space, since the idea of
accounting for burden and fiscal space are relevant to any lens that focuses on the socio-economic dimensions
of development, including agriculture, education, health, nutrition, gender, and social inclusion. Further, the
conclusion that thresholds and sharp cut-offs in assistance should be avoided could apply to any development
area where there are high levels of need and limited domestic capacity to address it.

It could be of significant value to consider how more refined approaches of need and fiscal issues could be
developed across key development sectors. It is not necessarily true that a country has made equal progress in
each area of development, and it is possible that resources and focus across the development spectrum are not
maximized. For example, it might be possible to begin with a general poverty index for all countries that is
supplemented by assessments of each main sector based on need and fiscal issues to create a complete picture
of a country’s status along the development continuum.
Such a comprehensive approach could help to guide domestic and external finance and to increase efficiency
and value for money across the areas of development to maximize the opportunity for countries to address
development issues. Such an approach could also be important to realize the SDG vision of focusing on people
and countries and not only on specific issues.

In a more general sense, this discussion highlights the need to focus on the more specific objectives of
development, such as more health or education, as a way of discussing how to strengthen the systems that
underpin them. More granular criteria could be valuable for different sorts of funders motivations, such as
prioritizing the most deserving or any other group of interest, avoid certain incentives, and promote specific
policies.

Finally, since the data required for detailed analysis are highly variable in availability, quality, scope, age, and
other important dimensions. It is important to consider the cost of collecting more information as one trade-
off for potentially better targeted decision making.




[1] There are three broad core functions 1)Supplying global public goods, which includes: Research and development for health tools; •
Development and harmonisation of international health regulations; • Knowledge generation and sharing; • Intellectual propert y
sharing; • Market-shaping activities 2) Management of cross-border externalities: Outbreak preparedness and response; • Responses to
antimicrobial resistance; • Responses to marketing of unhealthful products; • Control of cross-border disease movement; 3)Exercising
leadership and stewardship which includes: Health advocacy and priority setting (convening of policy makers for negotiation and
consensus building for strategy and policy); Promotion of aid eff effectiveness and accountability
[2] Jamison DT, Summers LH, Alleyne G, et al. Global health 2035: a world converging within a generation. Lancet 2013; 382: 1898–955
                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                       1




Chapter 6: Conclusions and Recommendations
Decision-making in health policy is complex and characterized by trade-offs between the need to invest in
contexts that maximise impact, and contexts that have the greatest financial and health need. Given these
contrasting, and often competing goals, the use of classifications that focusing either only on financial need,
or health need, would overlook the multifaceted nature of diseases, and the varied economic ability of
populations and governments to respond to these.

The findings from the analysis conducted under the aegis of the Equitable Access Initiative identify that just
as multi-stakeholder approaches are key to resolving public health issues, multi-criteria decision-making is
required in order to identify, and then prioritise contexts. The specific questions around the application of
such a framework, relating to grant management or resource distributions is beyond what could be proposed
and deliberated within the mandate of the Initiative. It is however hoped that by wider engagement through
the consultation processes, the governance bodies of different institutions will consider the EAI’s conclusions
in their own deliberations.

Finding:

          External health financing has been guided by the principles of improving health outcomes in contexts
          that have the least financial and structural capacity, both in terms of domestic resources and technical
          capability, to respond to key health needs. The analyses identify that complex policies such as
          eligibility and the prioritisation of investments should be informed by indicators reflecting income
          levels, health needs and policies.

          Using a comparison of countries’ rankings and eligibility, measured first by income and then by health
          needs, the analyses illustrates significant limitations of prioritizing based on income levels measured
          by GNI per capita.

          This is particularly relevant for eligibility polices, which, if based on income levels alone would tend
          to deprioritize middle-income countries where the level of disease burden continues to be too high to
          be domestically met, putting the population at further risk. A framework based solely on health needs
          would tend to deprioritize low-income countries with lower disease levels that may have insufficient
          resources to respond to the disease burden.

Recommendation:

          The overarching recommendation is that complex external health financing decisions such as
          eligibility and the prioritisation of investments should be informed by a multi-criteria framework that
          takes into account income levels, income distribution and health needs, in addition to domestic
          capacity and policies, where relevant.

          The analytical work emphasises the need to inform eligibility policies by both income and health
          metrics, and to account for levels of income relative to the disease burden a population must address.
          The analytical work examines a framework that accounts for health need relative to income by
          adjusting GNI by a general health-need indicator. Alternative ways of operationalising this
          recommendation for eligibility polices are explored in the report.

          Is it further recommended that discrete thresholds 36 in eligibility polices, if adopted, should be
          supported by policies that allow for a gradual and planned transition from external financing, in order
          to mitigate the risk of a country losing gains in health due to rapid decreases in external health
          financing in spite of significant health needs and/or limited fiscal space. In the absence of policies that
          would allow for a planned transition process, countries may be at risk of too rapid transitions,

36Thresholds and categories define the subset of contexts that fit the criteria of contexts. Income based eligibility frameworks typically
have discrete thresholds i.e. a country is either above or below the threshold.
                                                                                                               3
          potentially resulting in fiscal cliffs wherein external funding is withdrawn without sufficient planning
          to mitigate any interim decline in services.37                                                       2



Finding:

          In health policy, GNI per capita has also been used as a proxy to understand a government’s capacity
          to invest in health, but the analyses demonstrates that the metric is an imperfect measure. GNI per
          capita is a better measure of the level of wealth in a society, rather than the resources available to a
          government for investments in health.

          The focus on a government’s capacity to finance key publi c health interventions responds to external
          financing being considered to be more relevant where a country’s public domestic capacity is lower.

          There has been a growing concern that external health financing policies may dis-incentivize greater
          domestic investments towards health, if policies support external financing for health irrespective of
          a countries’ capacity to address domestic health needs, and the budgetary priority it allocates towards
          health.

          A competing view however is that reducing support to countries where the government fails to use the
          country’s capacity would adversely affect particularly key populations. Despite the continued debate
          over how policies could shape incentives, considering public capacity and policies in health policy
          making could be a first step in making the issue of incentives more explicit in decision-making for
          health.

Recommendation:

          In order to prioritize external health financing by better understanding a government’s domestic
          capacity to invest in health, a framework could compare the present and potential resource capacity
          of the government to invest in health with the level of priority given to investments in health.

          The analytical work suggests a framework that would inform polices based on a government’s h ealth
          financing characteristics, with a particular focus on i) the budgetary priority that governments give to
          health, measured in terms of the proportion of total government expenditure that is public health
          expenditure; and ii) their current fiscal capacity by accounting for the tax revenues collected by a
          government, the level of debt, and the size of annual interest payments.

          Against the concern with incentives, the analyses indicate that having an additional explicit focus on
          domestic policies in decision-making would be a first step in working with domestic governments,
          civil society, and other stakeholders to identify how low public investment in health and other barriers
          to achieving equitable health outcomes can be addressed.

          In policy terms, understanding the level of health need vis-a-vis the level of health priority and the
          degree to which a government leverages its domestic capacity, would be useful ‘levers’ that financers
          could use to prioritise investments, further define the type of assistance to be provided, as well as
          define the co-investment agreements with domestic governments. For e.g. in contexts where the
          government prioritises health well and is leveraging its domestic capacity, multilaterals may partner
          towards identifying inefficiencies in current spending, which would optimise the use of existing
          resources.

Finding

          It has also been emphasised that where possible, health need must be accounted for at a micro-level,
          and reflect the sub-national variation in health outcomes, particularly in order to avoid overlooking
          the needs of vulnerable groups and key populations. Legal and social barriers, or the lack of financial
          means, can disproportionally affect or effectively prevent certain groups from accessing vital health
          services. Given current data limitations, the groups did not endorse any particular metric or method
          of capturing this variation, and the analyses instead suggests nuancing policies based on qualitative
          assessments.

37 While there was consensus among EAI members that where discrete thresholds are used that render a country ineligible for support
once it passes a certain GNI per capita level, the risk of negative impacts on overall health financing should be mitigated by allowing for
a gradual and planned transition; an additional recommendation to avoid discrete thresholds for low- and middle-income countries was
not supported by the entire EAI.
                                                                                                         3
Recommendation                                                                                           3

     In order to improve health and development organisations’ capacity to systematically track specific
     challenges in countries, it is recommended that greater investments in data collection systems be
     considered. This would be a another step towards developing a more nuanced, comprehensive
     framework that captures equity considerations, including the needs of key populations and vulnerable
     groups, through better quality and more reliable data that support the inclusion of relevant indicators.
Annex I: Summary of the EAI consultative process                                                               3
                                                                                                               4
First meeting: February 2015

On 23 February 2015, the Equitable Access Initiative (EAI) held its first meeting organised by the initiative’s
co-convenors Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance; the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria; UNAIDS; UNICEF;
UNDP; UNITAID; UNFPA; WHO; and the World Bank. Hosted by WHO, the convening agencies, expert
panellists and other guests met in Geneva. They discussed possible measures or indicators that could be used
to better represent health needs and capacities than GNI per capita alone, which is commonly used by many
agencies and governments to assess eligibility for health-related assistance. Terms for a tender for analytic
work were discussed.

Experts described how the World Bank’s country classification using GNI per capita was designed to inform
its own lending decisions, but these groupings were being used far more broadly by many other agencies to
inform health-related decisions. As economic growth shifts more countries higher on this scale, they discussed
how it is increasingly difficult to use GNI per capita as a reliable indicator of disease burden or health system
capacity. Increasing inequality means that poverty and ill health can persist and even grow despite
improvements in aggregate indicators.

The motivation for the EAI was to produce a new starting point for considering how to classify countries,
characterise disease burdens and capacities and better inform health financing decisions. The governing body
of each institution or government would then be free to consider the EAI’s conclusions and adopt its own
approaches.

EAI members agreed with the importance of discussing health needs and ensuring equitable access. There was
a need to consider the highly-varied distribution of disease, poverty and inequality within countries; and
disparities including the urban-rural divide, gender and birth-order. They stressed the urgency of a discussion
given high disease burdens and pressure on funding. They also highlighted the importance of considering the
needs of marginalised, vulnerable and stigmatised groups; immigrants and migrant workers; and stateless
people.

Some argued that GNI/capita-based thresholds should not be used by donors to curtail assistance. Others
sought to stress the importance of considering commodity prices and other inputs, and to foster mechanisms
to address them including regional groupings of countries. Still others called for states to take primary
responsibility for the health of their populations, and for partners to create incentives and to reward efforts to
invest in health. There was a desire to avoid perverse incentives that rewarded governments for doing too little
and to ensure that donor funding would not “crowd out” domestic investments.

Many emphasized the need to recognise nuances: there is often a lag between growth and government
spending; GDP revisions do not rapidly translate into opportunities for improved investment and may even
lead to a short-term fall in income for health spending as foreign support falls while tax does not rise; and
some countries’ economic status may reverse as a result of conflict or other crises. Many that have become
lower-middle-income remain “just beyond the bar” dividing them from lower income.

There is additional complexity in federal states with regional governments that set their own budgets.
Ministries of health also face limited power in negotiating with ministries of finance, and other departments
that influence health including education and sanitation. They may feel they have limited flexibility since much
of their spending goes on headcount and overheads.

One option discussed was to retain the current GNI per capita criterion, but shift the “cut off” threshold higher.
There might be further adjustments to reflect a heavy disease burden. An alternative would be to examine a
broader range of different indicators. Suggestions included debt, poverty, access to services, disease burden,
the needs gap, institutional effectiveness, ability to pay, and willingness to pay.

Some wanted a large number of indicators to reflect local conditions and complexity. Others sought
practicality, simplicity and a limited burden of data collection with a maximum of 3 indicators. Speakers
stressed the challenges of data availability and quality, especially in those countries most in need of assistance.

There were calls for a transition period for countries over 5–10 years, giving time for adjustment and
acknowledging that GNI/head could slip backwards, such as during a conflict, crisis or economic downturn.
Some suggested the use of a rolling 3-year average to smooth out fluctuations. In implementation, there was
the desire for a “single conversation”, not one for each donor or disease programme.
Project development and consultation: summer/autumn 2015                                                    3
                                                                                                            5
After the meeting, the EAI launched a tender to further explore the issues raised, and awarded contracts to
four academic research groups to explore alternatives to GNI per capita for health. It held consultations with
the co-convenors and the governance bodies of the different organisations. The academic groups initially
developed their own models, analyses and approaches.

Given the great interest and importance of extended participation, the Equitable Access Initiative made
considerable efforts to engage with a variety of stakeholders throughout the analytical work. The consultative
process allowed participants to provide feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the outputs as well as
points of convergence.

Issues raised included the encouragement of shared responsibility to promote sustainability; that country
capacity could be explored as a coefficient for movement along the continuum; and that a guiding principle of
the health classification framework was to ensure access for the most vulnerable. They concluded that country
leadership would inspire accountability for a sustainable approach.

The NIPH research team conducted 20 interviews in August to September, to gather suggestions on the
framework and indicators. Participants included academics, civil society, multilateral organisations, bilateral
donor and country government representatives. The interviewees generally agreed that frameworks could be
useful in providing an initial orientation for decision making. Among the four areas of concern examined
directly, health and health needs was clearly identified as the most important. Stakeholders also highlighted
health needs and inequality as areas of concern.

The NIPH team also conducted a wider online discrete choice experiment (DCE) to map the preferences of
different stakeholders. The survey focused on common criteria for guiding decisions about external financing
for health, including income per capita, burden of disease, strength of the health system and health
inequalities. Through a set of binary choices, survey participants indicated how important they found each of
these country characteristics. A total of 285 people consented and completed the survey, with responses
coming from almost ninety countries. Civil society organizations were very well represented in the sample –
accounting for 44.6% of the responses.

Around the time of the UN General Assembly’s SDG Summit in September 2015, there was a series of
discussions including with UN policymakers and leading academics, a civil society consultation, a feedback
session with the Gates Foundation’s Primary Health Care Performance Initiative and a Private Sector
consultation. These sessions provided an opportunity to clarify the objectives of the Initiative in person, and
allowed stakeholders to voice concerns over indicators and suggest ways of improving engagement.

On 16 October, the Institut Jacques Delors hosted a discussion with Paris with 22 key representatives from
the private sector, conveners, civil society, donors, academia and French government officials. The meeting
focused on the potential policy impact of the EAI, highlighting the need to account for fiscal capacity as a
valuable tool for guiding international organisations and country governments toward considering effective
and efficient spending.

Second analytical advisory meeting: October 2015

On 28 October, technical experts from convening organisations, civil society representatives, academics and
the four analytical groups gathered in Geneva. The objective was to review the individual approaches, identify
a health framework, and define the trajectory of the Initiative’s analytical process.

While participants in each consultation pointed out the strengths of each of the different analytical
approaches, it was ultimately decided that the groups could develop common outputs during the final phase
of the Initiative. Using common theoretical elements from the four approaches, points of convergence were
identified in order to outline the third and final phase of the EAI, prior to the second Expert Panel Meeting in
February 2016. Those present in the October consultation agreed that a robust methodology required a
comprehensive model that was simple, replicable, transparent and easy to understand.

Subsequent meetings of the EAI included a Member States’ Meeting on the Global Fund Board in Brussels on
10 November, and a meeting convening leading experts in Berlin organised by Expert Panel member
Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul on 1 December to discuss political intentions and consequences of a potential new
framework.
Annex II: Table of country rankings                            3
                                                               6
Country                      GNIpc    GNI pc DALY   GNI    Change
                                      rank   rank   DALY
                                                    rank
Burundi                      250      1     19      14     ▲
Malawi                       280      2     13      10     ▲
Central African Republic     310      3     5       3      =
Congo, Dem. Rep.             370      4     7       6      ▲
Liberia                      370      5     28      24     ▲
Niger                        400      6     9       7      ▲
Madagascar                   440      7     45      29     ▲
Guinea                       450      8     17      13     ▲
Ethiopia                     470      9     31      27     ▲
Gambia, The                  500      10    30      26     ▲
Togo                         520      11    26      23     ▲
Guinea-Bissau                570      12    2       1      ▼
Mozambique                   600      13    11      9      ▼
Uganda                       620      14    23      20     ▲
Eritrea                      620      15    34      28     ▲
Mali                         630      16    3       2      ▼
Burkina Faso                 650      17    22      17     =
Sierra Leone                 670      18    10      8      ▼
Rwanda                       670      19    44      30     ▲
Afghanistan                  690      20    21      19     ▼
Nepal                        720      21    79      49     ▲
Benin                        790      22    42      31     ▲
Haiti                        800      23    43      32     ▲
Zimbabwe                     820      24    18      15     ▼
Comoros                      820      25    49      38     ▲
Tanzania                     840      26    27      25     ▼
South Sudan                  920      27    12      11     ▼
Cambodia                     960      28    57      43     ▲
Chad                         980      29    4       4      ▼
Tajikistan                   1000     30    72      51     ▲
Bangladesh                   1010     31    68      48     ▲
Senegal                      1050     32    46      35     ▲
Kenya                        1180     33    41      36     ▲
Kyrgyz Republic              1220     34    71      52     ▲
Cameroon                     1290     35    15      18     ▼
Yemen, Rep.                  1300     36    62      47     ▲
Mauritania                   1330     37    37      33     ▼
Cote d'Ivoire                1360     38    16      21     ▼
Pakistan                     1360     39    47      40     ▲
Djibouti                     1430     40    35      34     ▼
Lao PDR                      1490     41    53      44     ▲
India                        1530     42    50      45     ▲
Sao Tome and Principe        1560     43    66      53     ▲
Lesotho                  1580   44   1     5     ▼   3
                                                     7
Sudan                    1670   45   64    50    ▲
Zambia                   1700   46   14    22    ▼
Vietnam                  1740   47   116   62    ▲
Ghana                    1750   48   38    41    ▼
Nicaragua                1790   49   119   67    ▲
Solomon Islands          1830   50   65    54    ▲
Uzbekistan               1940   51   76    57    ▲
Papua New Guinea         2030   52   32    37    ▼
Honduras                 2190   53   103   63    ▲
Bhutan                   2330   54   70    59    ▲
Moldova                  2470   55   61    55    =
Congo, Rep.              2620   56   29    39    ▼
Bolivia                  2620   57   75    61    ▲
Nigeria                  2700   58   8     16    ▼
Kiribati                 2720   59   36    46    ▼
Swaziland                2750   60   6     12    ▼
Egypt, Arab Rep.         2940   61   78    68    ▲
Morocco                  2990   62   105   75    ▲
West Bank and Gaza       3060   63   123   81    ▲
Vanuatu                  3090   64   58    58    ▼
Syrian Arab Republic     3120   65   104   76    ▲
Sri Lanka                3180   66   112   79    ▲
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.    3270   67   77    71    ▲
Guatemala                3290   68   86    73    ▲
Philippines              3300   69   87    74    ▲
Cabo Verde               3530   70   111   82    ▲
Georgia                  3560   71   59    60    ▼
Indonesia                3740   72   88    78    ▲
Ukraine                  3760   73   48    56    ▼
Armenia                  3780   74   74    77    ▲
El Salvador              3870   75   92    80    ▲
Guyana                   3940   76   55    64    ▼
Samoa                    3960   77   115   88    ▲
Paraguay                 4190   79   108   89    ▲
Tunisia                  4210   80   122   94    ▲
Timor-Leste              4250   81   84    83    ▲
Marshall Islands         4300   82   60    72    ▼
Tonga                    4320   83   89    85    ▲
Belize                   4350   84   98    86    ▲
Mongolia                 4360   85   51    65    ▼
Fiji                     4370   86   54    70    ▼
Albania                  4510   87   95    87    =
Angola                   4730   88   20    42    ▼
Bosnia and Herzegovina   4790   89   83    90    ▲
Jordan                   4940   90   127   103   ▲
Macedonia, FYR           4980   91   99    93    ▲
Jamaica                          5220    92    107   97    ▲   3
                                                               8
Thailand                         5320    93    90    95    ▲
Algeria                          5470    94    113   102   ▲
Namibia                          5750    95    33    66    ▼
Ecuador                          5790    96    100   99    ▲
Dominican Republic               5840    97    101   100   ▲
Serbia                           6050    99    91    101   ▲
Peru                             6230    100   118   109   ▲
Cuba                             6500    101   102   105   ▲
St. Vincent and the Grenadines   6540    102   85    104   ▲
Maldives                         6730    103   128   117   ▲
China                            6740    104   114   113   ▲
Belarus                          6780    105   40    84    ▼
Iran, Islamic Rep.               6840    106   125   114   ▲
Dominica                         6860    107   96    107   =
Turkmenistan                     6880    108   63    98    ▼
Iraq                             6920    109   94    108   ▼
St. Lucia                        7060    110   97    110   =
Montenegro                       7250    111   73    106   ▼
Bulgaria                         7280    112   52    96    ▼
Azerbaijan                       7350    113   81    111   ▼
South Africa                     7410    114   25    69    ▼
Grenada                          7490    115   80    112   ▼
Botswana                         7500    116   39    91    ▼
Colombia                         7770    117   106   115   ▼
Romania                          9050    118   69    116   ▼
Suriname                         9470    119   67    118   ▼
Mauritius                        9570    120   82    119   ▼
Lebanon                          9610    121   121   122   ▲
Mexico                           9770    122   110   121   ▼
Costa Rica                       9780    123   126   123   =
Gabon                            9790    124   24    92    ▼
Libya                            10510   126   120   124   ▼
Malaysia                         10510   127   124   126   ▼
Panama                           10860   128   117   127   ▼
Turkey                           10970   129   109   125   ▼
Kazakhstan                       11560   130   56    120   ▼
Brazil                           12310   131   93    128   ▼
                                                                                           3
                                                                                           9
Annexe III: Equitable Access Initiative Expert Panel and Technical Working
Group Members

Expert Panel of the Equitable Access Initiative (EAI)

 Co-chairs of the Expert Panel of the Equitable Access Initiative
 Hon. Pascal Lamy                Honorary President, Notre Europe

 H.E. Donald Kaberuka            President, African Development Bank Group

 EAI Expert Panel Members


 Elhadj As Sy                    Secretary General, IFRC


                                 President, Association of Schools of Public Health in
 Prof. Fred Newton Binka         Africa

 Nancy Birdsall                  Founding President, Center for Global Development


 Prof. Awa Coll-Seck             Minister for Health, Senegal


 Tony Elumelu, C.O.N             Founder, Tony Elumelu Foundation

                                 Minister of Health, Jamaica
 Hon. Fenton Ferguson

                                 University Professor, Georgetown University
 Prof. Lawrence Gostin

 The Rt. Hon. Justine Greening   Secretary of State for International Development, DfID
 MP

 Anand Grover                    Co-Founder & Project Director, Lawyers Collective

                                 Vice President, Peking University Health Science Centre
 Yan Guo


                                 Professor of Global Health, University of Washington in
 Prof. Dean Jamison
                                 Seattle


 H.E. Christine Kaseba-Sata
                                 Goodwill Ambassador for Gender-based Violence, WHO
                                                                                      4
                                                                                      0


EAI Expert Panel Members (continued)


Hon. Michael Kirby AC, CMG   Former Justice, High Court of Australia


                             Director, Department of Health and Welfare Services,
Toshiro Kumakawa             National Institute of Public Health, Japan

                             International President, MSF
Joanne Liu

                             Director, Knowledge Ecology International
James Love

Hon. James Macharia          Cabinet Secretary for Health, Kenya


Graça Machel DBE             Founder, Graça Machel Trust


                             Special Advisor, FTI Consulting and former United
Lord Mark Malloch-Brown      Nations Deputy Secretary General


                             Chair of Board, The Global Fund to fight AIDS,
Hon. Nafsiah Mboi            Tuberculosis and Malaria

                             European Commissioner for International
Neven Mimica                 Cooperation and Development, European
                             Commission

H.E Festus Mogae             Former President, Botswana


                             President, Inter-American Development Bank
Luis Alberto Moreno

Prof. Arthur Mutambara       CEO, Africa Technology and Business Institute
                             Senior Research Fellow and Project Leader at Blavatnik
Mthuli Ncube                 School of Government, University of Oxford
                             Minister of Finance, Nigeria
Hon. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala

Eva Ombaka                   Pharmaceutical Systems Africa
Gorik Ooms                   Researcher, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Belgium
                                                                                          4
                                                                                          1


EAI Expert Panel Members (continued)

                              Professor of International Economics, University of
Hon. Mari Pangestu            Indonesia and former Minister of Trade, Republic of
                              Indonesia

Hon. David Parirenyatwa       Minister of Health & Child Welfare, Zimbabwe
Hon. Joy Phumaphi             Executive Secretary, African Leaders Malaria Alliance
                              Director, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Peter Piot
                              Medicine
Prof. Nana Poku               Political Economist, HEARD

                              Minister of Public Health, Thailand
H.E. Rajata Rajatanavin


                              Senior Leadership Fellow, Harvard School of Public
Hon. Sujatha Rao
                              Health

Prof. Hans Rosling            Professor of International Health, Karolinska Institute

Ambassador Richard Sezibera   Secretary General, East African Community


John Sewell                   Senior Scholar, The Wilson Center



Gloria Steinem                Feminist Activist & Co-Founder, Ms. Magazine


                              President of Global Policy, Advocacy, and Country
Mark Suzman                   Programs, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation


Ellen ‘t Hoen                 Director, Medicines Law & Policy

Mary Ann Torres               Executive Director, ICASO

Cardinal Peter Turkson        President, Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace

Stefano Vella, MD             Chair, Center for Global Health at the Italian National
                              Institute of Health; Advisor, Italian Ministry of Foreign
                              Affairs

Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul     Vice president, Friends of the Global Fund Europe;
                              Former Development Minister of Germany
Technical Working Group Members of the Equitable Access Initiative


EAI Conveners’ Technical Working Group
                              Policy Adviser, HIV, Health and Development Practice,
Tenu Avafia
                              Bureau for Development Policy, UNDP New York


                              Senior Policy Analyst for Health GAP (Global Access
Prof. Brook Baker
                              Project), Northeastern University

Manica Balasegaram            Director, Access Campaign, MSF

Elizabeth Benomar             Technical Advisor, UNFPA
Philippe Duneton              Deputy Executive Director, UNITAID
                              Head Strategy & Policy in the Office of the Executive
Harley Feldbaum
                              Director, The Global Fund

Christopher Game              Chief Procurement Officer, The Global Fund

                              Director, Strategic Information & Evaluation Department,
Peter Ghys
                              UNAIDS
Abdalla Hamdok                Deputy Executive Secretary, United Nations Economci
                              Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Jose Antonio Izazola-Licea    Division Chief, Evaluation and Economics, UNAIDS
Judith Kallenberg             Head of Policy, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance
Supon Limwatananon            Faculty of Pharmacy, Khonkaen University, Thailand
                              Executive Director, Akiba Uhaki Human Rights & Social
Ezra Mbogori                  Justice Fund, Kenya
Gabriela Flores               Health Economist, WHO
Pentzke Saint-Germain

Robert Newman                 Managing Director, Policy & Performance, Gavi, the
                              Vaccine Alliance
                              Senior Health Economist, Health, Nutrition & Population
Michael Kent Ranson           Global Practice, The World Bank Group

                              Chief of the Social Protection and Health Division, Inter-
Ferdinando Regalia            American Development Bank

Charles Siwela                PLHIV, National Director, Youth Engage Zimbabwe
                              Director, Program on Global Health and Technology
Anthony So
                              Access, Duke University
