    May 2016




                                                                                                                                            Photo: World Bank
The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality:
Approach and Activities
This note is a product of the policy series of the EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE). Grounded in extensive
research, the series summarizes country and regional activities funded by the EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality.


Toward Gender-Informed Policy Making                               1.	 Increasing availability of gender-relevant data and evidence
                                                                       by serving as a catalyst for innovation and investment in fron-
The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality was estab-
                                                                       tier issues (for example, women’s voice and agency) and in
lished in response to the World Bank’s 2012 World Develop-
                                                                       areas with persistent gaps
ment Report, which focused on gender. The EAP-UFGE aims
to strengthen the capacity for undertaking gender-informed         2.	 Road-testing evidence at the country level to strengthen and
investments and policy making in countries of the region.              expand successful approaches (for example, applying knowl-
This is achieved by supporting the integration of gender more          edge gained from pilot projects and impact evaluations) and
strategically into World Bank projects and policy dialogue             to generate operationally relevant lessons on how to effec-
(for example, in accordance with the priorities identified in          tively translate new evidence into results on the ground
the Bank’s regional and country gender action plans) and by
                                                                   3.	 Leveraging partnerships to help advance gender equal-
improving the measurement of gender-differentiated impacts
                                                                       ity through new ways of engaging development partners,
and results.  Funds are allocated through calls for proposals
                                                                       research institutions, statistics bureaus, and civil society orga-
under the three main pillars of UFGE:
                                                                       nizations in client countries.
2                   The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities




                                                  The World Bank’s East Asia and the Pacific (EAP) region has expe-
                                                  rienced faster growth and more poverty reduction than any
                                                  other region.a These achievements have helped narrow gender
                                                  gaps in education, health, and other areas. Gender gaps in access
                                                  to education, including at the secondary and tertiary levels, have
                                                  closed dramatically. Fertility rates have declined sharply. Female
                                                  labor force participation is higher than in any other developing
                                                  region, with about 70 percent of women participating in eco-
                                                  nomic activities. Women also have higher participation in the
                                                  management and ownership of firms than in other developing
                                                  regions.

                                              Despite progress, important challenges remain to achieving
                                              gender equality in the region. Growth and development alone
                                              are not sufficient to achieve gender equality in all dimensions
                                              and for all women. Gender gaps in economic opportunity and
                                              in women’s voice and influence have proven particularly persis-
                                              tent. Some 70–80 percent of women still earn less than men for
                                              similar work. Female workers are more likely than men to work as
Photo: World Bank
                                              unpaid family labor or in the informal sector. Female farmers and
                                              entrepreneurs own less land and have less access to productive
                      inputs, adversely affecting the productivity and profitability of their activities. Women
                      also have a weaker voice and exert less influence than men in the home, in politics, and
                      in civil society. Violence against women, an extreme manifestation of powerlessness,
                      remains high, particularly in the Pacific, where the prevalence of gender-based violence
                      is among the highest in the world. And while maternal mortality rates have declined in
                      the region, they remain high in lower-income countries (such as the Lao People’s Demo-
                      cratic Republic), in several Pacific countries, and even in Indonesia.

                      a. The countries that make up the Bank’s EAP region are: Cambodia, China, Fiji, Indonesia, Kiribati, Lao PDR,
                      Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Myanmar, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
                      Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Vietnam.




                                                   East Asia and Pacific
                             A product of the EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality
                                     The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities   3




Photo: Curt Carnemark / World Bank




The review and selection process for projects to be funded under the EAP-UFGE relies
on a multi-sectoral committee with representation across the Bank’s Global Practices and
chaired by the EAP Chief Economist. The selection criteria include: (a) relevance to EAP-
UFGE objectives, (b) alignment with countries’ sector priorities, (c) technical quality, (d) real-
ism and readiness in terms of clearly defined outcomes and beneficiaries that are consistent
with the available budget and time-frame, (e) regional and public good value, and (f) a plan
for dissemination and communication of results.

From three rounds of calls for proposals under the EAP-UFGE, 18 different activities have
been supported. Funded projects are focusing on first-generation gender issues such as
maternal health that remain a challenge in some of the countries in the region. Several
projects focus on fostering new opportunities and managing emerging risks associated with
globalization and integration, migration, urbanization, aging populations, and information
and communication technology—key trends affecting men and women of the EAP region. .

The EAP Gender Innovation Lab (EAPGIL) was recently established to underpin a comprehen-
sive program of activities to fill knowledge gaps and identify scalable, operational solutions
to enhance women’s economic opportunities. The funds for EAPGIL are housed within the
EAP-UFGE, although the program is independently responsible for managing resources and
4   The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities




    implementing activities. EAPGIL aims to build its knowledge base through impact evaluations
    and inferential research, to identify what works and what does not, and to ensure that lessons
    are fed back into the design of programs and policies, including the Bank’s lending operations.


    Project Activities and Results
    Promoting Gender Equality in Endowments and Human Development
    A woman’s agency is affected in fundamental ways by her education, health, and assets, and
    by how these endowments are linked to economic opportunities. Gender inequalities in
    educational attainment and access to health services can hinder women’s abilities to influ-
    ence their circumstances in the home, to enter and participate effectively in politics, or to
    leave bad or dangerous household situations. A variety of projects in the region are looking
    at how to close gender gaps in human development through evidence-based research in
    the health and education sectors.




                                                                                      Photo: World Bank
                        The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities   5




In Lao PDR, Cambodia, and Indonesia, projects have begun to reduce maternal mortal-
ity, increase the use of maternal health services, and to improve nutrition among women
and children. In Lao PDR, a project entitled Generating Evidence on Supply-Side Capacity
to Inform the National Free Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Policy (2013–2016) is look-
ing specifically at what is needed to increase supply and demand for maternal and child
health services in a gender-sensitive manner. In Cambodia, Effect on Female Knowledge
and Behavior toward Nutrition (2013–2016) is piloting a cash transfer scheme to improve
maternal and child health and nutrition. Improving Maternal Health in Indonesia (2014–2017)
is supporting evidence-based decision making to tackle persistently high maternal mortal-
ity by assessing the supply-side readiness and capacity of the Indonesian health system to
provide maternal health services in selected provinces showing a high number of maternal
deaths or a high maternal mortality ratio.

In terms of education and literacy, Hem No Leit Tumas (2013–2014) in the Solomon Islands
aimed to raise literacy rates, especially among women, by improving the design and imple-
mentation of informal literacy programs. The analysis resulted in a compendium of providers
and programs that noted good practices and lessons learned.

Taking Active Measures to Close Gender Gaps in Economic Opportunity
Many indicators in the EAP region demonstrate the substantial challenges to be overcome
to close the gender gap in access to economic opportunities identified in the 2012 World
Development Report. The type of work women do remains very different from that of men,
and their remuneration is lower. Women of all ages are more likely than men to be in poorly
remunerated occupations and sectors; women are paid less than men for similar work; and
gender norms in the division of labor within the household imply that women work longer
hours than men, although fewer of those hours are devoted to remunerated activities. A
variety of projects are being carried out to enhance the knowledge base on the various
determinants of labor force participation.

Female Labor Force Participation and Care (2014–2016) is helping to gather knowledge on
the participation of women over the age of 45 in the labor force of selected EAP countries
by examining (a) the sectoral composition, type, and status (for example, urban vs. rural) of
the work done by those participating; (b) transitions out of the labor force and the extent
to which these are driven by policy and socioeconomic factors (the state of the economy,
family needs, health status, and so on); (c) activities pursued after withdrawing from work;
(d) primary sources of support for women who withdraw from the labor force; (e) pen-
sion policies and gender; and (f) supply of and demand for elder care and long-term care
in China and related options for policy development. The project is producing valuable
inputs for the ongoing dialogue on elder care and women’s labor-force participation in
6   The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities




     Photo: World Bank




    China, notably for a recently requested lending operation on elder care in Anhui province,
    China. For other countries, the work has improved the gender focus of analytical work for
    the regional study on aging.

    Globalization can have a gender-differentiated effect on a wide range of outcomes, includ-
    ing earnings. The Mekong Informal Trade Facilitation and Gender Study (2013–2015) sur-
    veyed small and informal traders at border checkpoints between Lao PDR, Cambodia,
    Thailand, and Vietnam to investigate whether female traders face unusual difficulties. The
    results show that the higher costs incurred by female traders were traceable to their pro-
    pensity to hire small taxi services to move their goods across the border. The finding has
                         The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities   7




been useful for designing policies and technical assistance and is likely to contribute to the
reformulation of customs and border policies that affect small-scale trading communities.

Strengthening Women’s Agency and Engaging Men
In many countries of the region women have a more limited voice and less influence than
men in decision making in their homes, their communities, and society. Women are also
more likely to be victims of gender-based violence. The inability of women to voice and act
on their preferences affects their own welfare and is detrimental to development. Projects
have focused on how to strengthen the agency of women and improve the knowledge
base on male-specific gender issues.

Gender Impacts of Intelligent Transport System (ITS) (2014–2016) was designed to increase
knowledge of the gender impacts of intelligent transport systems and to identify approaches
to maximize their benefits for women in China. The expected outputs include (a) a report
summarizing the gender impacts of the existing ITS in Wuhan and Urumqi; (b) a technical
guideline to better incorporate gender considerations in ITS planning, design, implementa-
tion and operation; and (c) dissemination of key findings to cities hosting urban transport
projects funded by the World Bank, academia, design institutes, and civil society.

Other projects have been designed to better understand and address male-specific gender
issues. Situation Assessment for Men and Youth in Conflict-Affected Areas in Southern
Thailand (2013–2015) is the first study in Thailand to look at the impact of conflict and
violence on men and youth, the groups most directly affected by the long conflict in the
country’s “Deep South.” International workshops have generated discussion on legal frame-
works, compensation, and treatment and development programs targeting these groups.
The findings of the study are also being used in a project supported by the Peace Building
Partnership Fund to help at-risk men and male youth obtain psychological treatment and
gain knowledge of the legal system. Stopping Gender-Based Violence by Engaging with Men
(2014–2016) is looking into the underlying issues that lead Mongolian men and boys to adopt
detrimental behaviors (such as violence against women, alcoholism, and leaving school) by
piloting “Men Care” approaches through media and male support groups in Ulaanbaatar.

Building Capacity
The EAP-UFGE Gender and Transport program is building capacity among clients who are
starting or planning investments in urban or rural infrastructure and transport across the
region. Drawing on expertise among clients in the region and global lessons embedded in
the Social and Transport Global Practices of the World Bank and its donor partners, the
program is establishing a forum to develop local solutions that will shrink gender inequalities
through investments in the transport sector.
8   The EAP Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality: Approach and Activities




    The approach involves South–South exchanges; regional workshops and technical advisory
    services that offer clients concrete ideas on how to optimize the approach to gender in
    their operations or policies. Key topics include how to (a) structure consultations to ensure
    that both women and men’s views are taken into account in the design of urban transport
    projects; (b) design and fund road-maintenance programs that employ poor women in rural
    areas; and (c) decrease the risk of sexual harassment for users of public transport systems. In
    cooperation with the Vietnam Ministry of Transport, the program is inviting representatives
    from transport ministries, provincial transport authorities, and project implementation units
    from Kiribati to China to learn about the Vietnam Third Rural Road project, where more than
    68,000 women gained seasonal employment.

    The EAP Gender Capacity Program also publishes a series of knowledge notes that share
    findings and results from individual EAP-UFGE initiatives and operations. The notes are avail-
    able at http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/eap/brief/gender.




      Copyright © 2016
      The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank Group
      1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433 USA

      All rights reserved.

      The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the authors and
      should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, or its affiliated organizations, or to members
      of its board of executive directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee
      the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any
      consequence of their use.


      The UFGE aims to strengthen awareness, knowledge, and capacity for gender-informed policy making.
      It supports the priorities identified in the East Asia and Pacific Regional Gender action Plan as well as in the
      EAP Country Gender Action Plans.

      For additional information, please contact: Lourdes Anducta, landucta@worldbank.org
