                                                                                                                                 MAY 2016
                    EAP Gender
                    Photo: World Bank   October 2016



                                                               Gender and Trade
                                                               Gender Dimensions of
                                                               Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade
                                                               in Cambodia and the Lao
                                                               People’s Democratic Republic
                                                               A Policy Note from the East Asia and Pacific
Photo: World Bank




                                                               Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality


                    Trade integration supported by the
                    World Bank in Cambodia and the Lao
                    People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR)
                                                               T     he findings presented here, from a World Bank study led by the Trade and
                                                                     Competitiveness Practice of the World Bank, fill the gap in our knowledge
                                                               about the patterns of small-scale cross-border trade in Cambodia and Lao PDR
                                                               and those engaged in it. This knowledge will help inform future investments in
                    has brought direct benefits to firms by
                                                               trade integration and identify how interventions might be adjusted to ensure that
                    automating, streamlining, and simplify-    vulnerable border users are able to realize the benefits of trade modernization.
                    ing trade procedures (EMC 2012; World
                                                               Given the lack of data on small-scale cross-border trade and traders, an innova-
                    Bank 2012a, 2014a) and by improv-
                                                               tive mix of survey strategies was implemented in Poipet and Bavet, Cambodia
                    ing the effectiveness and integrity of
                                                               (on the borders with Thailand and Vietnam, respectively), and in Vangtao, Lao
                    public sector revenue collection. But      PDR (bordering Thailand). The three border crossings were chosen based on field
                    the impact of integration measures         observations and qualitative interviews in the vicinity of more than ten different
                    on small-scale cross-border traders is     border checkpoints. Selection criteria included trade volume, diversity and repre-
                    unknown—largely for lack of data.          sentativeness of trade patterns, and the active involvement of Lao and Cambo-
                                                               dian citizens. Cambodia and Lao PDR were selected because they are the poorest
                    Small-scale cross-border trade already     of the four countries.
                    supports the livelihoods of thousands of
                                                               Qualitative data from field observations, stakeholder interviews, and focus
                    men and women in Cambodia and land-
                                                               group discussions were combined with quantitative measures (sampling frames
                    locked Lao PDR. It holds great potential   listing small-scale cross-border trade transactions and in-depth interviews) to
                    to further enhance women’s economic        provide a clear and accurate picture of small-scale cross-border trade and its
                    empowerment.                               practitioners.
2   Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in
    Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




    Understanding Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade
    Small-scale cross-border trade can be defined in the Cambodian and Lao contexts as trade
    in goods conducted by traders and brokers across an international border in man-powered
    vehicles or vehicles with fewer than four wheels. Such trade is overwhelmingly informal, in
    the sense that traders and brokers are not registered and pay no income taxes, although they
    usually pay export or import taxes. Small-scale traders benefit from partial or total exemption
    from duty because of the low value of their shipments, but actual fees vary widely because
    some border authorities collect taxes and fees beyond their mandate. Moreover, because
    traders are seldom aware of the applicable rates, they tend to perceive taxes and duties as
    being arbitrarily determined by border authorities and negotiated on a case-by-case basis.

    Further confusion is introduced by the fact that different goods are subject to different tax
    rates—and most traders transport a variety of goods. For instance, it is common for traders
    to ship both vegetables and manufactured snacks, which are taxed differently. Female trad-
    ers are more likely to trade in perishable foods, such as vegetables and fresh fish or meat.

    Small-scale cross-border trade is highly asymmetric in the Mekong subregion, with most
    goods being imported into Lao PDR and Cambodia. A large share of small-scale trade—
    in excess of 70 percent around smaller checkpoints such as Bavet and Vangtao—is sold
    directly to final consumers, mostly in the traders’ own villages.

    There are various roles and arrangements in small-scale cross-border trade in the Mekong
    subregion: traders working on their own account (“own-account traders”), brokers, absen-
                                          tee traders, and transporters. Only own-account
    Figure 1.                             traders and brokers deal with border authorities.
    The composition of small-scale        Whereas traders purchase, transport, and sell goods
    cross-border trade activities         themselves, thus bearing market risks related to
    differs by gender                     unanticipated changes in prices, brokers are hired
        100                               by absentee traders and do not own the goods
         90                               they clear across the border. Nor are they respon-
    Share of crossings (percent)




         80                               sible for purchasing or selling them.
                                   70
                                                              Women are significantly underrepresented among
                                   60
                                   50
                                                              brokers. Whereas approximately 79 percent of
                                   30                         women in the population of interest are own-
                                   40                         account traders, compared with 56 percent for
                                   20                         their male counterparts (figure 1), they make up
                                   10                         only 25 percent of crossings carried out by brokers,
                                   0
                                            Men       Women
                                                              as against 50 percent of crossings by own-account
                                                              traders.
                                        Own-account traders
                                        Brokers
Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in                3
   Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




                                                  Photo: World Bank
4   Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in
    Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




    Using nationally representative datasets (Kingdom of Cambodia 2014; Lao PDR 2010), it
    appears that women are underrepresented in small-scale cross-border trade compared with
    similar self-employed jobs, which is indicative of specific constraints affecting women when
    it comes to crossing a border for trade. But the share of women in small-scale cross-border
    trade is lower than among comparable occupations (own-account and self-employed work-
    ers) in the country as a whole (figure 2). We find that 60 percent of crossings are performed
    by female traders or brokers in Vangtao, as against 37 percent in Bavet and 29 percent in Poi-
    pet, whereas 68 percent of the population of traders is female in Vangtao, with 41 percent
    in Bavet and 32 percent in Poipet. The gap between women’s share of crossings and their
    share in the trading population is an indication of a lower crossing frequency among female
    traders and brokers, which reflects tighter time constraints for female traders, as highlighted
    in the literature (World Bank 2012b, 2012c).


    The Challenges That Traders Face
    More than 80 percent of men and 90 percent of women finance their trade primarily from
    personal savings. The second most common source of startup capital, particularly for men,
    is a loan from relatives. Less common sources are relatives’ savings, loans (from banks, money
    lenders, neighbors, or friends), grants or low-interest loans from nongovernmental organiza-
    tions, and credits from suppliers. Women who need to knock on more doors than men to


    Figure 2.
    The share of women in small-scale cross-border trade is lower than
    in comparable occupations
                                    100
                                    90
    Share of population (percent)




                                    80
                                                                                                                  Male SSCBTers
                                    70
                                                                                                                  Female SSCBTers
                                    60
                                    50
                                    30
                                    40
                                    20
                                     10
                                     0
                                          Estimated    Estimated    Own-account/     Estimated    Self employed
                                            SSCBT        SSCBT      self-employed,     SSCBT         in trade,
                                          population   population     nationwide     population    Champasak
                                                                                                     province
                                            Bavet       Poipet       CSES (2013)      Vangtao       LFS (2010)

    SSCBT = small-scale cross-border trade; CSES = Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey (Kingdom of Cambodia 2014); LFS = Labor
    Force Survey (Lao PDR 2010).
                                                      Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in                       5
                                                         Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




Figure 3.
Time constraints as proxied by distance partly explain individuals’ choice
to engage in trade


                             Female



           Total distance traveled



Female x total distance traveled

                                    -20         -10        0          10       20               30          40
                                                      Marginal effect on probability of
                                                          being a trader (percent)


Note: The figure displays coefficients from an OLS regression. The dependent variable is activity choice (equal to 1 for traders
and 0 for brokers). Whiskers represent 95 percent confidence intervals.




mobilize the same amount of startup capital. A similar picture emerges when one considers
operating capital.

Time is a crucial determinant of women’s relative underrepresentation in small-scale cross-
border trade. Women are disproportionately affected by delays caused by poor transporta-
tion infrastructure in and around checkpoints, because such delays conflict with their roles
as homemakers. Time endowment is proxied in figure 3 by the total distance traveled by
a trader or broker in her activity. Regression results show that being a trader is positively
correlated with the total distance traveled. (The intuition behind this is that most brokers
take possession of goods for the purpose of dealing with border authorities; they generally
do not transport the goods or deal with the end consumer.) But distance enters the equa-
tion negatively when paired with the female variable. This is consistent with the idea from
the literature that time endowment—and thus distance and transportation—are more of a
concern for female entrepreneurs than for their male counterparts.

Small-scale cross-border traders and brokers voice concerns about narrow roads that cause
traffic jams and delays, about the lack of public transportation and parking lots, and about
restrictions on the types of vehicles allowed across the border with goods. Time-constrained
women cope with these issues either by hiring transporters, which eats into their business
margins, or by marketing smaller quantities, which limits their profit potential. On average
and per crossing, female traders pay more than double what male traders pay in transporta-
tion costs (figure 4).
6   Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in
    Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




    Figure 4.                                                                           Small-Scale Cross-Border
    Female traders spend more per crossing                                              Trade as an Income
    on transportation costs                                                             Opportunity for Women
                                       4.5                       Despite gender-specific constraints, small-
             4.0                                                 scale cross-border trade is worthwhile for
    Transportation cost per crossing




              3.5                                                women as an avenue for income generation
             3.0                                                 and empowerment. That this is so is dem-
              (US dollars)




              2.5                                                onstrated by comparisons with women’s
             2.0                                                 socioeconomic status in similar jobs and
               1.5                                               by income distributions. Both factors—the
               1.0                                               constraints and the benefits—argue for
             0.5                                                 enhanced inclusiveness and gender-aware-
                 0
                                                                 ness in trade-facilitation projects. Indeed,
                     Male traders        Female traders          to the extent that some degree of income
    Note: Traders only. Whiskers represent 95 percent confidence
                                                                 inequality in small-scale cross-border trade
    intervals.                                                   signals a potential for upward mobility,
                                                                 it reinforces the value of such trade as an
    option for women. The income inequality can be inferred from the gap between mean and
    median incomes, in particular for women (figure 5). The coefficient of variation of income
    from small-scale cross-border trade is twice as large for women as for men in Bavet.


    Figure 5.
    Small-scale cross-border trade income varies widely by checkpoint and gender
                                       9
                                       8                                                                                   Mean
    SSCBT income in past 12 months




                                       7                                                                                   Median
        (US dollars/thousands)




                                       6
                                       5
                                       4
                                       3
                                       2
                                        1
                                       0
                                               Male              Female      Male               Female      Male        Female
                                             SSCBTers           SSCBTers   SSCBTers            SSCBTers   SSCBTers     SSCBTers

                                                        Bavet                         Poipet                     Vangtao

    Note: The figure presents per capita income from small-scale cross-border trade in U.S. dollars corrected for purchasing
    power parity (using 2011 data from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators; the reference category is Cambodia).
    SSCBT = small-scale cross-border trade.
                                            Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in    7
                                               Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




Gender Differentials in Taxes and Fees
Unfortunately, the tax realities discussed in the remainder of this section discourage women
from entering small-scale cross-border trade and prevent them from prospering in that
industry. Alleviating such constraints matters: Profit from small-scale cross-border trade, and
thus the welfare of all traders and brokers, depends directly on interactions with border
agencies. Trading households rely on those profits to make ends meet. This is especially true
of households headed by female traders (figure 6).

Women are charged higher tax rates than men. This holds true whether we look at tax pay-
ments as a share of the total value of the goods traded or of the total profit and whether
we focus on averages and medians or on the whole distribution. The difference is particularly
striking when one considers taxes as a share of total gross profits (figure 7). A corollary of this
finding is that women are less successful than men in negotiating taxes and fees (figure 8).
Women’s weaker bargaining position means that they are less able to resist discretionary taxa-
tion, including by border agencies that have no official authority to collect taxes.

Women involved in small-scale cross-border trade are 73 percent more likely to be exempt
from taxes than their male counterparts. But this preferential treatment turns out to apply
only to female brokers. And it is statistically indistinguishable from zero for female trad-
ers because female traders are 79 percent more likely to pay tax than male traders. Such a
nonlinear tax schedule—positive discrimination in favor of female brokers and negative dis-
crimination against women when they trade on their own account—creates a “tax wedge”
that dissuades female brokers from extending into trading and deters women from entering
small-scale cross-border trade. The tax wedge is a combination of the preferential treatment
afforded by border agencies to female brokers and discrimination against female traders.

Figure 6.
Trading households headed by women derive more of their income from
small-scale cross-border trade than do trading households headed by men

                              95
Share of SSCBT in household
   income in past 7 days




                              90
                                                                             Men
                                                                             Women
          (percent)




                              85

                              80

                              75

                              70
                                   Bavet   Poipet            Vangtao


SSCBT = small-scale cross-border trade.
8   Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in
    Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




    Figure 7.
    Female traders face higher tax rates than their male counterparts
              30
                   Mean
              25
                   Median
              20
    Percent




              15

              10

               5

              0
                    Men                                                      Women           Men                  Women
                     Tax payments as share of                                                  Tax payments as share of
                       total purchase value                                                        total gross profit




                          Figure 8.
                          Female traders are less likely to report
                          negotiable taxes and fees

                                                                        80
                          Share of crossings where tax was negotiable




                                                                        70

                                                                        60

                                                                        50
                                           (percent)




                                                                        40

                                                                        30

                                                                        20

                                                                        10

                                                                        0
                                                                             Male traders   Female traders

                          Note: Whiskers represent 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                                    Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in                   9
                                                       Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




Figure 9.
Female brokers are likely to benefit from tax exemption, but not female traders

                                Female

                                Trader

Total purchase value (standardized)

    Female x total distance traveled
                      (standardized)

                      Female x trader

                                       -150       -100        -50        0       50        100               150
                                                         Marginal effect on probability of
                                                             tax exemption (percent)

Note: The figure displays coefficients from an OLS regression. Country and checkpoints are controlled for. Whiskers repre-
sent 95 percent confidence intervals. “Total purchase value” is standardized by checkpoint.



Policy Recommendations
Governments could disseminate regular procedures for small-scale cross-border traders
and apply them consistently. Small-scale trade tends to be informal and therefore vulner-
able to the ad hoc actions of border officials. In cases where irregular treatment becomes
predatory (as when bribes are demanded, for example), the cost of business for small-scale
traders goes up. High business costs have a direct impact on traders’ family incomes. Female
traders who provide the main source of income for their household feel a particularly heavy
welfare effect. In cases where irregular treatment takes the form of harassment, small-scale
traders may be physically intimidated, subjected to various forms of assault, or have their
goods confiscated. A clearly disseminated set of procedures for border officials to apply in
their dealings with small-scale traders would produce positive results for household incomes
by reducing the costs incurred through irregular treatment and harassment.

A charter for cross-border trade that defined mutual rights and responsibilities and pro-
motes essential rules and principles would improve clarity and transparency in the admin-
istration of border procedures for small-scale traders. Similar to the idea of the lists of
passengers’ rights and responsibilities displayed at many airports worldwide, such a charter
would enshrine a basic set of rights and obligations for traders and officials. It would do so
using a mirror approach: each right of the former would correspond to an obligation of the
latter, and vice versa.

As such, a charter for cross-border trade would help to improve the balance of power
dynamics at the border, improve the consistency of applied regulation, and provide an
10   Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in
     Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




     independent framework for appeals and the handling of complaints. The exact contents of
     such a charter would have to be discussed with all stakeholders: authorities on both sides of
     the border, small-scale cross-border traders and brokers, and transporters.

     With support from the World Bank, a similar initiative is being piloted by the governments
     of Malawi and Zambia, where the use of electronic “happy or not” feedback systems pro-
     vide real-time monitoring of trader satisfaction with regulatory processes at the border.
     Early results suggest that the charter is having a positive impact on the experiences of small-
     scale traders, most of whom are women.

     The success of such a charter would depend on a well-functioning legal framework for
     cross-border trade. Small-scale traders in developing countries often operate in a legally
     ambiguous context that makes them vulnerable to sudden shifts in de jure and de facto
     rules and practices applied at the border. This is an additional source of vulnerability for
     small-scale traders, a large proportion of whom are women with limited alternative sources
     of income and livelihood.

     A key step forward would be to formalize the legal basis for small-scale trade. This could
     include the introduction of a simplified trade regime where all transactions under a given
     threshold value were allowed to cross with minimal regulatory process and cost (at a flat,
     fixed notional fee, for example). The aim would be to reduce the transaction costs of admin-
     istering small-scale cross-border trade for both traders and administrative officials, as well
     as officials’ discretionary power, while maintaining broad government oversight of what is
     being imported and exported.

     A shift to a simplified but still formal process could result in unintentional changes in power
     at the border and so would have to be undertaken with caution. The misapplication of a
     formalized regime could simply lead to trade being diverted into alternative channels, at a
     heavy cost to both traders and government.


       Acknowledgments
       The research on which this note is based was prepared by the Trade and Competi-
       tiveness Global Practice of the World Bank. It was funded by the East Asia and Pacific
       Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (EAP UFGE), a multi-donor trust fund managed by
       the Social Development Team in East Asia and Pacific. The research was led by Julian
       Latimer Clarke, Senior Economist, and Richard Record, Senior Economist, with support
       from Marlon Seror, consultant, and under the overall guidance of Mona Haddad, Prac-
       tice Manager, Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice.

       The task team prepared this note in collaboration with Helle Buchhave, Senior Social
       Development Specialist, and Kamakshi Perera Mubarak, Social Development Specialist
       (Young Professional), both in the Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice.
Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in                11
   Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




                                                  Photo: World Bank
12   Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in
     Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic




     References
     EMC (Emerging Markets Consulting). 2012. “Time Release Study 2012 Lao PDR.” Emerging Markets Consulting, Ltd.,
        Vientiane.
     Kingdom of Cambodia. 2014. Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey 2013. National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of
        Planning, Phnom Penh.
     Lao PDR. 2010. Lao PDR Labor Force Survey. Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare, Vientiane.
     World Bank. 2012a. Cambodia–Lao PDR Trade and Transport Facilitation Assessment. Phnom Penh: World Bank.
     World Bank. 2012b. Lao PDR—Mapping the Gender Dimensions of Trade: A Preliminary Exposition. Vientiane:
        World Bank.
     World Bank. 2012c. Toward Gender Equality in East Asia and the Pacific: A Companion to the World Develop-
        ment Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
     World Bank. 2014a. Lao PDR Trade and Transport Facilitation Assessment. Vientiane: World Bank.
     World Bank. 2014b. The Republic of Zambia Diagnostic Trade Integration Study. Washington, DC: World Bank.




       Copyright © 2016
       The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank Group
       1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433 USA

       All rights reserved.

       The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the authors and
       should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, or its affiliated organizations, or to members
       of its board of executive directors or the countries they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee
       the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts no responsibility whatsoever for any
       consequence of their use.


       The UFGE aims to strengthen awareness, knowledge, and capacity for gender-informed policy making.
       It supports the priorities identified in the East Asia and Pacific Regional Gender action Plan as well as in the
       EAP Country Gender Action Plans.

       For additional information, please contact: Helle Buchhave, Senior Social Development Specialist, GSURR,
       hbuchhave@worldbank.org.
