  LE A R N ING PR O DUC T




    The Role
   of Political
   Economy
  Analysis in
Development
       Policy
  Operations
The Role of Political Economy Analysis in Development
Policy Operations




IEG Learning Product




June 28, 2016
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................................................. III

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ IV

OVERVIEW............................................................................................................................................. V

1.          INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................ 1

2.          POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS IN DPOS .......................................................................... 4
            The use of PEA in the World Bank Group ................................................................................................................. 4
            Analytical framework of budget support and the role of PEA .................................................................................... 5
            Relevance of PEA in the current operational framework .......................................................................................... 6


3.          EVIDENCE FROM IEG REVIEWS AND EVALUATIONS ON THE USE OF PEA .................... 8
            How is PEA used in DPOs? ...................................................................................................................................... 8
            What are the sources of PEA used in DPOs? ......................................................................................................... 11
            Is PEA underprovided in DPOs? ............................................................................................................................. 17


4.          FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA ............................................................... 19
            Reliance on NDS as a building block for DPOs and implications for PEA .............................................................. 19
            Anatomy of DPO-supported reforms and implications for PEA ............................................................................... 21
            The Role of Incentives ............................................................................................................................................ 24


REFERENCES...................................................................................................................................... 39



Boxes
Box 1.1. Bank’s Recent Political Economy Analysis Work ...................................................................... 2
Box 2.1. Indicators for Assessing country Ownership ............................................................................. 7
Box 3.1. Dominican Republic: Power Sector Reforms .......................................................................... 10
Box 3.2. Tanzania Crop Board Reform: PSIA and DPOs ..................................................................... 14
Box 4.1. Evolution of reforms supported by the World Bank’s budget support ...................................... 22


Tables
Table 1.1. Sources of Documentary Evidence ........................................................................................ 3




                                                                                                                                                                                 i
Figures
Figure 2.1. World Bank Public Documents Mentioning “Governance” and “Political Economy”
(Proportion; Period 1982-2010) ............................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
Figure 3.1. Levels of Analysis: Country, Sector and Project ..................................................................12




Appendixes

APPENDIX A: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC POWER SECTOR REFORMS AND BANK’S DPOS ........... 25

APPENDIX B: TANZANIA CROP BOARD REFORMS AND BANK DPOS ......................................... 31

ANNEX C: LIST OF REVIEWED DPOS ............................................................................................... 37




ii
Abbreviations
CEM       Country Economic Memoranda
CoP       Political Economy Community of Practice
DPOs      Development Policy Operations
GAC       Governance and Anti-corruption Strategy
GPE       Governance and Political Economy
HD        Human Development
ICRR      Implementation Completion and Results Reports
IDA       International Development Agency
IEG       Independent Evaluation Group
JSAN      Joint Staff Assessment Note
LP        Learning Product
NDS       National Development Strategies
NDS       National Development Strategy
NRM       Natural Resource Management
PEA       Political Economy Analysis
PER       Public Expenditure Reviews
PGPE      Problem-driven Governance and Political Economy
PPAR      Project Performance Assessment Report
PRSCs     Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit
PSIA      Poverty Social Impact Assessment
SCDs      Systematic Country Diagnostic Reports
SORT      Systematic Operations Risk-rating Tool




Evaluation Managers
   Caroline Heider          Director-General, Evaluation
   Nicholas David York      Director, Human Development and Economic Management, IEGHE
   Mark Sundberg            Manager
   Aghassi Mkrtchyan        Task Manager




                                                                                   iii
Acknowledgments
The task manager and the lead author of the report was Aghassi Mkrtchyan under
the supervision of Mark Sundberg (Manager, IEGHE) and the general direction of
Nicholas York (Director, IEGHE) and Caroline Heider (Director General, IEG).
Malathi Jayawickrama and Chad Leechor provided substantial inputs, including
preparation of case studies and drafting of the report. Research analysis by Sayyora
Krulikowski and Eduardo Maldonado are highly appreciated. Team assistance by
Corky De Asis and Yezena Zemene Yimer is gratefully acknowledged. The task
team is grateful to Mark Sundberg for substantive guidance and advice in all stages
of the study and to Moritz Piatti, Zeljko Bogetic, and Lourdes Pagaran for their
advice and comments on the draft. The task team is also grateful to the World Bank
colleagues interviewed for this learning product. Peer reviewers were Robert
Beschel, Brian Levy, and Iradj Alikhani.




iv
Overview
This learning product reviews the          specific reforms supported by DPOs.
extent to which political economy          Third, PEA can inform specific design
analysis (PEA) is used to improve the      elements, including choices of
design of development policy               programmatic instruments vs. stand-
operations (DPOs) and how effective it     alone operations, or front-loading vs.
has been. The learning product draws       back-loading of important reform
on the following sources: i)               actions in a programmatic series. And
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         fourth, PEA can be used in self
reviews of implementation completion       evaluations (such as implementation
and results reports (ICRRs) of DPOs;       completion reports) to better analyze
ii) project performance assessment         factors affecting program effectiveness
reports (PPARs); iii) program              and to contribute to knowledge and
documents of 40 randomly selected          improved design of subsequent
DPOs and analytical products; iv) case     operations.
studies on the use of PEA in DPOs
from IEG evaluations and other World       Many analytical products as well as
Bank studies; and v) interviews with       project or program documents in the
task team leaders (TTLs) and               World Bank already contain PEA
managers. The main findings are            relevant for DPOs. Stand-alone PEA
summarized as follows:                     reports are rarely commissioned for
                                           DPOs. DPOs largely draw on PEA on
PEA can improve the design of DPOs         country-level and cross-sectoral issues
by identifying implementation risks        that are typically found in studies,
and mitigating actions. IEG’s              such as institutional and governance
evaluative evidence indicates that         reviews, country economic
DPOs benefit from the availability of      memoranda, poverty and social
quality PEA. The lack of PEA to            impact assessments, and public
support politically sensitive and          expenditure reviews. DPOs also make
difficult actions tend to reduce the       use of various sector studies and notes
effectiveness of operations.               that may contain PEA. Risk
                                           assessments in operational documents
There are different ways to make use       often draw on PEA, and, thus, can
of PEA. First, the assessment of the       reveal the extent to which political
eligibility of the client countries for    economy perspectives have been
budget support can benefit from PEA.       applied through formal or informal
Second, PEA can provide important          analysis. More recently, systematic
insights on the political feasibility of   country diagnostics have created new


                                                                                 v
OVERVIEW


opportunities for assessment of the          evaluative evidence points to a
overall policy environment and               variation in the institutional depth of
political feasibility of specific reforms.   reform actions supported by DPOs:
                                             those with fewer significant reform
The learning product finds that              measures have less need for PEA, and
specific PEA customized for DPOs’            hence less demand. Third, budgets for
reform priorities is likely to be            analytical inputs for program
under-provided. Most PEA used in             preparation have been under pressure
DPOs is geared toward countrywide            in recent years, while resources from
governance and institutional issues.         trust funds that finance most formal
DPO teams are generally well                 PEA have also been declining,
informed about the overall policy            affecting the ability of the team to
environment and political economy            conduct PEA. And fourth, the lack of a
issues. At the same time, the political      confidential platform for politically
feasibility of specific reforms              sensitive discussions may undermine
supported by DPOs may not receive            staff incentives to conduct PEA.
adequate attention.
                                             More broadly, the under-provision of
Several factors identified by the            PEA could be a symptom of broader
learning product may explain the             issues concerning the results
under-provision of reform-specific           orientation of DPOs with respect to
PEA. First, the reliance on national         specific reforms. The key metrics of
development strategies (NDS), which          results orientation in DPOs is the
are used to signal ownership and             extent to which DPOs promote policy
political feasibility of reform              and institutional change in specific
programs, might have reduced the             reform areas as reflected in the policy
perceived need to conduct PEA for            matrix of the instrument. At the same
individual reform measures. Evidence         time, other aspects outside the policy
points, however, to the fact that the        matrix, such as predictable financing
need for PEA for politically sensitive       and, on the back of it, maintaining the
reforms has not diminished, even             World Bank’s relevance in the policy
when DPOs are closely aligned with           dialogue on macro-fiscal frameworks,
the NDS documents. The presence of           sector policies, and poverty reduction
particular reform measures in an NDS         are also important determinants of the
does not always guarantee their              quality of the World Bank’s
implementation or ownership because          engagement through DPOs. These
operationalization of NDS and the            “reforming” and “financing” elements
links to policy making may be weak.          of budget support can reinforce each
The reliance on NDS as a guide to            other if the World Bank’s and clients’
political feasibility may lead to the        priorities are strongly aligned. But
under-provision of PEA. Second,


vi
                                                                          OVERVIEW


there may be trade-offs between the        integration of DPF with systematic
two when there is a lack of alignment.     country diagnostics and country
The trade-offs can manifest in a           partnership frameworks that are
weaker focus on specific reforms, and,     underpinned by solid technical and
as a result, can lead to under-provision   PEA to identify the most critical
of PEA.                                    reforms and to monitor achievement
                                           of results can be a way to strengthen
Better prioritization of reforms           the reform pillar of the instrument. In
supported by the World Bank and            addition, individual risk assessment
risk assessment of specific reform         for all reform actions supported by
actions may strengthen the results         DPOs may enhance the World Bank’s
orientation in development policy          knowledge about the theory of change
financing (DPF) with respect to            in those reform areas and contribute to
policy and institutional change and        more informed risk-taking in DPOs.
increase demand for PEA. Stronger




                                                                                vii
1. Introduction
       This learning product reviews the World Bank’s experience in the use of political
economy analysis (PEA) in development policy operations (DPOs). It is part of the
program to strengthen learning and knowledge products in the World Bank (including
the Independent Evaluation Group [IEG]). It is also intended to contribute to the World
Bank’s ongoing reflections on the design and use of DPOs. In FY 2015, IEG produced
four learning products, including: (1) macro-fiscal frameworks in DPOs, (2) use of
public expenditure reviews in DPOs, (3) social and environmental risks in DPOs and (4)
results frameworks in DPOs. This learning product builds on these learning products
and a number of proproject-level evaluations (project performance assessment reports
[PPARs] for Tanzania, Vietnam, Uganda, and Ghana), IEG’s review of implementation
completion reports (ICRs) of DPOs, and relevant major evaluations.

       Political economy analysis, whether through formal analysis or other channels, is
an important knowledge product for the World Bank’s engagement with its clients.
Although the World Bank’s mandate explicitly precludes it from engaging in politics,
an understanding of the political economy is critical for the organization’s effectiveness.
A political economy perspective broadens the World Bank’s operational considerations
beyond technical analysis to the significance of power relations and the national
political processes.1

       The overarching objective of the World Bank’s DPOs is to promote policy and
institutional change for growth and sustainable reduction in poverty.2 The World Bank
pursues this objective through a civil approach that puts a premium on borrowers’
ownership of policy reforms and allows flexibility (in case of programmatic series) to
accommodate changes in the pace and contents of reforms.3 This places an emphasis on
accurate reading of the political economy for successful program design and
implementation. Recent trends in country policy and institutional assessments (CPIAs),
however, indicate that nearly half (22 out of 48) of the countries requesting DPO
support have experienced a decline in their CPIA scores.4 This highlights the




1 The Political Economy of Policy Reform: Issues and Implications for Policy Dialogue and Development Operations
2 World Bank OP 8.60.
3 Good Practice Note for Development Policy Lending, 2011
4 Based on a subset of World Bank borrowers that had a CPIA score below 4 in 2006. The list of countries with a

decline in CPIA score includes several countries that experienced external shocks and civil conflicts in recent years,
such Yemen, Tunisia, and Mali. However, many other countries in the list that experienced a decline in CPIA, such as
Tanzania, Ghana, and Honduras were not subject to such major shocks and deterioration in institutional
developments can be attributed to reform slippages and reversals.


                                                                                                                     1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

importance of strengthening DPO programs and the role of political economy analysis
in enhancing the quality of World Bank operations.


    Box 1.1. The World Bank’s Recent Political Economy Analysis Work
    PEA, which has a long history in the World Bank, received new impetus following the
    adoption of the Governance and Anti-corruption Strategy (GAC) in 2007. The momentum
    was strengthened by the availability of funds through the Governance Facility for PEA,
    which, however, expired in 2012. The Good Practice Framework developed by the
    Governance Network was published in 2009 providing guidance on PEA sponsored through
    the facility and as an attempt to institutionalize PEA as a diagnostic tool. The Social
    Development Network of the World Bank contributed to the momentum by publication of a
    report on network’s lessons from the use of PEA in its operations. The Political Economy
    Community of Practice (CoP), consisting of around 400 staff members, serves as a platform
    for knowledge sharing and is the repository of more than 400 specific PEA conducted in the
    World Bank from 2005-2015. As of May 2016, there were uncertainties in the organizational
    structure in which CoP will function due to ongoing restructuring in the Governance Global
    Practice of the World Bank.
    Source: An evaluation of Political Economic Analysis in Support of the World Bank’s Governance and Anti-Corruption
    Strategy, IEG working Paper, 2011



       DPOs have evolved, in part, driven by the World Bank’s recognition of the
importance of the political economy context for successful policy lending. By the end of
the 1990s, a consensus had emerged that the World Bank’s adjustment lending
operations, which mostly relied on high risk-high return structural reforms often
representing first-best solutions, had under-delivered in many cases because of the
failure to take political economy realities into account.5 As a result, a recognition
emerged about ownership as a key ingredient for successful reform implementation.
This was reflected in the reforms of the instrument in the early 2000s that channeled the
energy in the World Bank toward promoting nationally owned reform programs
developed through participatory processes and consensus building. The World Bank’s
Good Practice Framework does not discuss political economy analysis in the context of
DPOs. Policy lending draws on insights generated by various analytical tools as well as
policy dialogue during program preparation that should generate insights about the
feasibility of reforms.




5Borrower Ownership of Adjustment Programs and the Political Economy of Reforms, World Bank Discussion
Papers



2
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 1
                                                                                                INTRODUCTION

        To address the key question of the learning product on the extent and
effectiveness of the use of PEA for design and implementation of DPOs, this review
addresses the following questions:

       Can PEA improve DPO design and in what areas?
       What analytical products contain PEA relevant for DPOs?
       Is the provision of PEA sufficient for informed risk-taking in DPOs?
       What are the factors that can affect the provision of PEA in DPOs?

       In terms of sources of evidence, this study mostly builds on evaluative findings
from previous IEG work, including ICRRs, PPARs of long-term programmatic series
(Tanzania, Vietnam, Uganda, and Ghana PRSCs). Supplementary evaluative evidence
was gathered through a portfolio review of randomly selected DPOs, internal PEA
reports, and Systematic Country Diagnostic reports (SCDs) relevant for DPOs. Table 1
shows the documentary sources for this study. This learning product also draws on
interviews with World Bank task team leaders (TTLs) and managers.

Table 1.1. Sources of Documentary Evidence
         Evaluative Reports                                  Operational Documents
 Independent Evaluation Group        Country and Task Team               Political Economy Community of
                                                                         Practice
 400 IEG Reviews of Implementation   40 program documents of randomly    600 Internal reports relevant for
 and Completion Reports (ICRRs)      selected DPOs (See Annex C)         DPOs
 20 IEG Project Performance          10 SCDs
 Assessment Report (PPARs)
                                     Miscellaneous (Public Expenditure
                                     Review, Joint Staff Assessments,
                                     Poverty and Social Impact
                                     Assessments, etc.)
Source: IEG


        The focus of this learning product is on formal PEA conducted in the World
Bank through various analytical products. The role of informal PEA that provide inputs
for program preparation may be substantial too. Although assessing the full extent of
informal PEA is rather difficult under an IEG learning product that largely draws on
existing evaluation evidence, in deriving the lessons this learning product factored in
available information on informal PEA collected through interviews of World Bank
staff. The learning product also draws on the risk assessment review in DPOs that can
point to the extent of the use of both formal and informal PEA.




                                                                                                             3
2. Political Economy Analysis in DPOs6
        This section provides an overview of the use of PEA in the context of DPOs. It
illustrates i) the types of analytical products containing PEA; ii) frequency of their use;
and iii) the issues covered. This overview is a synthesis of evaluative evidence from
IEG’s reviews of ICRs and PPARs, as well as a portfolio review of PEA products and
randomly selected DPOs.


The use of PEA in the World Bank Group
         PEA, whether through formal analysis or tacit understanding, is an important
element in the World Bank's engagement with clients. Although the World Bank's
charter explicitly prohibits political involvement, an awareness of the political economy
is critical for effective diagnostics and design of World Bank operations. 7 A political
economy perspective broadens the World Bank's operational considerations beyond
technical solutions and takes into account the significance of power, relations, vested
interests, and social divisions. This point of view enhances the World Bank's
engagement and effectiveness as a development partner.8

       PEA has a long history in the World Bank. It received new impetus in 2007 from
the adoption of GAC Strategy. The availability of funding for PEA through the
Governance Facility, a donor-supported funding source for analytical activities, added
to the momentum. The Governance Network issued the Good Practice Framework in
2009 to institutionalize PEA as a diagnostic tool. The Social Development Network
contributed to the interest by publishing a report on the network's lessons of experience
from the use of PEA. Today, the Political Economy Community of Practice (CoP), with
membership of around 400 staff, serves as a platform for knowledge sharing. Its
repository contains a database of more than 600 PEA products delivered by the World
Bank during 2005-2015.

        The number of PEA reports has gone down with the closing of the Governance
Facility, but there is evidence that PEA has gained traction in the context of the World
Bank's increasing focus on results. The mainstreaming of PEA in operations has gone


6 The term “development policy operation” is used in this paper to refer to budget support operation of the World
Bank. When similar operations are conducted by other donors, the more general term “budget support” will be used .
In effect, the two terms—DPO and budget support—are interchangeable
7 Fritz, V., Kaiser, K. and Levy, B., 2009. Problem-driven governance and political economy analysis. The World Bank.
8 Norton, A., Beddies, S., Holland, J., Garbarino, S., Gamper, C., Ruckstuhl, S. and Sjorslev, J., 2008. The political

economy of policy reform: Issues and implications for policy dialogue and development operations. The World Bank
and Oxford Policy Management.


                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 2
                                                                          POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS IN DPOS
beyond producing specific PEA products. In recent years, more analytical products and
operational documents funded from World Bank administrative budgets have applied
PEA “lenses” in their analysis.9 In addition, the new SCDs were introduced which have
a specific mandate to identify binding constraints for growth and poverty reduction and
to derive the best response through assessing political feasibility.

        The approach to PEA in the World Bank has evolved. The so-called “problem-
driven” PEA that focuses on specific reform issues, preferably the most important
binding constraints, rather than addressing only broad and cross-cutting governance
issues has gained wider acceptance. Such ideas as “working with the grain” and “good-
fit” give more weight to incremental institutional changes in a particular situation,
rather than the pursuit of the most optimal policy.10 Many stakeholders find that these
concepts contributed to the operational relevance of PEA.


Analytical framework of budget support and the role of PEA
       PEA is seen as a useful approach for enhancing the development effectiveness of
donor-led interventions. Its role in DPOs, which is known more generally as “budget
support,” is especially important because, with a greater reliance on country systems
and possible information asymmetries, it is particularly susceptible to the “principal-
agent” problem. 11 Policy and operational frameworks for budget support of different
donors vary, but one common feature is the emphasis on the alignment of donors’ and
recipients’ priorities.12 To ensure that the alignment is valid, it is incumbent on the
donors to acquire adequate understanding the recipient’s political economy.

       Budget support became an important part of World Bank support as it became
evident that cross-cutting policy reforms were often critical for achieving broader
development objectives. Investment lending—or projects—are sometimes hampered by
broader issues beyond the scope of the project, including macro-economic or structural
imbalances. Structural adjustment credits (SACs) were introduced by the World Bank in
the 1980s to ensure adequate macro and policy environment through a combination of
external financing and structural conditionality. However, the results of World Bank-
supported structural adjustment programs in the 1980s and 1990s were mixed. The lack
of adequate assessment of the political economy and reform ownership was deemed a



9 Unpublished Note prepared by the Political Economy Community of Practice (by Sakuntala Akmeemana).
10 Working with the Grain by Brian Levy. New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.
11 An agency problem, or principal-agent problem, arises when the agent, such as the government of an aid recipient,

may or may not act in the best interest of the principal, say, the donor or the World Bank.
12 Reconciling Alignment and performance in budget support Programs: What Next?; Budget Support as More

effective Aid? World Bank 2006.


                                                                                                                   5
CHAPTER 2
POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS IN DPOS

key factor.13 The experience with SACs highlighted the inherent limitations of
conditionality when ownership was not in place.

       With the reorientation of donor aid to focus on aid effectiveness and donor
harmonization under the Monterrey Consensus in 2002 and Paris Declaration in 2005,
the emphasis shifted from heavy reliance on conditionality towards better selection of
recipients that are able to demonstrate sufficient ownership of growth promoting and
poverty reducing reforms. Increasingly, donors applied pre-conditions such as country-
owned national development strategies (NDS), pro-poor public expenditure
frameworks, and growth-oriented policies. Of particular importance are the technical
merits of NDS and the extent of its ownership of the key stakeholders. Although the use
of conditionality by the World Bank did not disappear entirely, the mechanism to
pursue reform measures through DPOs of more recent vintage (since the early to mid-
2000s) was more flexible. The resulting new model of budget support that was first
introduced in PRSP countries also applied to the World Bank’s broader client base.14
The focus on NDS and a flexible approach to conditionality became the main feature of
the World Bank’s budget support generally.


Relevance of PEA in the current operational framework
        The current framework for budget support hinges first on countries’ readiness
based on their development strategies, macroeconomic environment, and the quality of
public expenditures.15 These are considered “pre-conditions” of the World Bank’s
budget support. As an instrument for promoting reforms, DPOs target specific policy
and institutional improvements in various sectors through sector-specific prior actions.
DPOs can support reforms in any one sector or many sectors simultaneously. According
to the 2015 DPO Retrospective of the World Bank’s Operational Policy and Country
Services (OPCS), more than half of the prior actions in 2012-2014 were outside macro-
fiscal and public financial management. This fact underscores that DPOs aimed to
influence a wide scope of policy and institutional reforms.

       Under the current operational framework, PEA is especially relevant for
assessing the ownership by the government of the national development strategies, pro-
poor public expenditures, and growth oriented policies. While the assessment of pre-
conditions—macro-economic framework and pro-poor public expenditures—requires a
sound technical analysis, a political economy perspective can add value. Paying special
attention to the fiscal balance in an election year, for example, often reveals the degree

13 Borrower Ownership of Adjustment Programs and the Political Economy of Reform, World Bank, 1993.
14 Poverty Reduction Support Credit, an Evaluation of World Bank Support, IEG 2010
15 OP 8.60 and BP 8.60.




6
                                                                                     CHAPTER 2
                                                             POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS IN DPOS
of commitment of the incumbent administration to economic stability. The World
Bank’s current procedures do not mandate PEA in the preparation of DPOs, but the
OPCS good practice guidance note requires an assessment of country’s ownership of
reforms (see Box 2.1). The steps recommended for the DPO teams, such as government
track record, public support of key policy makers, and engagement of interest groups in
the policy dialogue, are clearly elements of PEA.


 Box 2.1. Indicators for Assessing Country Ownership
    The government has recently taken initial steps to implement elements of the reform
     program to be supported by the operation.
    The government has a good track record in implementing related reforms.
    The reform is specifically endorsed in the country’s formally adopted national
     development strategy, PRSP, or similar document that has been widely discussed and
     formally approved.
    The government has taken the initiative in formulating the reform agenda and presenting
     it to the World Bank.
    Key policy makers articulate their intellectual conviction that the reform is needed.
    Top political leaders have publicly stated their support for the reform.
    The government has undertaken efforts to build support for the reform among key
     constituencies.
    Relevant interest groups have been engaged in dialogue with the government about the
     reforms and have indicated general support. Potential beneficiaries have been mobilized,
     and the concerns of groups that might suffer losses from the reforms have been taken into
     consideration.
    The reform has been openly advocated during the campaign of an elected government.
 Source: OPCS




       Assessing the ownership of broad reform programs and their individual
components supported by DPOs is an integral part of the overall risk assessment that
allows informed risk taking in DPOs. In this respect, risk assessments typically reflect
the extent of PEA conducted for program preparation, including formal and informal
PEA. This potential link is used in the learning product to derive inferences on the
extent of the use of informal PEA based on the review of risk assessment for DPOs.




                                                                                                 7
3. Evidence from IEG Reviews and Evaluations
on the use of PEA
       Evaluative evidence on the role of PEA in DPOs comes from about 400 reviews
of ICRs (ICRRs) prepared in 2005-2015, as well as a number of PPARs. A review of this
evidence suggests that while the World Bank draws on country-level diagnostics that
often contain elements of PEA, there may be an under-provision of PEA in sector-
specific reforms that the DPOs seek to accomplish.


How is PEA used in DPOs?
       One in six ICRRs (or 17 percent of the total) mentioned PEA either as a
contributor to success or as a gap in cases of failure. This is a significant percentage
since there are no requirements in ICR or ICRR methodologies to reflect on the political
economy. The results below illustrate the range in which PEA has been put to use.

       Assessing the choice of the instrument and eligibility for budget support:
Some ICRRs highlight that PEA has helped to shed light on ownership of the overall
reform program as a pre-condition for budget support. More specifically, in some
ICRRs successful design and implementation of reforms is attributed to quality PEA,
where PEA realistically assesses the feasibility of the government reform program
(Afghanistan) and creates a platform for policy dialogue using PEA (Mozambique).
ICRRs also discuss cases where the absence of PEA leads to weak implementation.
Other instruments, such as technical assistance, could be more effective (Cote d’Ivoire).
Evaluative evidence also suggests that the World Bank’s choice of the instrument may
be affected if the focus is only on technical analysis, such as fiduciary assessment,
without paying attention to the political economy (Namibia and Iraq). Beyond available
evidence from ICRRs, this learning product also highlights the important role of PEA in
many of the World Bank’s decisions to drop plans for DPOs in the pipeline because of
high risks of non-implementation of reform programs16.

      The availability of quality PEA does not always translate into better design:
The insights from PEA are not always taken into account. For example, the knowledge
gained from PEA about the role of political cycles in Vietnam (timing of Party
Congress) in reforms was not adequately used in preparation of a major DPO. In


16These decisions are mostly based on informal PEA, which are difficult to observe. However, a number of cases are
known to the World Bank from country or program level evaluations.


8
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 4
                                                                      FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA
Ghana, available quality PEA revealed the complexity of public wages and the
difficulties in wage control in an election year. Those risks, however, were not
adequately mitigated in the design, resulting in the implementation of a DPO in an
unstable macroeconomic environment17.

        In the context of specific reforms: PEA is used to promote sensitive reforms in
many areas including power tariffs, agriculture subsidies, public wages, tax
exemptions, land use, social protection, and healthcare, among others. As an example,
the failure to conduct a proper “mapping of the stakeholders” was found as a major
shortcoming in a DPO seeking power sector reforms in the Dominican Republic (further
elaborated in a case study below).. A Malawi DPO was not able to achieve the intended
results because political constraints in the reform of fertilizer subsidies were not
anticipated. The lack of PEA compromised the design on tax reforms in Honduras. In
addition to these cases, Box 3.1 summarizes a case study conducted for this learning
product on DPOs implemented in a challenging political economy environment
without formal assessment of political feasibility of reforms.

       Another lesson from the review of ICRRs is that some political risks can be
mitigated by appropriate consultations and addressing grievances. The Lao People’s
Democratic Republic’s (PDR) experience, for example, suggests the importance of i)
identifying champions in government with a well-defined reform agenda; and ii)
engaging with a broader range of actors. A case from Mexico illustrates the importance
of engaging with the line ministries and with agencies that are subjected to reforms to
ensure their ownership as well. Romania’s example illustrates that political support for
reforms needs to be broad-based, including some degree of support from the
opposition, when social consensus is unclear. In such an environment, finding the
common ground between government and opposition through PEA is needed to
prevent policy reversals.

       Informing specific design elements: Some ICRRs offered lessons about the
choice between programmatic versus stand-alone DPOs based on PEA. For example, in
a DPO in Cote d’Ivoire, the ICRR pointed out that a stand-alone operation would have
been more effective than a programmatic series because of high risks of reform non-
implementation. By contrast, St. Lucia’s case suggested that a programmatic series was
beneficial in a contentious political context, but it was necessary to design interventions
in a multi-year perspective to sustain continuing policy dialogues around key issues.

      Evaluating results of DPOs: Some ICRRs highlighted the importance of
providing PEA in the ICRs to inform the preparation of follow-up operations. For

17   IEGs evaluation of Vietnam and Ghana PRSCs (2015 and 2016, respectively)



                                                                                                          9
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

example, an ICR on a Vietnam DPO did not provide an account of political economy
factors that were key in the failure of public investment reforms even though another
operation targeting the same reform areas was in the pipeline. PEA at completion could
have helped with the design of the next operation. By contrast, PEA provided in the ICR
of a DPO in Uganda on legislative politics and its impact on World Bank-supported
legal initiatives was useful for the World Bank’s follow-up operations.


 Box 3.1. The Dominican Republic: Power Sector Reforms
 The power sector in the Dominican Republic has been in distress since the early 2000s. The
 persistent gap between tariffs charged and the operating cost was exacerbated by the
 widespread theft and poor collection of bills. The losses placed a severe financial strain on the
 sector, limiting its ability to improve services. A DPO approved in 2005 was the first in a
 planned program of three (two development policy loans and one investment loan) to
 address challenges in the power sector. The development objective was to support the
 government's strategy for the recovery of the power sector through set of important reforms
 that were at the core of government strategy. There appeared to be a sense of urgency among
 the stakeholders to work out strong and lasting solutions.
 The program, however, could not achieve substantial results. The government’s payments of
 subsidies and its bills to the utility company remained irregular; the tariff regime remained
 grossly inadequate to cover costs; the regulatory agency remained weak. Allowing tariffs to
 fluctuate according to the agreed formula was difficult for the government to comply with,
 even when there were no spikes in oil prices. IEG’s review highlighted that although some of
 the key risks were identified at the outset, such as the possibility of fading government
 ownership of the reform program, political economy barriers to achieving difficult reforms
 continued strong consumer resistance to bill paying and tariff increases (especially given
 poor service quality), no further analyses were done on mitigation of those risks. The design
 was predicated on the assumption that large and rapid disbursements of budget support
 would motivate the authorities to implement the reforms strenuously. This, however, was not
 consistent with the history of budget support in the Dominican Republic that showed that
 DPLs were difficult to implement with frequent dilutions of prior actions.
 Many political economy issues were at work to undermine the outcomes of power sector
 reforms. The political economy setting is believed to be one where politicians are more likely
 to deliver specific favors to particular groups than to promote general welfare. In the
 Dominican Republic at the time of this operation, voters had learned to expect short-term
 benefits, like lower electricity tariffs, instead of more distant gains like financial sustainability
 of public utilities. Politicians—or more generally policy entrepreneurs—knew that refusing to
 adjust tariffs—and thus violating agreements with external partners—carried little cost. In
 addition, stemming power losses called for a change of deep seated behavior among
 employees of distribution companies, including weeding out illegal power connections and
 collecting payments fully and promptly, which may have been contrary to prevailing social
 norms. A careful review and analysis of the political economy prior to the implementation of
 DPOs could have made a difference. It could have informed the task team and the
 government of the challenges that lay ahead—and possibly of a different approach that



10
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 4
                                                                          FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA
 would allow more time and more grassroots consultations to build the necessary political
 coalitions.
 Source: IEG Learning Product on Word Bank’s support of Financial Viability of Power Sector ; IEG review of DPO Program
 Documents; and IEG analysis.




What are the sources of PEA used in DPOs?
      The World Bank conducts PEA in different ways to inform the preparation of
DPOs. These include formal analysis and informal use of tacit knowledge by country
and program managers. This study draws mostly on documented sources and
primarily focuses on formal PEA. Nonetheless, IEG recognizes the importance of
informal PEA. In fact, many managers in the World Bank believe that most PEA
remains informal due to possible sensitivities that may arise from formal PEA analysis.
The value of formal analysis, however, is to create institutional memory and
documentation of evidence for the future.

     To determine the characteristics of PEA used in DPOs, the following genres of
documents have been reviewed:

        First, about 600 internal and external reports in the repository of PEA (managed
         by the Political Economy CoP).
        Second, 40 randomly selected program documents of programmatic or stand-
         alone DPOs in the period 2006 - 2014 (around 20 percent of total) with a special
         focus on analytical underpinnings of operations and risks assessment.
        Finally, the World Bank’s newly launched diagnostic instrument, SCDs.

         As illustrated in Figure 2, one can distinguish three broad levels of PEA:

        The macro or country- level;
        The sector and thematic level; and
        The project- and policy-specific level.

       PEA can focus at one level only or cover several levels. Country-level analysis
captures the overall governance and the main political drivers. Analysis at this level
deals with important factors, such as geopolitics, social divisions—economic, ethnic, or
religious—and the distribution of economic rents, as well as how they have evolved.
Sector and thematic PEA focuses on specific areas and may cover an entire sector “value
chain” or selected issues within a sector or broad theme. The third level is problem-
driven governance and political economy (GPE) analysis focused on specific projects or



                                                                                                                          11
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

policy decisions. Such analysis aims to generate advice to a single operation or to aid in
dialogue on a specific issue.

         A number of observations can be made based on this multi-genre review:

        There is a distinction between problem-driven PEA and more generic PEA. The
         former, issue-focused (sector- or reform-specific) PEA, targets problems that
         DPOs address through prior actions. The latter, generic PEA, addresses cross-
         cutting governance or macro-economic issues, including ownership of national
         development strategies.
        Another distinction is between specific PEA products versus the World Bank’s
         mainstream analytical products, such as country economic memoranda (CEM),
         public expenditure reviews (PERs), poverty social impact assessments (PSIAs),
         joint staff assessment notes (JSANs), risk assessments, and SCDs that may use
         special PEA. In the category of specific PEA, the work is specifically
         commissioned for a DPO or for related investment lending.



     Figure 3.1. Levels of Analysis: Country, Sector and Project




     Notes: GPE=Governance and political economy; PGPE=Problem-driven governance and political economy;
     HD=Human development; NRM=Natural resource management.
     Source: Fritz et al (2009).



12
                                                                                  CHAPTER 4
                                                     FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA


      The review for this learning product identified the following products that
provide DPO-relevant PEA.

       PEA specifically conducted for DPOs: The portfolio analysis indicates that this
category is very rare. There are few reports in the repository that were specifically
prepared for DPOs. This is confirmed by the portfolio review of program documents of
selected DPOs. Out of 40 DPOs, only two included specific PEA reports prepared for
operations. One example is the PEA on the mining sector in Burkina Faso, which
provided important insights on natural resource management. A key fact is that the
World Bank seldom commissions formal PEA for DPOs.

       Sector-specific PEA conducted for parallel project financing relevant for
DPOs: Although this subcategory is more common than specific PEA for DPOs, it is still
not widespread. Fewer than one in six DPOs draw on sector-specific analytical products
with PEA prepared as part of the World Bank’s investments lending. In such cases, PEA
is found in sector-specific technical notes, often not published on the World Bank’s
website.

       “Generic” PEA relevant for DPOs: This type of PEA is more prevalent.
Although not specifically prepared for DPOs, they provide important insights about
cross-sectoral governance and institutional issues (institutional and governance
reviews, for example). About half of the DPOs reviewed for this study had country-
level PEA available at the time of preparation. Although this type of PEA can help in
assessing the overall reform momentum in the country, it typically does not provide
insights about sector-specific reforms except in cases where the PEA covers the same
issues (as with DPOs on governance reforms).

        Joint staff assessment notes: JSANs were introduced in the early 2000s jointly by
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to assess the national
development strategies of International Development Association (IDA) countries as a
criteria for concessional lending. The focus of the notes has been on the extent to which
national development strategies are pro-poor, linked to the budget, and reflect broader
views on country development. JSANs contain some elements of PEA because of the
focus on the feasibility of broad reform programs and the assessment of stakeholder
consultation and participation. The operational importance of JSAN has declined
recently because the role of PRSPs as a platform for mobilizing donor assistance has
diminished (further discussed in section 2) and many IDA countries have graduated.
JSANs are no longer mandatory for IDA countries and are currently being phased out.




                                                                                        13
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

        Poverty and social impact assessments: PSIAs are important analytical products
that the World Bank has employed for more than a decade. By definition, PSIAs can be
used to examine changes in power relations, which are political economy issues. 18 One
World Bank study19 has identified PSIAs from the period 2003 to 2007 that provided
good analysis of the losers and winners of reforms and insights about the interests of
elites and their influence on reform proposals. But not all PSIAs use PEA lenses. The
study previously mentioned also listed seven DPOs that drew on PSIA with PEA
(Burkina Faso, Senegal, Tanzania, Indonesia, Malawi, Chad, Mozambique, and Mexico).
The PSIA of Tanzania looked at important political economy aspects of crop board
reforms and is summarized in Box 3.2.

       The review of randomly selected DPOs for the period between 2007 and 2014
uncovered only one DPO that draws on PSIA with PEA (the Kyrgyz Republic energy
sector). Although the findings of the 2008 study and the results of the portfolio review
are not directly comparable, there is an indication (also confirmed by interviews) that
the use of PSIAs as PEA for DPOs might have become less prevalent in recent years.
Box 3.2 provides a summary of a cases study on the use of PSIAs as PEA for DPOs.


 Box 3.2. Tanzania Crop Board Reform: PSIA and DPOs
 Crop boards play a significant role in determining the production and investment
 environment of agricultural Tanzania’s export crops. Issues attributed to their activities had
 raised concern about industry performance. In 2003, the government requested support for
 further analysis of the boards in the form of a PSIA, which was conducted jointly by the
 government, the World Bank, and the European Union. The PSIA provided very important
 insights on political economy of reforms and possible options to advance the reform agenda.
 It revealed many important challenges, such as the institutional vacuum after liberalization,
 uneven private sector participation, unfair trading, mixed public and private activities and
 conflicts of interest, lack of accountability, smallholders unawareness of the pricing
 mechanisms, and quality rewards. The study also showed that parts of government and
 smallholder producers were skeptical about the market economy and adhered to socialist
 principles and traditions. Hence, the crop boards and some government agencies at the
 political level opposed to the reforms that would reduce controls over private agents and
 require greater accountability to producers in service delivery. The study also revealed strong
 support for reform at the technical level in the government. The study developed three
 reform options in addition to a fourth option of “no change.”
 The World Bank supported the crop board reforms through two series of PRSCs. The original
 plan was ambitious, but the delays in implementation began at the early stages of reform. In
 spite of several actions, there has been insignificant progress in reforms under DPOs reflected
 in IEG’s evaluation. Critical factors that the PRSCs seem to have overlooked were the political


18   Tools for Institutional, Political and Social Analysis of Policy Reform.
19   The Political Economy of Policy Reform, The World Bank, 2008.


14
                                                                                                    CHAPTER 4
                                                                       FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA
 economy factors behind sensitive reforms identified by PSIA. The PSIA had noted that export
 crops, such as coffee, could be a lucrative business for a wide range of stakeholders, including
 public sector employees. Political life was dominated by clientilist politics and clientilist
 political organizations. Powerful interests, within and outside of the crop boards, defended
 the status quo that benefits them. Despite general political will for reform, actual commitment
 to a prompt reform implementation was less well established. IEG’s review found that the
 links between PSIA findings and the design of PRSCs were quite weak.
 The importance of the political economy factors behind agriculture sector reforms in
 Tanzania were further highlighted by another study on the political economy of agricultural
 sector reforms that recommends to focus on broader demand-side governance interventions
 to have a greater potential for improving the incentives of politicians to effectively implement
 growth and poverty-reduction policies.
 Source: The Political Economy of Policy Reform (The World Bank, 2008); PPAR of Tanzania PRCSs (IEG 2013)



       Public expenditure reviews (PERs): The review finds that PERs had elements of
PEA in only two (Pakistan subnational water sector reform program and Lao PDR
multi-sector DPO) of 40 DPOs that informed the design of operations. This small
number of PEA-relevant PERs suggests that this high-profile and widely-disseminated
document may be more appropriate for technical analysis than for PEA.

       Risk assessment: According to the review, risk assessment turns out to be an
important instrument containing elements of PEA. The guidance note on DPOs
instructs every operation to identify risks, present a strategy for mitigating the risks,
and explain why the remaining risks are worth taking. Some of the questions in the
checklist of the operational guidance for risk assessment are relevant for understanding
the political economy and, in this respect, risk assessments offer an opportunity to
apply political economy lenses in World Bank analysis. At the same time, risk
assessments may reflect the extent of underlying PEA for program preparation, both
formal and informal.

       Most program documents (PDs) for DPOs identify risks associated with the
political economy. In most cases those were country-level risks rather than reform-
specific risks. Less than half of PDs provided risk assessment about individual reform
areas and a minority of multi-sector operations provided sector-specific risk
assessments for the sectors covered. Only two DPOs out of 40 reviewed provided risk
assessment, some of which drew on formal and informal PEA, per each policy area or
reform action.

       In addition to assessing the risks, PDs provide risk mitigation measures, some of
them informed by PEA. In 20 percent of PDs, the risk mitigation section provides
discussions of the political economy. Examples of PEA in risk mitigation include the


                                                                                                            15
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

front-loading of reforms in Pakistan’s programmatic DPOs and the use of special sector
notes for discussion with opposition parties in Panama to address political risks.

       In 2014, a risk assessment of DPOs was integrated with the World Bank-wide
risk assessment framework, the Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT). Under
the new approach, the focus was still on assessing the risks to the development
objective stemming from the country’s political economy and governance, but without
assessing the overall riskiness of a country. The framework highlights that political and
governance risks should be assessed specifically against the development results
associated with the operation. This highlights the importance of the problem-specific
approach to risk assessment. The SORT itself is not intended to be a risk management
strategy or mitigation plan. Instead, it is intended to be the screening mechanism on
which such a plan would be based.20

       This evaluation highlights that the risk analysis underpinning program
preparation may also point to the extent of informal PEA undertaken by World Bank
teams working on DPOs, a largely unobservable activity that would otherwise be very
difficult to capture. Many stakeholders indicated that informal PEA play an important
role as formal analysis with sensitive materials is not always possible. However, even
informal PEA should be reflected to a certain extent in the risk assessment sections of
program documents.

        Systematic country diagnostics: SCDs were introduced in 2014 to enhance the
link between diagnostics and the World Bank's country engagement. The corporate
guidelines on their preparation mentions that "recognizing that there is no blueprint for
poverty reduction and income growth, SCD[s] would take into account country context,
including political economy factors, in identifying constraints, solutions, and
opportunities". This implies the use of PEA in the preparation of SCDs. As part of this
exercise, IEG conducted a review of 10 SCDs relevant for preparation of DPOs (out of
total 31 SCDs).21

        All relevant SCDs were found to include a focus on the political economy in the
areas covered by DPOs, but with varying depth. This suggests that SCDs are potentially
an important instrument that can inform the design of DPOs and implementation. Half
of the reviewed SCDs (Albania, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Jordan, and Panama) provided
sector- or problem-specific PEA in the areas relevant for DPOs. The coverage varied
from drawing on a specific sector study with indepth PEA to assessments of political
feasibility. The example of Chad is instructive. PEA in SCDs gives rich political insights


20   Interim Guidance Note Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT), June 25, 2014, the Word Bank.
21   Defined as cases when SCD preparation was followed by preparation of a new DPO series


16
                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4
                                                                    FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA
and assesses the feasibility of proposed actions including possible measures to mitigate
risks (for example, compensatory mechanisms for those who will lose rents as a result
of reforms in price setting for export crops). The remaining SCDs (Columbia, the Arab
Republic of Egypt, Honduras, Indonesia, and Madagascar) offer only generic PEA on
overall reform momentum without a specific focus on sectors or problems. This can be
useful for DPOs, albeit they may not substitute for analysis of specific issues.22


Is PEA underprovided in DPOs?
       As the review of evaluative evidence indicates, the importance of PEA is
recognized in assessing country-level risks and the feasibility of individual reform
actions to be implemented in a challenging context. The World Bank has conducted
PEA through various instruments such as sector-specific studies for DPOs or for
investment lending operations implemented in parallel to DPOs, PSIAs, PERs, SDCs,
and in operational risk assessments. In addition, informal PEA used at various decision
points of World Bank engagement may also be playing a role.

       A key finding emerging from this review is that the World Bank mostly draws
on country-level PEA involving cross-cutting governance and institutional
development issues. By and large, this knowledge is gained through the assistance with
preparation of NDSs in IDA countries and through work on SCDs and country
assistance/partnership strategies. It helps in assessing operational risks. At the same
time, the use of sector-specific or reform-specific PEA remains uncommon. In fact, the
World Bank seldom commissions sector-specific PEA for DPOs. While there has been
more attention given to the feasibility of individual reforms with the introduction of
SCDs, this instrument is yet to mature.

      The lack of formal sector or problem-specific PEA does not necessarily imply that
PEAs are underutilized. Notably, PEA is not always warranted, but it is of utmost
importance in situations where uncertainties or sensitives abound with respect to
reforms. Also, many sector-specific issues can be addressed through informal PEA.

       Nevertheless, relative to the ambitions of the instrument in promoting reforms,
the dearth of sector-specific PEA may well be a sign of under-provision. As the World
Bank's DPOs pursue very specific sector objectives, there is a high premium on
understanding both the technical merits and political feasibility. In some cases, the
World Bank may also need to work on expanding the reform space and finding
common grounds. The literature on the use of PEA for World Bank DPOs highlights


22   An upcoming IEG evaluation of SCD/CPF will provide a comprehensive coverage of various aspects of SCD/CPF



                                                                                                            17
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

specific areas where such analysis can be used, including a) defining politically feasible
prior actions; b) directing resources efficiently to the most promising reform prospects;
c) identifying specific opportunities for reform and developing risk mitigation
strategies; and d) building consensus for reforms.23 This suggests a substantial reform-
or problem-specific focus in PEA which may be lacking.

      This review also highlights that although the World Bank uses informal PEA
(mostly unobservable) for program design, the fact that risk assessment in DPOs, which
should to some extent reflect the results of informal PEA, is mostly about country-level
and cross-cutting governance issues rather than specific reforms may point to an overall
weaker focus on the political feasibility of specific reforms both in formal and informal
PEA.




23Nunberg, B., Barma, N., Abdollahian, M., Green, A. and Perlman, D., 2010. At the Frontier of Practical Political
Economy.



18
4. Factors Affecting the Provision of PEA
       This section looks at factors emerging from evaluative evidence that may affect
the extent of provision of PEA in DPOs and specifically in the sector-specific problems
that DPOs aim to address. These factors include 1) reliance on NDS and sector
strategies; and 2) the depth of reforms supported by DPOs.


Reliance on NDS as a building block for DPOs and implications for PEA
       A new paradigm of donor harmonization and predictable aid flow emerged in
the early 2000s. It sought to bring about higher investments and pro-poor expenditures
in poor countries with demonstrated capacity for managing aid resources without
stringent conditionality.24 In this new concept, country-owned NDSs for growth and
poverty reduction became the main platform of harmonized budget support. Defined as
outcome-oriented documents that draw on a long-term vision, incorporate sectoral
strategies, and shape countries' public expenditures,25 NDSs became a screening
mechanism for assessing a borrower’s ownership of public expenditure and reform
programs26.

        The approach of relying on NDSs was in line with the notion of "best-practice"
budget support where the reform program owned by the governments was supported
and performance was to be measured by the extent to which the NDS was
implemented. 27 Although this was initially an aid delivery approach for IDA countries,
the reliance on NDSs soon became an important feature of the World Bank's budget
support applied in both IDA and International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development countries.28

        Under this new approach, the donors, including the World Bank, directed their
efforts to helping the clients to prepare NDSs as a building block for budget support
with an emphasis on stakeholder consultations and consensus building to ensure
ownership of pro-poor and growth-oriented programs. A new product, the joint staff
advisory note, was introduced by the World Bank and IMF for a formal assessment of

24 This approach is perhaps best exemplified in the Millennium project.
25 Results-Based National Development Strategies: Assessment and Challenges Ahead, World Bank, 2007
26 Reconciling Alignment and Performance In Budget Support programs: What Next? David Booth, Karin

Christiansen, and Pablo De Renzio, ODI (published in “Budget Support as More Effective Aid? “ World Bank 2006)
27 Aid Effectiveness: Opening the Black Box, François Bourguignon and Mark Sundberg, The American Economic

Review, Vol. 97, No. 2 (May, 2007).
28 PRSC Evaluation, IEG 2010.




19
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

NDSs in IDA countries to determine their readiness for concessional borrowing. These
efforts in many cases involved political economy issues, although the focus was on
country-level, rather than problem-specific PEA.

       In spite of the reliance on the NDS, DPOs remained a pragmatic instrument to
advance specific reform objectives. Under the new framework, the concept of "prior
actions"—a softer form of conditionality—emerged both as a monitoring device for the
implementation of the NDS and for targeting specific reforms. In an early generation of
PRSPs, there was a premium placed on prior actions that directly came from NDS. This
practice naturally changed the way the World Bank assessed the feasibility of
individual actions taken from NDS. The expectation was that, since these actions came
from NDS, they would be implemented sooner or later. Thus, the reliance on NDS,
which signaled ownership and political feasibility of clients’ reform programs, might
have reduced the perceived need to conduct PEA for individual measures supported by
DPOs.

       An example is found in an IEG's evaluation of programmatic series of Tanzania,
Vietnam, Uganda and Ghana Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs). According to
these evaluations, many important triggers proposed at the outset were directly taken
from the NDS. Nonetheless, many triggers were dropped or weakened in subsequent
series because of inadequate political support. In retrospect, sector-specific PEA could
have shed light on the feasibility of these reforms.

       In general, there is mixed evidence on the performance of NDSs—both in terms
of operational relevance for DPOs and in terms of the links to national budgeting
processes. The 2007 World Bank review29 concluded that in spite of initial successes, the
links between NDSs and the budget remained weak in most countries and progress in
developing results-oriented frameworks was limited.30 IEG’s evaluation of PRSCs
mentions that NDSs did not always provide good quality poverty and growth
diagnostics. No systematic assessments of NDSs have been conducted recently.
However, the role of PRSPs as a donor platform for harmonized budget support in
many countries31 has declined. Thus, the reliance on NDSs as a guide to the political
feasibility of specific reforms may be misguided.32 The need for PEA to assess



29 Results-Based National Development Strategies: Assessment and Challenges Ahead, World Bank, 2007.
30 The report uses three criteria to assess whether a country has an operational development strategy: a unified
strategic framework, prioritization within that framework, and a strategic link to the budget.
31 For example, Vietnam, Ghana and Rwanda.
32 Shortcomings of the model of budget support that relies on PRSPs due to the lack of adequate monitoring

framework were discussed at the outset of the new approach, in particular in Reconciling Alignment and
performance in budget support Programs: What Next?; Budget Support as More effective Aid? World Bank 2006.


20
                                                                                                 CHAPTER 4
                                                                    FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA
borrowers' ownership and develop options for expanding the reform space has not
diminished.


Anatomy of DPO-supported reforms and implications for PEA
        According to the World Bank's Operational Policy,33 a DPO promotes policy and
institutional change for sustained poverty reduction and economic growth. The types of
reforms that DPOs support have evolved. (See Box 4.1).34 One way of looking at the
relevance of reform measures supported by DPOs is to assess the extent to which they
tackle the borrowers' key constraints for growth and development. As the 2015 DPO
Retrospective highlighted,35 the link between the reforms addressed by budget support
and prioritization exercises, such as growth diagnostics or other tools, is sometimes not
clear. IEG's evaluative evidence suggests that the presence of specific reform actions in a
DPO is not necessarily a reflection of its importance for the recipients' development
agenda. The measures supported often are those “available” at the time of program
preparation.36

       With respect to the strength of reforms, evaluative evidence indicates that along
with important actions, DPOs may support measures that lack the depth to trigger
institutional change.37 Weak prior actions do not necessarily indicate that particular
reform areas are not important, but they may point either to the lack of sufficient reform
momentum or to the lack of relevance of this reform area to their development agenda.
This may naturally reduce the incentives and demand for PEA.

       Flexibility is a major feature and attraction of programmatic DPOs. It allows
DPOs to be adjusted to accommodate changes in the country's circumstances and thus
can be quite useful in addressing the rigidity of conditionality. The World Bank's
experience of the past decade shows, however, that balancing flexibility and
performance cannot be taken for granted.38 There has been both good practice and bad
practice in the use of the instrument's flexibility. There are examples of deteriorating
quality of prior actions of follow-on operations39. IEG's evaluative evidence indicates
that the termination of a programmatic series, especially that of multi-sectoral DPOs,




33 OP 8.60, updated in 2014.
34 Learning from Reforms, World Bank, 2005.
35 2015 Development Policy Financing Retrospective: Results And Sustainability, 2015, World Bank Group, Page 21.
36 The term “Christmas Tree” has been in use in the World Bank to describe some of the budget support operations

that include many policy areas and reform actions of varying quality.
37 DPO’s Results Framework, IEG Learning Product, 2015 .
38 DPO’s Results Framework, IEG Learning Product, 2015 .
39 IEG evaluation of Tanzania and Vietnam PRSCs




                                                                                                               21
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

more often takes place because of problems with pre-conditions such as macroeconomic
tensions and fiduciary risks rather than due to slippages in individual reform actions.40

       The role of PEA in the context of flexible DPOs is not straightforward. PEA,
which is about what is feasible and how the reform space can be expanded, can be used
to derive scenarios of reform progression and to develop a strategy to maximize
development impact. Good quality PEA, for example, informs the World Bank about
the pros and cons of keeping aid flowing in a challenging environment to maintain the
policy dialogue.41 On the other hand, as some of the World Bank's TTLs highlighted,
many PRSC clients tend to frontload their efforts in preparing PRSPs while becoming
less engaged later on in expectations of flexibility from the World Bank42. In this
context, PEA may not be very helpful, which may lead to its under-provision.


 Box 4.1. Evolution of reforms supported by the World Bank’s budget support
 Reforms supported by the World Bank’s budget support have evolved in recent decades
 shaped by several factors. First, with the transition from volatile and turbulent 1980s and
 1990s to the era of so-called “great moderation” of the 2000s, the nature of issues that
 developing countries were facing have changed. Second, the development paradigm has also
 shifted, first from the pro-active industrial policies of the 1960s and 1970s to the “Washington
 consensus” of the 1980s and 1990s, and then to Millennium Development Goals. Third, there
 was an evolution in the aid paradigm that led to a major rethinking in the concept of budget
 support as an instrument, which resulted in reforms in the early 2000s.
 The World Bank launched budget support on a large-scale in the early 1980s to support
 structural adjustments in client countries and to address major imbalances and structural
 issues in the 1980s and 1990s. Heavy conditionality became the feature of the instrument to
 support critical adjustments in large macro imbalances. Instruments’ conditionality became
 controversial, however, as it increasingly embraced what was later framed as the
 “Washington consensus,” which was not necessarily focused on country-specific
 development opportunities for growth and poverty reduction but rather on eliminating
 inefficiencies and market distortions inspired by the free market ideology.
 With the reforms in the instrument in the early 2000s, alignment with national development
 strategies was seen as a powerful tool for bringing donors’ and recipients’ preferences
 together. At some point there were views that given the focus on alignment of NDSs, DPOs
 should no longer have a focus on specific reforms through conditionality. Changing the
 instrument to rely on high-level performance and eligibility assessments instead of specific
 reform conditionality was seen as an optimal way to address the intrinsic problem of a
 principle and agent that characterizes budget support. The World Bank, however, never




40 Review of IEG validation of ICRs of programmatic cases that were terminated
41 Aid and Reform in Africa, Lessons from Ten Case Studies, World Bank, 2001.
42 This may be the symptom of moral hazard arising from the prior knowledge of the World Bank's flexibility.




22
                                                                                                    CHAPTER 4
                                                                       FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA
 abandoned its focus on specific reforms. The solution to the problem was to adopt a model of
 “softer” conditionality and support reforms identified in NDSs and government programs.
 Contemporary budget support instruments target a wide spectrum of reforms derived from
 country-specific contexts. Although the primary focus of DPOs have been historically on
 reforms that enhance the quality of budget allocations and spending, such as macro-fiscal and
 PFM reforms, many DPOs support reforms that may not have direct and short-term
 consequences for public expenditures. DPOs may cover broad areas of reforms such as
 governance, social protection, and so on. Multi-sector DPOs may cover several policy areas.
 Source: IEG review of relevant literature cited in the bibliography



        The relative lack of reform-specific PEA in the context of variation in the quality
of reform actions may be a symptom of a weakness in the results orientation of DPOs in
specific policy and institutional reforms. Incorporation of less critical actions appears to
undermine the instrument’s credibility and may be a lost opportunity for the World
Bank in terms of leveraging the World Bank’s financing for promoting reforms. One
lesson may be that stronger integration of DPF with SCD/CPF for identifying most
critical reforms and monitoring achievement of results can be a way forward to further
strengthen the instrument.

       The results orientation of DPOs in specific reforms can be also discussed in the
context of possible trade-offs between the “reforming” and “financing” objectives of the
instrument. The key metrics of results orientation in DPOs is the extent to which DPOs
promote policy and institutional change in specific reform areas as reflected in the
policy matrix of the instrument. At the same time, other aspects outside the policy
matrix, such as timely and predictable financing and maintaining the World Bank’s
relevance in the policy dialogue on macro-fiscal frameworks, sector policies, and
poverty reduction are also important determinants of the quality of the World Bank’s
engagement through DPOs43. These “reforming” and “financing” elements of budget
support can reinforce each other if the World Bank’s and clients’ priorities are strongly
aligned. When they are not, there may be trade-offs between the two that could
manifest in a weaker focus on specific reforms.44 World Bank TTLs and managers
mention that they in fact often face trade-offs between these “reforming” and
“financing” roles of DPOs. This trade-off may cause under-provision of PEA compared
to a model where the focus is primarily on results in specific reforms.




43PRSC Evaluation
44This is related to the debate about possible inconsistency between “multiple objectives” and the number of
instruments in DPOs when two distinct objectives are pursued with a single instrument. For further discussion see,
for example, http://blog-pfm.imf.org/files/op-ed.pdf


                                                                                                                 23
CHAPTER 4
FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROVISION OF PEA

       Stronger links between SCD/CPF and DPF may help to improve result
orientation with respect to policy and institutional changes by helping the instrument to
focus on the most critical reform actions identified by country diagnostics and to take
more informed risks. Mandating risk assessment for individual reform actions for better
understanding the underlying theory of change and possible risks will increase the
demand for sector-specific PEA and may improve program design.



The Role of Incentives
The incentive structure in the World Bank may also play a role in provision of PEA.
First, the relatively scarce resources available to task teams may undermine the
provision of PEA. World Bank budget for program preparation has been under
pressure in recent years, which not always allows the teams to generate all of the
necessary analytical inputs for preparing DPOs, including PEA. External sources, such
as trust funds that used to fund many PEA reports, have been on the decline in recent
years. Second, the lack of a confidential platform for politically sensitive discussions
may also undermine staff incentives to conduct PEA.




24
Appendix A: Dominican Republic Power Sector
reforms and Bank’s DPOs45
The Context:

1.      Utilities in the Dominican Republic were chronically unprofitable in the early
2000s. This was due to poor governance, lack of investment and mismanagement. In the
case of electricity, the service was also unreliable, unavailable 20% of the time. The
average Dominican company experienced 25 electricity blackouts a month – more than
one per working day. More than 60% of Dominican firms considered electricity a major
constraint on their business. Meanwhile, the persistent gap between tariffs charged and
the operating cost was exacerbated by the widespread theft and poor collection of bills.
The losses placed a severe financial strain on the sector, limiting its ability to improve
services. Significant resources were needed to close the financial gap. In 2002, with the
oil price spike in 2002, the distribution companies were unable to pay generation
companies for the power purchases. The Government re-nationalized two of the three
distribution companies in 2003.


2.      These problems in the power sector were harmful to the economy. First, they deterred
both domestic and international investment, especially in sectors that used electricity
intensively. Second, they forced households and firms to incur additional costs in setting up
and using alternative sources of electricity. About half of all businesses relied on costly back-up
generators while some larger firms built their own power plants. And third, they substantially
enlarged fiscal deficits. In 2002, the subsidies to electricity consumers reached 1.2 percent of
GDP.


The WB Operations

3.      A DPO approved in 2005 was the first in a planned program of three (two development
policy loans and one investment loan). According to the Program Document (PD), the
development objective (PDO) of the program was to support the Government's strategy for the
recovery of the power sector, and in particular to:

        (a) Improve the quality of service, especially by reducing the frequency and length of
        blackouts prevalent in recent years;


45The case study extensively draws on IEG Learning Product in Bank’s Support of Financial Viability of P ower
Sector, program documents, ICRs, and ICRRs of relevant DPOs


25
APPENDIX A
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC POWER SECTOR REFORMS AND BANK’S DPOS
       (b) Establish conditions that would permit the financial sustainability and efficient
       operation of all companies in the sector; and
       (c) Increase the percentage of the population with access to electricity.

4.     The program had four policy pillars for the achievement of this PDO:


Pillar I: Restoring financial viability, with the following measures:
    (i)     Elimination of government arrears;
    (ii)    Prompt payment of bills and subsidies due by Government;
    (iii)   Better targeting of subsidies; and
    (iv)    Assuring financial sustainability of the electricity distribution companies (EDEs)
            through rationalization of tariffs, improved collection, enhanced efficiency and
            reduced operating costs.

Pillar II: Improving the supply of power to the poor.

Pillar III: Ensuring environmental sustainability through environmental regulations which are
adapted to local conditions and properly enforced.

Pillar IV: Improving sector governance through:
    (i)     Sustained improvements in the operating efficiency of the EDEs; and
    (ii)    Dissolution, following successful reform, of the Power Sector Recovery Committee
            (PSRC); and
    (iii)   Re-establishment of the responsibility of the National Energy Commission (CNE) for
            overseeing and administering the sector.
5.      This loan focused primarily on Pillar I since, according to the PD, the financial
hemorrhaging had to be curbed before other reforms could bear fruits. No Pillar II measures
were included in the conditionality and only one measure each for Pillars Three and Four.
Outcomes of the Pillar One reforms were expected to be: Financially stronger EDEs, able to
meet their payments to generators (with government subsidy if necessary), thereby permitting
an improved power supply and a reduction in blackouts. Government, by remaining current in
both its bill and subsidy payments, would no longer be a financial burden on the power sector.
The tariff regime would provide appropriate economic signals to consumers. Subsidies would
be better targeted for the poor. As a result of these improvements, service quality would be
enhanced, especially through a reduction in the length and frequency of blackouts resulting
from non -payment to generators. The loan was accompanied by a Technical Assistance Project,
approved in 2004, supporting institutional strengthening in the CNE, the Office of the
Superintendent of Electricity (SIE) and the Coordinating Entity for the Interconnected System
(OC).

6.       These reforms were at the core of Government strategy for counteracting the economic
crisis that afflicted the Dominican Republic between 2002 and 2004 and for laying the



26
                                                                                      APPENDIX A
                                        DOMINICAN REPUBLIC POWER SECTOR REFORMS AND BANK’S DPOS

foundations for sustainable growth. There was a sense of urgency among the stakeholders to
work out strong and lasting solutions.

Choice of the instrument

7.      Nonetheless, it was not clear whether a stand-alone DPL was the most appropriate
instrument for the power sector in Dominican Republic. Two of the sector's core problems were:
a) an over-dependence on imported oil (84% of power generation relies on fossil fuels) and b)
the poor conditions of transmission and distribution infrastructure. They could not be
adequately addressed by such an operation. Although an investment loan supporting
infrastructure enhancements was planned to follow, it would have worked better if it had
preceded or was implemented concurrently the DPL.

Other design issues

8.      The key risks were correctly identified at appraisal, among them: fading government
ownership of the reform program, political economy barriers to achieving difficult reforms,
continued strong consumer resistance to bill paying and tariff increases (especially given poor
service quality), the persistence of governance issues and institutional weaknesses. But the
design of a multi-tranche operation made it difficult for these risks to be adequately mitigated.
The design was predicated on the assumption that large and rapid disbursements of budget
support would motivate the Authorities to implement the reforms strenuously. This, however,
was not consistent with the history of multi -tranche DPLs in the Dominican Republic. As the
Program Document acknowledged, previous multi-tranche DPLs were difficult to implement
with frequent dilutions of prior actions. A series of single tranche loans would have allowed
both the Borrower and the World Bank to adjust to changing political and sector conditions, as
well as to external shocks such as a spike oil prices.

Prior Conditions (first tranche) US$50 million

9.       Among the prior actions of the first tranche were:


        A viable and binding agreement between the Government and power sector institutions
         to record arrears, schedule interest payments, and provide for a one year moratorium on
         debt repayment.

        Government payment of electricity bills remains current. The Government has
         transferred appropriate subsidies to the CDEEE (Corporacion Dominicana de Empresas
         Electricas Estatales, the public holding company of state electricity companies) under
         budgetary allocation for the power sector as set forth in the Borrower's National Budget,
         and CDEEE has transferred the funds to the distribution companies as set forth in the
         Power Sector Action Plan.



                                                                                                27
APPENDIX A
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC POWER SECTOR REFORMS AND BANK’S DPOS
        Plans for the financial recovery of the power sector are approved and their
         implementation started, including: (a) the EDEs' loss reduction, cost control, and
         increased collection plans; and (b) an increase in the Cash Recovery Index (CRI46) from
         45% in August 2004, to 50%.

        Revision and implementation of a formula for the automatic adjustment of retail tariffs
         in response to variations in the exchange rate, fuel prices and inflation.

        Formulation of a contingency plan in case the performance of the state -owned
         distribution companies fails to improve.

        Creation of a Power Sector Recovery Committee to oversee implementation of the
         recovery plan, and appointment of its Coordinator.

        Launching of a communications campaign to build awareness of the rationale behind
         the recovery plan.


Second Tranche Conditions US$ 50 million

        Repeat of Condition on the Government being current on its payments (bullet 2)

        A further increase in the CRI to 55%.

        Continued application of the formula for automatic retail tariff adjustments.

        Signature of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Comision Nacional de
         Energia (National Energy Commission -- CNE) and the Secretaria del Estado de Medio
         Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (SEMA -- Ministry of the Environment and Natural
         Resources ) to improve environmental management in the sector, implement
         streamlined procedures for granting environmental licenses and monitor their
         implementation.

        Creation of hydro-generation and transmission companies which have a separate legal
         identity from CDEEE, with injection of their capital and preparation of their bylaws.

Third Tranche Conditions US$ 50 million

        Repeat of Condition on Government payments being current.

        A further increase in the CRI to 60%.

        Repeat of condition on the use formula for automatic tariff adjustments.

46The formula for computing the CRI is defined as: CRI = [the energy billed by distributors /the energy purchased
by distributors] multiplied by [bills paid by consumers to distributors/total billing of the distributors to consumers]



28
                                                                                            APPENDIX A
                                              DOMINICAN REPUBLIC POWER SECTOR REFORMS AND BANK’S DPOS


             Selection of an option for private sector participation in distribution.

10.    While the operation was active, financial conditions of the EDEs did improve during
2006 and 2007. Better revenue collection was reflected in the CRI, which improved from 45% in
2004 (one of the lowest in the world) to an estimated 68% in 2009. This progress, however, was
overwhelmed by the substantial increase in the non -fuel operating costs of sector institutions
and by a rapid rise in oil prices in 2008.

11.   The Government cleared its arrears to sector institutions before Board approval
in May 2005, but soon thereafter the payments faltered again. This caused a delay in making
the loan effective, and hence the release of the first tranche, which did not take place until
December, 2006. Bill and subsidy payments remained current throughout 2007, permitting the
release of the second tranche in November. However, arrears to generators resurfaced in 2008,
again due in large measure to higher oil prices, while the budget deficit attributable to the
power sector rose to over US$ 1.2 billion. Budget transfers were nonetheless insufficient to meet
the contractual obligations to the generating companies. The Government also fell back into
arrears on its bill payments. Although the sector's finances improved somewhat late 2008 and
early 2009, as oil prices retreated from their previous peaks, the combined arrears on bill and
subsidy payments were still in excess of US$ 500 million at loan closure.

12.     Meanwhile, the tariff regime implemented did not send appropriate economic signals
to consumers and with higher oil prices in 2008 was grossly inadequate to cover costs. Contrary
to the objective, the regulatory agency remained weak and it enjoyed little, if any, independence
from the Government. It was established late – years after the legislation was approved in 2001
and 2002 and long after the so -called "first generation" reforms (which introduced private
participation in generation and distribution) were initiated in the late 1990s.

13.     Allowing tariffs to fluctuate according to the agreed formula was difficult for the
Government to comply with, even when there were no spikes in oil prices. Tariffs were frozen
in February 2006 and remained so throughout the life of the project. Waivers were granted by
the World Bank on the tariff-related conditionality for both the first and second tranches. For
the third tranche, the issue was moot given the failure to comply with other stipulated reform
measures.

14.           The World Bank justified the waivers on the grounds that:

      (i)        Electricity prices were already relatively high (about 22 US cents/kWh);
      (ii)       Service quality was poor; and
      (iii)      Economic growth was strong (averaging 9.5% per year in real terms between 2005
                 and 2007), making it possible for the Government to make compensatory transfers
                 that would still enable the project to achieve its other objectives.



                                                                                                   29
APPENDIX A
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC POWER SECTOR REFORMS AND BANK’S DPOS
15.     There were also political imperatives in light of the Dominican Republic's two -year
electoral cycle. The President is elected for a four year term while the legislative elections are
scheduled two years into the presidential term. Thus major elections are held every two years,
thus reminding politicians of the risk of raising power tariffs.

16.      No progress was made in targeting subsidies to the poor. Reduced payment arrears to
generating companies cut the length and frequency of blackouts in 2006 and 2007. But they
returned to the pre -project levels when the arrears expanded in 2008. Power rationing was
estimated at 18%, but this figure was widely regarded as an understatement. Project results thus
fell far short of the objective of establishing a financially stronger power sector. The loan's
contribution to broader program objectives -- improved service quality, financial sustainability
and increased access to electricity -- was also equally modest.

17.     Many political economy issues were at work to undermine the outcomes of this
operation. First, the political economy setting is one of entrenched clientelism where politicians
are more likely to deliver specific favors to particular groups than to promote general welfare.
In Dominican Republic at the time of this operation, voters had learned to expect short-term
benefits, like lower electricity tariffs, instead of more distant gains like financial sustainability of
public utilities. Politicians – or more generally policy entrepreneurs –knew that refusing to
adjust tariffs – and thus violating agreements with external partners – carried little cost. On the
other hand, a politician committed to pursuing general welfare, like raising power tariffs
(according to an abstract formula) would appear quixotic to the voter and gain little support.

18.     Second, most of the reforms envisaged in the power sector required high
“implementation intensity”. The institutional overhaul, including the split-up of one vertically
integrated firm into two generation companies and three distribution companies in 1999 as well
as the backsliding three years later, was far reaching and difficult to internalize by management
and staff. In addition, to stem power losses called for a change of deep seated behavior among
employees of distribution companies, including weeding out illegal power connections and
collecting payments fully and promptly, which may have been contrary to prevailing social
norms.

19.    A careful review and analysis of the political economy prior to the implementation of
this DPO could have made a difference. It could have informed the task team and the
Government of the challenges that lay ahead – and possibly of a different approach that would
allow more time and more grassroots consultations to build the necessary political coalitions.




30
Appendix B: Tanzania Crop Board Reforms and
Bank DPOs
Background

1.     Until recently, crop boards played a key role in determining the production and
investment of Tanzania’s export crops--cashews, coffee, cotton, pyrethrum, sisal, sugar,
tea and tobacco.47 Their stipulated functions were to ensure quality and fair prices.
Their activities, however, had raised many concerns about the country’s agriculture and
exports, including disruption of export trade; high administrative costs; low
accountability to their constituents; and interference in the business of private
marketing companies.

2.      Crop boards were accountable to the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
(MoAFS) and financed by withholdings from the trade, rather than general revenues. Cess and
license fees provided more than 75 percent of their revenues, with the exception of cotton. The
expenditures of these boards totaled about US$ 5 million a year, much of it due to
administrative expenses.48

3.      Reforms of Crop Boards. The government prioritized a crop board analysis in
Tanzania’s 2001/02 Second Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) Progress Report. The rural
development strategy, as well as the agriculture sector development strategy both emphasized
the need to restructure these Boards. The review of the roles and funding of the Boards was a
policy benchmark in the donor-supported Poverty Action Framework (PAF). By 2003, the
Government had not yet devised a reform program, but addressed the concerns instead with
various actions to increase stakeholder participation, reduced taxes and fees on small holders,
and curbing the abuses of private traders (see documents (i) and (ii) under footnote 2 below). In
2003, the Government requested support for further analysis of the Boards in the form of a
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA).

4.     Findings of the PSIA. The World Bank, the Government Task Force (Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security (MoAFS), the Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing (MoCM)
and the European Union jointly conducted the PSIA. The study’s focus was to review the
Boards--specifically its regulatory, service & revenue collection functions, the institutional

47 Crop boards were formed after the liberalization of the early 1990s to replace the marking boards, which had been created as
monopoly public agencies to fulfill a range of marketing activities (see ‘The Political Economy of Policy Reform:; Issues and
Implications for Policy Dialogue and Development Operations, 2008).
48 This case study draws extensively from the following: (i) Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) of Reforms, Lessons and

Examples, Aline Coudouel, Anis A. Dani, Stefano Peternostro, 2006; (ii) The Political Economy of Policy Reform: Issues and
Implications for Policy Dialogue and Development Operations, Social Development Department, The World Bank, 2008; and
(iii) Project Performance Assessment Report, Tanzania, IEG, 2013.

31
APPENDIX B
TANZANIA CROP BOARD REFORMS AND BANK DPOS
arrangements/ environments, and their impact on the incentives in production and marketing
of the affected crops and to propose options to reform the crop boards. A comprehensive
stakeholder dialogue characterized the PSIA process.49

The PSIA findings revealed:
     (i)      There was an institutional vacuum after liberalization in the 1990s with uneven
              private sector participation, unfair trading, and some re-regulation to increase the
              role of crop boards;
     (ii)     Crop boards mixed public and private activities and acted as both regulators and
              participants in markets with large scope for conflicts of interest;
     (iii)    Boards were only accountable upward to MoAFS, but are financed entirely by their
              constituents in the industries and through property income; and
     (iv)     Small holders did not fully understand the pricing mechanisms and quality rewards.
5.     The PSIA, however, did not identify specific impacts on different stakeholders as the
reform options were to be subject to national debates.

6.     The study showed that parts of government and smallholders were skeptical of the
market economy and adhered to socialist principles. Hence, the Crop Boards and the Ministry
of Cooperatives opposed the reforms that would reduce their controls over private agents and
require greater accountability to producers. At the political level, MoAFS was in favor of the
reforms. At the technical level, the Government Task Force (MoAFS and Ministry of
Cooperatives) also supported the reform. The PSIA developed four reform options including:

   (1) Boards that are publicly financed and focus on public services;
   (2) Boards that are privately financed;
   (3) Boards that are jointly financed, with associated private services financed by a levy and
       contracts for public services; and
   (4) Boards that remain as they are.
7.     The study team recommends option 1 for the coffee industry, and option 3 for the cotton
industry.

The Development Policy Operations (PRSCs)

8.      There were two series of PRSCs; a total of 8 operations with one approved each year.
The first series, PRSCs 1-3 spanned the years 2003-2006 (US$432 million), and the second series,
PRSCs 4-8, covered 2006-2010 (US$ 1,025 million).




49See PSIA, 2006, and ‘The Political Economy of Policy Reform: Issues and Implications for Poli cy Dialogue and Development
Policy Operations’, Social Development Department, 2008, p. 54-75 for details on the PSIA process.



32
                                                                                                  APPENDIX B
                                                                 TANZANIA CROP BOARD REFORMS AND BANK DPOS
9.     PRSCs 1-3. The agriculture and rural development agenda was extremely ambitious. It
included reforms of crop boards, particularly with respect to input supply, product quality, and
competitiveness. A review of the crop boards was set as a prior action to PRSC-3. However, the
Government delayed the preparation of an action plan for the reform, prompting the World
Bank to reduce the PRSC-3 envelope from US$175 million to US$150 million.

10.    PRSCs 4 – 8. The implementation of crop board reform was taken up under PRSC 4.
Despite the delay, the government took an important step – changing crop board financing
from the original crop cess to budgetary allocations. But amending the laws that governed the
crop boards was delayed. The World Bank accommodated this change in strategy, and made
the consultations and signing of MoUs with the crop boards a prior action for PRSC-5, and the
submission of the legislative amendments of all crop boards a trigger for PRSC-6.

11.     The prior actions for the series were somewhat weak and only partially achieved
(PPAR, 2013). For example, the annulment of the cess had taken place long before, but was
included as a prior action under PRSC 4. The government did not consolidate any gains from
removing the cess, as Cabinet did not endorse specific reforms on the role and function of crop
boards, including their regulatory functions, governance structures, and accountability to
stakeholders. The joint evaluation of General Budget Support (ODI and DAL 2005) noted that it
was not so clear that there was a strong political commitment from the Government in favor of
implementing the reforms (PPAR, p. 99). Overall, the trigger and prior actions related to crop
boards under PRSC 4-6 were generally met with significant dilutions under strong political
resistance.

12.     The PRSCs seemed to have overlooked the political economy and government
ownership of sensitive reforms. The PSIA had noted that export crops, such as coffee, could be a
lucrative business for a wide range of stakeholders, including public sector employees. As in
many African countries that are agrarian and pluralistic, political life was dominated by
clientelism and related political organizations. Powerful interests, within and outside of the
crop boards, defended the status quo that benefited them.


Political Economy Analysis
13.     The World Bank carried out a Political Economy Analysis to support the Tanzania
Poverty Assessment (PA), with immediate attention to opening up space for policy dialogue
under the PA.50 This was done in response to concerns within the country team that difficult
political incentives were:



50Using Political Economy Analysis for Country Poverty Assessment and Broader Strategy, Stuti Khemani, Development
Research Group, World Bank, 2010.



                                                                                                                     33
APPENDIX B
TANZANIA CROP BOARD REFORMS AND BANK DPOS
a) Inhibiting adoption of even very obvious growth promoting policies;
b) Allowing large capture of private rents from public resources, thereby reducing the resources
that reach the poor; and
c) Impeding the delivery of the World Bank’s programs.
Two key arguments presented are:
     (i)    The key issue for policy dialogue in Tanzania lies in the implementation of policies,
            to overcome governance problems of elite capture and political rent-seeking, rather
            than substantial disagreement between the Government and the World Bank on the
            general direction of good policies. Many rent-seeking opportunities were available to
            local officials and village leaders. Even if national anti-poverty programs and
            policies were well designed, their implementation appeared to be subject to large
            local political risks.
     (ii)   The approach of advocating politically palatable “2nd Best” policies, as part of donor
            conditionalities, is likely to be misguided for two reasons.
            a. First, because the World Bank’s team did not have sufficient evidence that the
               policies they recommend, nor its “2nd Best” incarnation, will actually lead to the
               intended development outcomes; and
            b. Second, because policies pushed through donor insistence is less likely to be
               effectively implemented and sustained, compared to policies that emerge
               through political bargaining within Tanzania, which the World Bank can
               influence through other types of governance interventions.

14.     In areas of policy disagreement, therefore, a “politically savvy” approach is to invest in more
rigorous technical analysis of the costs of current government policies, and the benefits of specific reforms,
which can be used to facilitate demand for better policies within Tanzania.

15.     Crop Boards, however, may not be different, and, furthermore, may be subject to even
more inefficient rent seeking by a larger number of dispersed local officials. Focus group
meetings suggested poor farmers lacked information about prices and market conditions, which
likely enabled the leaders of these societies to collude with other actors in the warehouse receipt
system to extract rents at the expense of better prices for farmers. The public good of greater
access to agricultural market and pricing information through local radio (“farmer radio”) and
cell-phone networks were conspicuously absent from policy discussion in Tanzania. While
greater government and cooperative society control over agricultural marketing was vigorously
defended by district officials on the basis of enabling collective action among farmers to
demand better prices from oligopolistic traders, these same respondents were unable to answer
why the government hadn’t invested in providing greater price information to farmers through
mass media.




34
                                                                                      APPENDIX B
                                                     TANZANIA CROP BOARD REFORMS AND BANK DPOS

16.    The note found that the World Bank’s current approach to the Government’s
interventions in agricultural marketing appeared to be to criticize these as inimical to producer
incentives to take advantage of global markets, and to convince the government that greater
market liberalization and specific institutional reforms would give better incentives to
producers and yield better outcomes (the study references Binswanger and Gautam, 2010; and
Baregu and Verhoogeven, 2010). A political economy perspective suggests that the World
Bank’s persuasive powers would be circumscribed by two constraints: (i) a charge against the
World Bank of taking policy positions that are ideological rather than fully substantiated by
evidence; and (ii) the local political constraints of the interest groups being serviced by current
government policies. The latter constraint seems to be increasingly acknowledged by the World
Bank, and, addressed it appears largely through donor conditionality for institutional reforms.
Simply pushing for reforms through donor conditionality risks yielding de jure reforms, but
with de facto implementation on the basis of clientelist politics; or even reversals in de jure
reforms.


17.     For example, the World Bank’s current approach to Crop Board reforms is subject to
political risks of being ineffective in practice. With respect to passing government decrees to
stop the levy of certain crop cess and requiring the Boards to prepare financial plans in line with
the budgetary MTEF-- it is not difficult to conceive of ways in which such formal legislation or
decrees could be bypassed at local levels either by calling a crop cess by a new name, or finding
other ways to tax those producers whom the local politicians want to tax. The real determinants
of local incentives to tax and manage revenues are likely to lie in the nature of local politics.
Recommendations on governance reforms that engage stakeholders (demand-side governance
reforms) would likely require more analytical work, with micro-empirical data to examine what
institutional designs work at overcoming clientilist political constraints.


18.      This is to identify a range of more innovative governance interventions to influence the
demand of national political elite engaged in political bargaining with each other, the demand
of private business interests engaged in influencing national policies, in addition to the demand
of citizens for broad public goods. That is, governance interventions on the demand-side rather
than the technical supply-side, but going systematically beyond the very local, social
mobilization interventions typically associated with demand-side practices. Political economy
analysis can help design such broader demand-side governance interventions to have greater
potential in improving the incentives of politicians to effectively implement growth and
poverty-reduction policies.




                                                                                                 35
Annex C: List of Reviewed DPOs
List of Randomly Selected and Reviewed DPOs

     Project number          Country            Project number         Country
        P034365             Guatemala              P117723             Vietnam
        P055909              Tanzania              P118027            Afghanistan
        P074181               Turkey               P122793             Vietnam
        P074889              Tajikistan            P123267             Colombia
        P083459            Mozambique              P123352        Nigeria: subnational
        P094967               Bulgaria             P123679            The Gambia
        PO83927               Uruguay              P125298             Lao PDR
        P095730                Ghana               P126207           Burkina Faso
        P096928                Benin               P126453               Tonga
        P096962        Pakistan: sub-national      P127080              Burundi
        P099420             Madagascar             P127956             Morocco
        P101232               Uganda               P128023       Sao Tome and Principe
        P102018              Romania               P128251              Tunisia
        P105710               Panama                P128258            Pakistan
        P107163              Indonesia             P128573              Lesotho
        P107242              Lao PDR               P130972             Colombia
        P115626               Armenia              P131028                Peru
        P115732                Latvia              P147152             Grenada
        P116972         Dominican Republic         P147226              Albania
        P117273               Senegal              P150313              Ukraine




37
References
Bourguignon, François; Sundberg, Mark. 2007. Aid Effectiveness: Opening the Black Box. The American
       Economic Review, Vol. 97, No. 2 (May, 2007)
Collier, Paul. Should budget support be discontinued? IMF Blog
European Commission, 2014. Synthesis of Budget Support Evaluations: Analysis of the Findings,
       Conclusions and Recommendations of seven Country Evaluations of Budget Support
Fritz, V., Kaiser, K. and Levy, B., 2009. Problem-driven governance and political economy analysis. The
         World Bank.
IEG. 2011. Background paper on PEA for governance
_____ 2011. Governance and Anti-Corruption, IEG Evaluation,
_____ 2015. DPO’s Results Framework, IEG Learning Product, 2015
_____ 2016. Learning Product on Financial Viability of Energy Sector
Levy, Brian. 2014. Working with the Grain. New York: Oxford University Press, 2014
Norton, A., Beddies, S., Holland, J., Garbarino, S., Gamper, C., Ruckstuhl, S. and Sjorslev, J., 2008. The
        political economy of policy reform: Issues and implications for policy dialogue and development
        operations. The World Bank and Oxford Policy Management
Nunberg, B., Barma, N., Abdollahian, M., Green, A. and Perlman, D., 2010. At the Frontier of Practical
      Political Economy
ODI, 2011. Pieces of the puzzle: evidence, dilemmas and the emerging agenda for budget support
World Bank. 1993. Borrower Ownership of Adjustment Programs and the Political Economy of Reform.
_____ 1996. Tools for Institutional, Political and Social Analysis of Policy Reform
_____ 2001. Aid and Reform in Africa, Lessons from Ten Case Studies.
_____ 2006. Reconciling Alignment and performance in budget support Programs: What Next?; Budget
        Support as More effective Aid?
_____ 2007Results-Based National Development Strategies: Assessment and Challenges Ahead.
_____ 2008. The Political Economy of Policy Reform.
_____ 2015. Development Policy Financing Retrospective: Results And Sustainability, 2015,




39
