     The World Bank

                                                   Program Completion Summary
                                                            Philippines
                                     Programmatic AAA for Social Protection and Labor (P148753)

Created by Pablo Ariel Acosta on 20-Nov-2016          Last Modified by Pablo Ariel Acosta on 02-Dec-2016                     Form Status:Archived


Program Basic Information
Product Line                       Title                                Country, Region or Global              Program Team Leader(s)
Programmatic Approach              Programmatic AAA for Social          Philippines                            Pablo Ariel Acosta,Aleksandra
                                   Protection a                                                                Posarac
Legal Name                                                                                                     Practice Manager/Manager
Programmatic AAA for Social Protection and Labor                                                               Jehan Arulpragasam
Responsible CC (e.g. OPCDR)        Requesting CC (e.g. OPCDR)           Completion Fiscal Year                 Status
GSP02 (0000009341)                 EACPF (0000000336)                   2017                                   Complete
Parent GPP


Audience                           Reimbursable Advisory Services
Donor                              No
Includes RAS Subtask(s)?
No

Program Context, Development Objectives and Design
This section is descriptive not evaluative

Context at Program Concept Approval (Brief summary of country and sector background, rationale for undertaking program)
The Government of the Philippines has made significant progress in developing its social protection sector over the last 10
years, which has been one of its main strategies to address poverty and vulnerability. The most notable developments had
been the introduction of a national household targeting system (more popularly known as Listahanan), a conditional cash
transfer (CCT) program, and the universal health care (UHC) program that reaches out to the poorest Filipino families, i.e.,
those who belong to the bottom 40 percent as identified in the Listahanan.

The flagship social protection program is the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, a CCT program. It was introduced to
support poor families➢❨ investment in health and education of children 0-14 and to alleviate their poverty. It has rapidly
grown from 360,000 beneficiary households at the time it was launched in 2008 to 3.8 million poor households in 2013. By
then, the Pantawid has become the world➢❨ s third largest CCT program ➢❨ covering nearly 20 million people or 75% of
the poor population and with a budget that reached 0.4% of GDP. Free health insurance and access to primary health care
has been extended to all the Pantawid beneficiaries, as well as to other families that belonged to the bottom 40 percent of
the population, as part of the UHC program. Both the Pantawid and UHC programs benefited from the Listahanan that was
established in 2009. The Listahanan contains information of 11 million households nationwide (about 60 percent of the
population), of which 5.2 million households were classified as ➢❨ poor➢❨ and prioritized for various Government
assistance programs.
Original Program Development Objectives (PDO) (as approved at Program Concept Approval)
This program seeks (i) to assist DSWD sustain the role of the CCT program as an well established and implemented
backbone of the SSN in the Philippines. This will be achieved by further strengthening of the CCT operations and
management , including identification of beneficiaries, eligibility and compliance verification, grievance and redress and
payment delivery, MIS integration, monitoring and evaluation capacity and expansion to cover poor children in secondary
education. The program also aims to (ii) to advance the implementation of the Government?s convergence agenda by
expanding and deepening the knowledge base and broadening the SP policy dialogue to include social security and labor
market policies. In so doing, this program will contribute to the Government's efforts to reduce poverty and vulnerability and
improve human capital of the poor.

The program will be realized through technical assistance, transfer of global knowledge and experience and knowledge
exchange provided to the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD). Most of these will be financed through
the Australian Aid Trust Fund and will support DSWD in its continuous efforts to improve design and implementation of its
flagship Pantawid Pamilya Program and other programs associated with it. In addition to technical assistance and
                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 19
    The World Bank


knowledge transfer, the program will also support several discrete pieces of analytical work, which are intended to inform the
policy dialogue, not only around the social safety net programs, but also in other areas of social protection, such as labor
market programs and social insurance. This part of the PAAA will be financed by the WBG budget.
Revised Program Development Objectives (PDO) (as approved at last Program Review) and reasons/justification for PDO revision


Other Significant Changes (In design, scope and scale, implementation arrangements and schedule, and funding)



Key Factors Affecting Implementation and Outcomes
Program Preparation & Design, including quality at entry (Including whether lessons of earlier operations were taken into account, risks and their mitigations
identified, appropriate mix of sub-activities to achieve objectives, determination of key stakeholders and audience, and if they were appropriate to meeting
the PDO)
The World Bank, jointly with Australian Aid (DFAT), first supported the Government➢❨ s ambitious social protection agenda
through a series of discrete technical assistance grants from 2006 through 2010. This was followed by the first Social
Protection Programmatic AAA (SP PAAA) that covered FY2010-FY2015. The Bank➢❨ s assistance throughout this
foundational period for the Philippine SP system has been instrumental, particularly in the areas of poverty targeting, CCT
implementation and monitoring, and rigorous analytical work to inform the broader policy dialogue on social safety nets and
poverty reduction.

The second SPL PAAA FY2014-FY2017 (P148753) built on the results achieved in the first seven years of close
collaboration with DSWD and DFAT. It sought to continue the technical support and advice to the Government in further
strengthening its flagship SP programs while at the same time open new areas of engagement beyond social assistance and
targeting, such as labor market policies and programs, and social insurance. While the foundational management
information systems and procedures had already been established and functioning in support of Listahanan and the
world➢❨ s third largest CCT program, the Pantawid Pamilya, to deliver on their respective objectives, DSWD was keen to
ensure that these systems continued to be strengthened and primed to meet evolving demands. The Government remained
keen on learning more about how to make its CCT program more effective using rigorous evaluations and in-depth process
assessments to inform necessary recalibration of the current program design and implementation. In addition, attention to
other components of the social protection system was just as important. Thus, the second phase of technical assistance was
designed to continuously provide high quality technical support to DSWD in its efforts to enhance the design of the CCT
program and Listahanan and strengthen their operation systems and business processes. Also, the TA was designed to
open the dialog in insurance/pensions and to further Bank engagement in the labor, skills, and jobs agenda.

To deliver on this ambitious program, a combination of just-in-time technical assistance on the daily operation and
troubleshooting of DSWD programs, discrete analytical products, and capacity building workshops was designed over a 4-
year period (FY14-FY17) to benefit mainly DSWD management and technical staff. All activities in the programs were
discussed and agreed on with the counterparts in DSWD and in consultations with DFAT staff.
Implementation (including any program changes/restructuring, evolution of program to respond to changing conditions in country, and actions taken, as
applicable. Also include actions taken during implementation such as adequacy of participatory processes, engaging key audiences, translations, etc.)
The program consisted of 5 pillars (components) with an original list of 14 discrete tasks with separate p-codes at CN
approval in February 2014. After a year of implementation in February 2015, the program was restructured to (i) reflect
changes in budget allocation with a more realistic set of achievable outputs, and (ii) manageability of the program by
consolidating tasks. The restructuring also dropped one activity listed at CN (Assessment of Family Development Sessions
under Pillar 1), which the client decided to do with their own funding. The restructured Program maintained the 5 original
pillars and retained 7 subtasks (out of the original 14).

Total budget of the PAAA was $2.66 million, quite in line with original allocation of $2.64 million. The program was mostly
(81%) financed by the Australian Aid Trust Fund (DFAT TF). This was supplemented by WB Bank Budget (BB), which
funded WB staff time and discrete pieces of analytical work under Pillar 5 that were intended to inform the policy dialogue
not only around the social safety net programs but also in other areas of social protection such as labor market programs
and social insurance. Overall, BB contribution was higher than expected at CN. There was also general shifting between TF
and BB resources within pillars.

Assessment of Risk to Development Outcomes
Assessment of Risk to Development Outcomes
Please address the chances of the intermediate outcomes progressing up the results chain to achievement of Outcomes. What factors and risks will play a
key role in the clients acceptance and taking action on the programs recommendation(s) and/or capacity building efforts, and what is the likelihood that they
                                                                                                                                               Page 2 of 19
    The World Bank


will be actualized into Outcomes?
The SP&L PAAA has successfully contributed in informing policy and operational decisions of the Government in the
continuous enhancement of its core social protection instruments. The dialogue around social protection had been informed
by high quality analytical products from this PAAA on topics related to targeting, social assistance design (specifically on the
CCT and SLP), design of instruments for disaster/emergency response, social insurance and pensions, and labor.

This TA has been efficiently shaped reflecting client➢❨ s priorities and needs The outputs were identified and agreed with
Government counterparts, so findings have high chance to impact directly in policy decisions.

Assessment of Outcomes
Relevance of Objectives, Design and Implementation (to current country and global priorities, and Bank assistance strategy)
This program was aligned well with the World Bank Group (WBG) twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. It
directly contributed to the achievement of the objectives of the World Bank➢❨ s Country Partnership Strategy for the
Philippines, specifically in Engagement Area 2: Empowering the Poor and Vulnerable. Besides contributing to the
achievement of better health and education outcomes for poor children, it also informed and assisted DSWD and other
policy making agencies in efforts to improve program➢❨ s performance by taking actions to continuously improve its
implementation. More importantly, the PAAA was focused on strengthening the social protection as a whole - SP played an
important role in the Philippine Government➢❨ s overall strategy to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity.

With its long and excellent tradition and track record in social protection, the WBG was uniquely positioned to conduct this
PAAA. The program was a continuation of technical assistance which laid the foundations for the core safety net program,
and continued to guide the dynamic evolution of the social protection system.

Achievement of Program Development Objectives

Overall Development Objective
                                                    Rating                                              Explanation
Overall Development Objective                       9-Very Effective                                    This TA has been efficiently shaped
                                                                                                        reflecting client➢❨ s priorities and
                                                                                                        needs. It has also been closely aligned
                                                                                                        with the activities of the Bank➢❨ s
                                                                                                        ➢❨ Social Welfare Development and
                                                                                                        Reform Project I and II (SWDRP I,
                                                                                                        P082144, 2010-2015; SWDRP II,
                                                                                                        P153744, 2016-2019). Although some
                                                                                                        changes and adjustments in timing and
                                                                                                        activities were necessary, the close
                                                                                                        working relationship with DSWD, DOLE,
                                                                                                        and SSS counterparts allowed the full
                                                                                                        use of the TA facility to still achieve its
                                                                                                        intended results. Furthermore, the TA
                                                                                                        deliverables have been subject to strict
                                                                                                        quality control arrangements, with most
                                                                                                        of deliverables going through technical
                                                                                                        reviews, prior to being finally delivered
                                                                                                        to the client.

Intermediate Outcome(s)
Please rate only those outcomes that were selected in the program Concept Note or during the last program review.
Intermediate Outcome                                Rating                                              Explanation
Client capacity increased                           9-Very Effective                                    The SPL PAAA carried out its objectives
                                                                                                        with an eye on building lasting capacity
                                                                                                        after the fact. Undertaken in this way,
                                                                                                        with World Bank technical staff working
                                                                                                        ➢❨ in the kitchen➢❨ and being on

                                                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
    The World Bank


                                                                                                      demand to the needs and questions of
                                                                                                      the client whenever they arose,
                                                                                                      ownership of each component.
                                                                                                      Consequently, lasting capacity to
                                                                                                      administer these processes has been
                                                                                                      built, to the long term benefit of the
                                                                                                      implementing agency and the program.

Indicator(s)                                       Rating
Design capacity strengthened                       9-Very Effective
Implementation capacity strengthened               9-Very Effective
Monitoring & Evaluation capacity                   9-Very Effective
increased

Intermediate Outcome                               Rating                                             Explanation
Knowledge deepened                                 9-Very Effective                                   The dialog around social protection had
                                                                                                      been informed by high quality analytical
                                                                                                      products from this PAAA on topics
                                                                                                      related to targeting, social assistance
                                                                                                      design (specifically on the CCT and
                                                                                                      SLP), design of instruments for disaster/
                                                                                                      emergency response, social insurance
                                                                                                      and pensions, and labor.

Indicator(s)                                       Rating
Facilitated exchange of best practice w/           10-Exceptionally Effective
clients

Intermediate Outcome                               Rating                                             Explanation
Policy/strategy informed                           9-Very Effective                                   The SP PAAA allowed the World Bank
                                                                                                      to work in full partnership with DSWD
                                                                                                      throughout its SP reform process.

Indicator(s)                                       Rating
Bank country strategy informed                     10-Exceptionally Effective
Government policy/strategy informed                9-Very Effective
Public debate stimulated/initiated                 9-Very Effective

Custom Outcome(s)
Please rate only those outcomes that were selected in the program Concept Note or during the last program review.
Custom Outcome(s)                                  Rating                                             Explanation
MIS system strengthened through the                8-Effective                                        The business process review of the
integration of operational business                                                                   CCT➢❨ s MIS led to a larger, more in-
processes modules                                                                                     depth review of the business process of
                                                                                                      Pantawid Pamilya. This study found that
                                                                                                      the CCT as a program is able to
                                                                                                      accomplish its objectives by effectively
                                                                                                      reaching out to more than 4.4 million
                                                                                                      beneficiaries. This means that the right
                                                                                                      beneficiaries are able to receive the
                                                                                                      appropriate grants according to their
                                                                                                      degree of compliance with program
                                                                                                      conditionalities, and that process
                                                                                                      controls are in place to ensure this. The


                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
    The World Bank


                                                                   report found that it still has significant
                                                                   room for improvement in terms of
                                                                   enhancing controls and in ensuring data
                                                                   integrity and accuracy. The report
                                                                   observed that the key vulnerabilities of
                                                                   the program relate to the multiple
                                                                   manual conduct of tasks across the
                                                                   Pantawid processes coupled with its
                                                                   unintegrated information systems.
                                                                   Furthermore, the inflexibility of the
                                                                   current information systems paired with
                                                                   the regular changes being made in the
                                                                   processes and policies make it difficult
                                                                   for the systems and processes to fully
                                                                   synchronize and nimbly adapt to any
                                                                   changes in direction. It therefore
                                                                   recommended to further automate
                                                                   processes and integrate information
                                                                   systems. This entails improving the
                                                                   Pantawid➢❨ s technological
                                                                   infrastructure, with primary focus on
                                                                   upgrading its database. This upgrade
                                                                   would reduce bottlenecks experienced
                                                                   in data processing, promote efficient
                                                                   processing, and strengthen internal
                                                                   controls. Implementing IT service
                                                                   management practices will also help in
                                                                   ensuring that the Pantawid➢❨ s
                                                                   information systems will become more
                                                                   responsive to the changing needs of the
                                                                   program. These findings were discussed
                                                                   in depth with new authorities at DSWD,
                                                                   which are now taking action for its
                                                                   implementation.

Indicator(s)                          Rating
MIS system automated linkages beween 7-Moderately Effective
operations modules functional.

Custom Outcome(s)                     Rating                       Explanation
CCT expanded to poor students in      10-Exceptionally Effective   This sub-task aimed to provide hands-
secondary education                                                on, just-in-time technical support to
                                                                   DSWD during the preparation, launch
                                                                   and roll out of the CCT expansion to
                                                                   cover children in secondary education.
                                                                   A technical note was intended to
                                                                   support the eventual roll-out of the CCT
                                                                   program to poor children in secondary
                                                                   education who are 15-18 years of age.
                                                                   The study on the CCT expansion to
                                                                   secondary education led to eventual
                                                                   adoption of Government to cover older
                                                                   children into the program. The study and
                                                                   the Bank➢❨ s technical and operational
                                                                   advice concerning the nuts and bolts of
                                                                   expansion (identification and verification


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 19
    The World Bank


                                                                     of eligible children, payment, roll out,
                                                                     etc.) helped DSWD in its efforts to
                                                                     mobilize public support for the change in
                                                                     design of the CCT program. The
                                                                     decision on extending grants to
                                                                     secondary school came after the Bank
                                                                     made a presentation to economic
                                                                     cabinet. The expansion was completed
                                                                     satisfactorily and the payment of the
                                                                     CCT grants to 1.2 million poor children
                                                                     in secondary education (up to 18 years
                                                                     of age), commenced in June 2014 and
                                                                     retroactively covering grants for kids
                                                                     who complied with the 85% attendance
                                                                     conditionality beginning in January
                                                                     2014.

Indicator(s)                            Rating
Eligible secondary education children   10-Exceptionally Effective
enrolled and receive grants

Custom Outcome(s)                       Rating                       Explanation
Second round IE completed and DSWD 9-Very Effective                  Building upon the successful conduct of
IE capacity strengthened                                             the first round of the Impact Evaluation
                                                                     (IE) in 2012 supported under the first
                                                                     phase SP PAAA, this pillar continued
                                                                     the technical support to DSWD in the
                                                                     design, supervision, and analysis of the
                                                                     second IE of the Conditional Cash
                                                                     Transfer Program and to document its
                                                                     impact on key outcomes related to
                                                                     health and education. This emanated
                                                                     from the strong demand from DSWD for
                                                                     continued rigorous impact evaluation of
                                                                     the biggest program of the Department
                                                                     to justify its continuation, but also the
                                                                     demand for continued knowledge
                                                                     transfer on how to conduct and analyze
                                                                     rigorous IEs. At the request of DSWD,
                                                                     an IE expert was hired to provide
                                                                     continuous hands-on technical advice,
                                                                     guidance and training, throughout the
                                                                     complete cycle of the second round
                                                                     CCT IE. Documentation of good practice
                                                                     and capacity building are already
                                                                     helping DSWD in the conduct of the
                                                                     third round of the IE data collection and
                                                                     in other data collection efforts. Results
                                                                     from the impact evaluations are always
                                                                     cited in various policy circles during
                                                                     discussions on program continuity and
                                                                     budget, in Congress and at Cabinet
                                                                     meetings.

Indicator(s)                            Rating
Second round IE data set published and 9-Very Effective
IE report completed by DSWD

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   The World Bank


Custom Outcome(s)             Rating             Explanation
CCT operations strengthened   9-Very Effective   The pillar also supported DSWD on the
                                                 conduct of several assessments and
                                                 consequently enhancements in selected
                                                 processes of Pantawid Pamilya
                                                 particularly the payment and grievance
                                                 redress system (GRS). The entire
                                                 business process and management
                                                 information system of GRS was
                                                 assessed to identify, quantify and
                                                 analyze the strengths and weaknesses
                                                 of the system since its inception in 2008.
                                                 Results of the assessment served as
                                                 guide in streamlining the Pantawid
                                                 Pamilya operations and processes and
                                                 instituting policies and accountabilities
                                                 to address grievances on program
                                                 implementation. Likewise, the pillar
                                                 assisted DSWD in several capacity
                                                 building activities conducted to enhance
                                                 the knowledge and skills of field staff in
                                                 managing requests and complaints
                                                 about the program. Several workshops
                                                 were done to gather inputs from field
                                                 staff, the main implementer or frontline
                                                 workers who provide crucial information
                                                 to the beneficiaries and public at large
                                                 about the program. All activities were
                                                 executed timely and in close
                                                 collaboration with DSWD. Most of the
                                                 recommendations in the GRS
                                                 Assessment were already in place which
                                                 include redefined grievance typologies,
                                                 enhanced GRS flowchart (with clear
                                                 accountability, feasible timeline and
                                                 resolution indicators), simplified and
                                                 localized grievance uptake form and
                                                 decentralized strategy of grievance
                                                 handing to provide immediate advice to
                                                 beneficiaries on queries regarding
                                                 updates, compliance and payment
                                                 concerns. The PAAA provided financial
                                                 and technical capacity to disseminate
                                                 the results of the assessment and to
                                                 ensure continuous, efficient and
                                                 effective implementation of GRS
                                                 operations. The PAAA implementation
                                                 greatly provided support in the
                                                 operational and strategic operations of
                                                 the program.

                                                 Findings from the assessment of the
                                                 CCT payment system resulted in
                                                 operational changes in the payment
                                                 procedures of the CCT program not only
                                                 to improve speed of delivering cash


                                                                               Page 7 of 19
    The World Bank


                                                                  grants to beneficiaries but also to
                                                                  facilitate faster liquidation. This task with
                                                                  the delivery of a Technical Note on the
                                                                  findings and detailed operational
                                                                  recommendations to strengthen the
                                                                  CCT Payment System, Under the
                                                                  guidance of DSWD➢❨ s appointed focal,
                                                                  in the person of the Undersecretary for
                                                                  Finance, several consultations were with
                                                                  partner agencies Land Bank of the
                                                                  Philippines (LBP) and the Commissions
                                                                  on Audit (COA), as well as a series of
                                                                  consultations and presentations with
                                                                  relevant units in DSWD at the central
                                                                  and field offices.

Indicator(s)                         Rating
Improved payment and grievance and   7-Moderately Effective
redress systems

Custom Outcome(s)                    Rating                       Explanation
NHTSPR updated                       10-Exceptionally Effective   The WB TA has been instrumental to
                                                                  the success of updating the Listahanan
                                                                  database, the benefits of which are far
                                                                  reaching beyond Philippines. The
                                                                  update of Listahanan will help continue
                                                                  increasing both the efficiency and
                                                                  effectiveness of public spending to
                                                                  target programs to the poor and
                                                                  vulnerable in the Philippines. The
                                                                  significance of this achievement extends
                                                                  far beyond the country. Grounded in
                                                                  empirical studies, the experience of
                                                                  Listahanan is as a leading ➢❨ good
                                                                  practice example➢❨ for a growing
                                                                  number of countries that aspire to
                                                                  introduce such registries. The resources
                                                                  and technical assistance from the WB,
                                                                  coupled with ample time for preparation,
                                                                  allowed DSWD to adopt several
                                                                  innovations for 2015 Listahanan. In
                                                                  2012, soon after the first round of
                                                                  Listahanan was released, DSWD
                                                                  immediately kick-started the preparatory
                                                                  phase for the second round of targeting
                                                                  in 2015. Experience from the first round
                                                                  of a massive and nationwide household
                                                                  targeting highlighted several operational
                                                                  aspects that required special attention
                                                                  for the succeeding rounds of targeting.
                                                                  These include improving the design and
                                                                  performance of the PMT models,
                                                                  reducing the period for data collection,
                                                                  using the latest available technology (as
                                                                  tablets and mobile applications),
                                                                  improving the management information


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
    The World Bank


                                                                                                    system (MIS), strengthening training of
                                                                                                    enumerators and other field staff, and
                                                                                                    adopting effective strategic
                                                                                                    communication practices, which all
                                                                                                    contribute to increasing the accuracy of
                                                                                                    Listahanan in identifying the poor.

Indicator(s)                                       Rating
Second round household wellfare                    10-Exceptionally Effective
assessment completed

Custom Outcome(s)                                  Rating                                           Explanation
Knowledge and understanding of SP                  8-Effective                                      The Labor Market and Social Securitiy
issues and policies deepend                                                                         Reviews contributed to the body of
                                                                                                    knowledge on labor and insurance/
                                                                                                    pensions policies in the Philippines.
                                                                                                    While studies on employment and labor
                                                                                                    policies in the Philippines abound,
                                                                                                    including the World Bank, ➢❨ Philippine
                                                                                                    Development Report Creating More and
                                                                                                    Better Jobs,➢❨ released in September
                                                                                                    2013, most of these reports focused on
                                                                                                    the role of macroeconomic policies and
                                                                                                    labor regulations on jobs and
                                                                                                    employment. The labor report
                                                                                                    contributed to the dearth of studies that
                                                                                                    links employment and labor policies to
                                                                                                    poverty and social protection policies. In
                                                                                                    addition, there is also insufficient
                                                                                                    information and assessment about the
                                                                                                    country➢❨ s insurance and pensions
                                                                                                    systems and its sustainability. The note
                                                                                                    on social insurance and pensions, in
                                                                                                    particular, contributed to understanding
                                                                                                    (i) how to increase the de facto
                                                                                                    coverage of social security (de jure, all
                                                                                                    employed persons in the Philippines are
                                                                                                    mandated to contribute to SSS), and (ii)
                                                                                                    how to ensure long term sustainability of
                                                                                                    the SSS.

Indicator(s)                                       Rating
Public dscourse and policy dialogue                8-Effective
broadens to include social security and
labor market

Justification of Overall Outcome Rating (combining relevance, achievement of PDOs and efficiency)
Overall Outcome Rating is Satisfactory, given high relevance, very effective achievement of PDO and efficiency.
Other Unintended Outcomes and Impacts (positive or negative)
Beyond DSWD, this task also contributed to broadening technical expertise of the pool of local researchers in undertaking
impact evaluations. While some expertise on impact evaluations exist in-country, the use of RDD methodology has not been
widely used by local academics and researchers until this second round of IE for the CCT program. An international expert
on impact evaluations from the Bank➢❨ s Development Economics Group (DECPI) and another international expert from
academia provided guidance and technical support to the local research group hired by DSWD to prepare the second IE
report. The technical guidance from the IE experts served three main purposes: (i) to assure sound technical procedures in
the conduct of the second IE analysis based on international best practice experiences; (ii) to capacitate further the DSWD
technical staff and the local research team, which was particularly important given that same methodologies will be used for
                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
     The World Bank


the third round IE; and (iii) to brainstorm about possible design and research questions for the third round IE. Workshops
were held with the local research group, which consisted of a 1 Senior Economist and 4 Economists and Data Analysts, to
discuss methodological details of undertaking RDD analysis and peer review results. It is hoped that the third round of IE for
the CCT will further intensify participation and involvement of local researchers and academics in all aspects of the study.
Summary of Findings of Client Feedback and/or Stakeholder Workshops (Please describe in summary form feedback from clients, partners, key audiences,
etc. This section should provide evidence of impact, e.g., if the objective was to inform government policy, a ministerial level discussion or workshop would
provide evidence that the policy was being informed by the Banks work since it was being debated and discussed.)
The SPL core course has been a one-of-a-kind event, first time done in a single country. Beyond DSWD, several agencies
participated, such as Department of Finance, NEDA, Department of Labor, Social Security System, and TESDA. Using the
conceptual framework presented in the course, participants teamed up to apply their learning and identify key issues in the
areas of SP system, social safety nets, social security and labor markets in the Philippines and proposed strategic actions
for short and long term implementation. The participants pointed out that these inputs will be used and further elaborated as
the Philippines moves forward to update the Social Protection Operational Framework and prepare the SP strategy, as well
as the new Philippine Development Plan.

Bank Performance
Areas to be rated                                                              Rating
Overall Bank Performance                                                       9-Very Effective
Strategic Relevance & Ownership                                                10-Exceptionally Effective
Technical Quality                                                              9-Very Effective
Client Engagement/Dissemination                                                10-Exceptionally Effective
Timeliness                                                                     10-Exceptionally Effective
Comments



Budget and Funding (amount in USD)
Resources                      Bank Budget                     Bank-executed Trust Fund        Other                           Total
Total estimated at
Concept (including             430,000.00                      2,000,000.00                    0.00                            2,430,000.00
subtasks)
Total Actual (including
                               341,005.62                      1,638,947.79                    0.00                            1,979,953.41
subtasks)

Duration of Program
Concept approval to today's date (in days)         1013
Milestone                                                                                Original                           Actual

AIS Sign-Off                                                                             11-Nov-2013                        07-Nov-2013
Program Concept Review                                                                   18-Feb-2014                        20-Feb-2014
Management Approval of Program Concept                                                   20-Feb-2014                        06-Mar-2014
Final Delivery/Prog. Completion Summary                                                  09-Jun-2016                        13-Dec-2016
Activities Assessment

Strategic Pillars
Strategic Pillar                                                               Description (optional)




                                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 19
     The World Bank


Strategic Pillar                                           Description (optional)
Technical Assistance on the Design and Implementation of   This pillar will continue to provide knowledge and technical
the CCT                                                    assistance to help DSWD adjust the design and continuously
                                                           improve implementation arrangements for the CCT program.
                                                           The CCT program is currently being expanded to reach all
                                                           eligible poor children 0-18 years of age. The CCT program
                                                           implementation is underpinned by a complex administrative
                                                           architecture from identification of beneficiary households, to
                                                           compliance verification to grievance and redress to delivery
                                                           of payments to beneficiary households. It is a huge
                                                           mechanism, operating at various levels of government. It is
                                                           constantly under the public and media magnifying glass and
                                                           under extreme pressure to perform flawlessly. The program is
                                                           thus one of the flagship participants in the Open Government
                                                           initiative, with innovative open data platform and web based
                                                           front and back office functions to enable easy and
                                                           transparent access to information on the CCT program to all
                                                           citizens.
Technical Assistance on Targeting                          After the successful implementation of the country’s first
                                                           National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction
                                                           (NHTSPR) - Listahanan in 2009-2011, the National
                                                           Household Targeting Office (NHTO) of DSWD is getting
                                                           ready to update the system in the 2014-2015 household re-
                                                           assessment. The current NHTSPR has become the official
                                                           poverty targeting database for all nationally supported
                                                           programs, including the Philippine’s core social assistance
                                                           programs, the Pantawid Pamilya and Universal Health Care.
                                                           Other government agencies – both at national and local
                                                           levels – are already anticipating the results of the updated
                                                           NHTSPR for the expansion of other services, such as water
                                                           and sanitation in rural areas. Based on lessons learned from
                                                           the first NHTSPR implementation, the government has
                                                           committed to make the necessary improvements in this next
                                                           round of implementation, including enhancing the tool it used
                                                           to identify poor households and improving survey operations
                                                           with a view to covering more households (especially in rural
                                                           areas) in a cost effective manner. There is also need to
                                                           intensify efforts to build shared understanding and stronger
                                                           support around the NHTSPR, more generally among various
                                                           stakeholders but also within government. There is a healthy
                                                           interest and debate on how best to update the targeting
                                                           database. It will be important to ground the debate on
                                                           international best practice and the specifics of the Philippines
                                                           context to come up with a high quality, sustainable, database
                                                           which has credibility and integrity with regard to accuracy.

                                                           This pillar will thus provide support to DSWD in their
                                                           continuous improvement of the NHTSPR, specifically in
                                                           refining the tools and field operations for the 2014-2015 re-
                                                           assessment, and in generating better understanding and
                                                           stronger support for it. This entails just-in-time policy advice,
                                                           close oversight of operations and trouble-shooting and
                                                           facilitating active dialog with various stakeholders and
                                                           potential users of the targeting database. Support to these
                                                           activities is critically important in maintaining the integrity of
                                                           the program and ensuring its sustainability.

                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 19
   The World Bank


Leveraging the CCT program to Increase Opportunities,   As the CCT program matures, the Government is seeking to
Inclusiveness, and Protection                           diversify and customize its social protection programs to
                                                        better respond to different risks faced by Filipino households
                                                        and the nature of poverty (e.g. chronic vs. transient poverty).
                                                        To be able to do that a better understanding vulnerability and
                                                        resiliency is needed. The Government is also keen to take
                                                        advantage of the CCT program’s infrastructure and outreach
                                                        to strengthen the Government’s Social Protection agenda.
                                                        The intent is to extend the options to increase opportunities
                                                        for beneficiaries to link to other social programs, as well as
                                                        modifying the CCT program design to reach those in special
                                                        circumstances or those with special needs. The Technical
                                                        Assistance program will also focus on further linking the CCT
                                                        program more comprehensively as a platform for reducing
                                                        poverty and vulnerability through expanding the scope of the
                                                        CCT program as well as strengthening synergies with other
                                                        programs. This is very much in line with the “convergence”
                                                        agenda as articulated in the “Social Protection Operational
                                                        Framework and Strategy of the Philippines”. The
                                                        Government also wants to consider how beneficiaries may
                                                        “graduate” from the CCT program into other appropriate
                                                        programs. As noted in the Operational Framework, it will be
                                                        important to link the “protection” agenda of the CCT with
                                                        “promotion” of opportunities for beneficiaries. As such, this
                                                        pillar will support Government in the broader agenda of the
                                                        SP Operational Framework and the “second generation”
                                                        issues following the successful implementation of the CCT
                                                        program. This is a conversation that is lively in parts of the
                                                        world with mature social assistance programs, and it will be
                                                        very useful to expose policy-makers to some of the
                                                        international discussion and debate on these issues. At this
                                                        stage, this component would be focused on assessing
                                                        options that can be operationalized in a subsequent phase,
                                                        presenting design considerations.




                                                                                                           Page 12 of 19
    The World Bank


The CCT Impact Evaluation                                           Building upon the successful conduct of the first round of the
                                                                    Impact Evaluation (IE) supported under the first phase SP
                                                                    PAAA, this pillar will continue to support DSWD in the design,
                                                                    supervision, and analysis of the impact evaluation of the
                                                                    Conditional Cash Transfer Program and to document its
                                                                    impact on key outcomes related to health and education.
                                                                    First, this activity will assist DSWD with the cleaning of the
                                                                    raw data of the first round of IE, which will be publically
                                                                    available for research and analysis. Second, a top-notch
                                                                    technical assistance will be provided to teach and guide
                                                                    relevant DSWD staff and local researches to analyze this
                                                                    data set. Third, this activity will provide technical support to
                                                                    DSWD and undertake capacity building for the second round
                                                                    IE design, implementation and data analysis.

                                                                    There is strong demand from DSWD for more rigorous
                                                                    Impact Evaluations and more TA on transfer of knowledge on
                                                                    how to conduct and analyze rigorous IEs. DSWD attributes
                                                                    the fact that the budget hearing processes in 2012 was
                                                                    smoother and significantly less critical of Pantawid Pamilya
                                                                    due to the successful dissemination of the Initial Findings
                                                                    from the CCT Impact Evaluation. The DSWD is not only
                                                                    interested in good news from the study to rally support, but
                                                                    they are also willing to learn about challenges that the impact
                                                                    evaluation identifies, to improve the program design and
                                                                    efficiency and effectiveness of program implementation. In
                                                                    addition to providing technical assistance and guidance, this
                                                                    activity will transfer knowledge and build capacity in DSWD
                                                                    and in a team of local researchers.
Improving the Knowledge Base and Informing Policy                   The WBG engagement in social protection in the Philippines
Dialogue                                                            has understandably been focused on assisting the
                                                                    government with extremely complex and enormously vast
                                                                    task of designing and implementing the conditional cash
                                                                    transfer program. To expand the policy dialogue and assist
                                                                    the government beyond the CCT program with the objective
                                                                    of weaving different programs into a coherent, harmonized,
                                                                    efficient and effective system, the World Bank needs to
                                                                    expand its knowledge base in areas of Social Insurance and
                                                                    Labor Market Policies and Programs.

Summary of Activities
Pillar: Technical Assistance on the Design and Implementation of the CCT
             Project Name and Product                                                                Total Expenses
Project ID                              RAS        Project Status       Team Leader Date Completed                    Comments
             Line                                                                                    to Date
P150516      CCT expansion to           No         Complete             Yuko         18-Jun-2015               0.00
             secondary education                                        Okamura
             (TA)
P150519      CCT business               No         Complete             Pablo Ariel 18-Nov-2016        732,749.05
             processess, GRS and                                        Acosta
             MIS(TA)

Pillar: Technical Assistance on Targeting
             Project Name and Product                                                                Total Expenses
Project ID                              RAS        Project Status       Team Leader Date Completed                    Comments
             Line                                                                                    to Date
P150527      Updating and improving No             Complete             Pablo Ariel 03-Jun-2016        253,291.55
             the NHTSPR(TA)                                             Acosta
                                                                                                                         Page 13 of 19
    The World Bank



Pillar: Leveraging the CCT program to Increase Opportunities, Inclusiveness, and Protection
               Project Name and Product                                                                           Total Expenses
Project ID                                      RAS              Project Status      Team Leader Date Completed                    Comments
               Line                                                                                               to Date
P150530        SP and disaster                  No               Complete            Aleksandr   16-Oct-2015                0.00
               preperadness(TA)                                                      a Posarac

Pillar: The CCT Impact Evaluation
               Project Name and Product                                                                           Total Expenses
Project ID                                      RAS              Project Status      Team Leader Date Completed                    Comments
               Line                                                                                               to Date
P150532        CCT Impact Evaluation            No               Complete            Aleksandr   21-Nov-2016        653,025.21
               (TA)                                                                  a Posarac

Pillar: Improving the Knowledge Base and Informing Policy Dialogue
               Project Name and Product                                                                           Total Expenses
Project ID                                      RAS              Project Status      Team Leader Date Completed                    Comments
               Line                                                                                               to Date
P150534        Social insurance issues No                        Complete            Aleksandr   24-Jun-2016                0.00
               note(TA)                                                              a Posarac
P150535        Labor market review              No               Complete            Jan J.    27-Apr-2016             24,133.93
               (TA)                                                                  Rutkowski


Pillar: Technical Assistance on the Design and Implementation of the CCT
 CCT expansion to secondary education
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                      Country
                                           Services
 CCT expansion to secondary                                                Technical Assistance (Non-        Philippines
 education                                                                 lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                      Prior Management Endorsement
 Yuko Okamura                                                              No                                No
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                      Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150516                         30-Apr-2014                       18-Jun-2015
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective
 The CCT program was expanded in 2014 from covering children 0-14 years of age to children up to 18, and adjustments
 in the CCT delivery mechanisms were needed to accommodate the change. This sub-task aimed to provide hands-on,
 just-in-time technical support to DSWD during the preparation, launch and roll out of the CCT expansion to cover children
 in secondary education. A technical note was intended to support the eventual roll-out of the CCT program to poor
 children in secondary education who are 15-18 years of age.

 CCT business processess, GRS and MIS
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                      Country
                                           Services
 CCT business processess,                                                  Technical Assistance (Non-        Philippines
 GRS and MIS                                                               lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                      Prior Management Endorsement
 Pablo Ariel Acosta                                                        No                                No
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                      Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150519                         30-Apr-2014                       18-Nov-2016
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective
 This subtask assessed existing system requirements and the necessary enhancements to significantly improve the
 efficiency of the CCT program implementation. Specifically, it assessed the following: (i) business process related to the

                                                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
    The World Bank

 CCT payment, and Grievance Redress System (GRS); and (ii) the automated integration of the various components of
 the CCT MIS architecture. This subtask also supported training of CCT field implementers (Municipal Links and
 Grievance Officers) to help them perform more effectively and help resolve issues expeditiously. Assistance in developing
 and rolling out a campaign was also extended to increase awareness of the general public on the GRS process.


Pillar: Technical Assistance on Targeting
 Updating and improving the NHTSPR
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                 Country
                                           Services
 Updating and improving the                                                Technical Assistance (Non-   Philippines
 NHTSPR                                                                    lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                 Prior Management Endorsement
 Pablo Ariel Acosta                                                        No                           No
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                 Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150527                         30-Apr-2014                  03-Jun-2016
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective
 This sub-task provided technical assistance in two areas.
 a) Updating and Improving Listahanan. This component continued the advice and technical assistance in enhancing the
 Proxy Means Test (PMT) models that are used by Listahanan to identify poor households, and designing new instruments
 that support the enhanced PMT models accordingly. This component also supported several activities that are critical for
 the effective implementation of the Listahanan ground operations for its update. This included assistance in developing
 and pretesting questionnaires, updating the field manuals and training materials. On the systems side, to ensure accurate
 data collection, efficient data processing, and secure management of huge personal information, the Bank supported a
 systems review of the entire MIS structure of Listahanan and the development of a tablet application for faster and more
 efficient data collection and processing. Lastly, this component sought to assess the targeting accuracy of the new and
 enhanced PMT models. This component funded the engagement of local and international consultants, travels to
 supervise field activities, and meetings/workshops.
 b) Expanding Utilization of the Listahanan Database. Continued technical assistance was also provided to DSWD in
 developing communication material and support stakeholder dialogues to build broader and stronger support for the
 updated Listahanan.


Pillar: Leveraging the CCT program to Increase Opportunities, Inclusiveness, and Protection
 SP and disaster preperadness
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                 Country
                                           Services
 SP and disaster preperadness                                              Technical Assistance (Non-   Philippines
                                                                           lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                 Prior Management Endorsement
 Aleksandra Posarac                                                        No                           No
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                 Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150530                         30-Apr-2014                  16-Oct-2015
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective
 Being one of the countries that are most vulnerable to natural disasters, the Philippines has unfortunately accumulated
 significant knowledge and experience on how to respond to disasters. It has also taken significant steps to ready various
 sectors, including DSWD and social protection for disaster response. DSWD, which is the primary agency in charge of
 social protection, is also the agency tasked with first response at times of disaster. DSWD is continuously looking at
 options to keep improving its disaster response readiness and to make its programs resilient to disaster.
 This pillar examined lessons from the recent disaster response and look at the options for improvements based on
 lessons learned, as well experience from other countries. Outputs included workshops with global experts, and other
 forms of knowledge transfer and exchange. It was envisioned that these outputs will inform improvements in the social
 protection disaster response readiness.

                                                                                                                               Page 15 of 19
    The World Bank

Pillar: The CCT Impact Evaluation
 CCT Impact Evaluation
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                 Country
                                           Services
 CCT Impact Evaluation                                                     Technical Assistance (Non-   Philippines
                                                                           lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                 Prior Management Endorsement
 Aleksandra Posarac                                                        No                           No
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                 Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150532                         02-Apr-2014                  21-Nov-2016
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective
 Building upon the successful conduct of the first round of the Impact Evaluation (IE) in 2012 supported under the first
 phase SP PAAA, this pillar continued the technical support to DSWD in the design, supervision, and analysis of the
 second IE of the Conditional Cash Transfer Program and to document its impact on key outcomes related to health and
 education. This emanated from the strong demand from DSWD for continued rigorous impact evaluation of the biggest
 program of the Department to justify its continuation, but also the demand for continued knowledge transfer on how to
 conduct and analyze rigorous IEs.
 The objectives of this task were to: (i) undertake capacity building in DSWD and in a team of local researchers for the
 second round IE design, implementation and data analysis; and (ii) provide high-level technical assistance to teach and
 guide relevant DSWD staff and local researches to analyze this data set, with the assistance of global experts and local
 researchers.


Pillar: Improving the Knowledge Base and Informing Policy Dialogue
 Social insurance issues note
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                 Country
                                           Services
 Social insurance issues note                                              Technical Assistance (Non-   Philippines
                                                                           lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                 Prior Management Endorsement
 Aleksandra Posarac                                                        No                           Yes
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                 Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150534                         30-Apr-2014                  24-Jun-2016
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective
 The note intended to map social insurance programs in the Philippines, including social insurance arrangements for old
 age, disability, work injury, survivorship and unemployment. It looked at programs design and performance parameters,
 including eligibility criteria, adequacy of benefits, coverage, dependency ratios, replacement ratios, contribution rates and
 financing and public spending. It compared the Philippines to other countries and identified issues that need attention. It is
 expected that the note produced will contribute to the existing knowledge base on social insurance in the Philippines and
 globally and inform policy dialogue in-country.

 Labor market review
 Title                                     Reimbursable Advisory           Product Line                 Country
                                           Services
 Labor market review                                                       Technical Assistance (Non-   Philippines
                                                                           lending)
 Team Leader                                                               Separate CN?                 Prior Management Endorsement
 Jan J. Rutkowski                                                          No                           Yes
 Responsible Cost Center                   Project ID                      AIS Sign Off                 Final Delivery/CS
 GSP02 (9341)                              P150535                         30-Apr-2014                  27-Apr-2016
 Describe the contribution of this activity to the overall development objective

                                                                                                                               Page 16 of 19
     The World Bank

  The review aims to better understand the role of social protection programs in facilitating labor market participation of
  poor and vulnerable population. It builds on existing WBG reports such as the Jobs Report and the Skills Report and will
  provide additional information on labor market situation and developments based on the latest (2012) FIES and Labor
  Force Survey. The review was intended to map labor legislation, workers protection provisions and arrangements and
  how they apply given significant labor force and employment informality in the Philippines. It also mapped existing labor
  market programs and assess their design, scope and scale viz-a-vis the needs and other countries. The main output was
  a labor market study that contributed to the knowledge base on labor market issues and improve and policy dialogue on
  related issues.


Role of Clients/Partners

Client Ownership
Did the client ask for this initiative?
Yes
Did the client agree to the concept/scope/design?
Yes
Did the client participate in carrying out the program?
Yes
Did the client help finance the program?
No
Comments



Contact Information
Please provide a name for the activity that is recognizable by the client. This is the name that will appear in the survey.



Partners/Other Programs
Were other partners doing similar programs? If yes, did you ensure this person was not duplicative and/or had value-added? Explain
Asian Development Bank and Australian DFAT are also supporting DSWD. To ensure that activities in this PAAA do not
overlap, a coordination meeting chaired by DSWD to review all activities and ensure that there is no duplication was
organized.
Were there one or more partners who either funding this activity or contributed expertise?
Yes
Australian DFAT through TF is financing Advisory Activities in this PAAA (Pillars 1-4).
Partners
Organization Name                         Type            Contact                     Title                    Office Phone      Email



Is this a joint work with IFC?   No

Practice Area Mapping
Practice Area (Lead)
Social Protection & Labor
Contributing Practice Areas
Finance & Markets, Governance

Gender Tag
Does the activity support (select all that apply)
Analysis and/or consultation on gender related issues
Yes
                                                                                                                                         Page 17 of 19
    The World Bank


Specific actions to address the distinct needs of women and girls, or men and boys, or positive impacts on gender gaps
Yes
Mechanisms to monitor gender impact to facilitate gender-disaggregated analysis
Yes

Major Findings, Lessons Learned/Next Steps
Major Findings and Lessons Learned
As with the first SPL PAAA (P118853), maximum results of the WB➢❨ s technical assistance are achieved when there is: (i)
strong ownership and leadership from the Government; (ii) the TA is designed to ➢❨ fit the purpose➢❨ with concrete
activities; and (iii) TA complements a World Bank lending operation. This TA has been efficiently shaped reflecting the
client➢❨ s priorities and needs. It has also been closely aligned with the activities of the Bank➢❨ s ➢❨ Social Welfare
Development and Reform Project I and II (SWDRP I, P082144, 2010-2015; SWDRP II, P153744, 2016-2019). Although
some changes and adjustments in timing and activities were necessary, the close working relationship with DSWD, DOLE,
and SSS counterparts allowed the full use of the TA facility to still achieve its intended results. Furthermore, the TA
deliverables have been subject to strict quality control arrangements, with most of deliverables going through technical
reviews, prior to being finally delivered to the client.

The DFAT TF funding has been instrumental to the success of this PAAA. This PAAA would not be able to accomplish what
it has accomplished without DFAT TF funding. The bank budget alone would have never allowed the team to engage across
so many critical tasks and areas, nor to engage a stream of best experts in impact evaluation, targeting and CCT
implementation. This strongly demonstrates the continued importance of grant funded TA in enabling the World Bank to help
governments implement new and complex programs. The close collaboration with DFAT staff on the ground throughout the
whole implementation period has only strengthened the TA activities implemented under this TA.

An aspect that could have been improved is adequate budget and task planning at the point of Program entry. One of the
challenges that was faced during was the creation of 14 child codes that proved hard to administer. Overtime, these was
consolidated into more manageable 7 child tasks. Predictability of funding allocation is also critical in multi-year planning of
activities and delivering results: this PAAA experienced drastic changes in funding allocation from original approved to
reduced allocation in the middle of implementation of activities. More adequate planning at entry is critical to avoid diverting
focus from substantive TA implementation into cumbersome administrative management.

Such a sustained technical assistance engagement can be the key to strengthening capacity within an implementing agency.
The preceding analysis has repeatedly made reference to the many ways in which the SPL PAAA carried out its objectives,
with an eye on building lasting capacity after the fact. Undertaken in this way, with World Bank technical staff working ➢❨ in
the kitchen➢❨ and being responsive to the demands of the client whenever they arose, the TA promoted an even stronger
client ownership of the activities. Consequently, lasting capacity to administer these processes has been built, to the long
term benefit of the implementing agency and the program.
Assess and describe the benefits of utilizing a programmatic approach in meeting the development objective
Programmatic tasks are a powerful tool that can allow the World Bank to be fully engaged throughout the implementation of
an ambitious, long-term SP systems building agenda. The SP PAAA allowed the World Bank to work in full partnership with
DSWD throughout its SP reform process. The SP PAAA meant that every tool in the technical assistance tool kit could be
leveraged under the umbrella of the PAAA, from just-in-time policy advice, to in the field supervision of implementation, to
rigorous analytical pieces and more. Taken together, this comprehensive leveraging of World Bank resources in response to
myriad client technical assistance demands helped to support the national household targeting system, the Pantawid CCT,
and the broader SP system, through a partnership between the World Bank and Government counterparts in a way that
piecemeal TA could not.
Next Steps (Describe expected follow-up)
As next steps, and with a Government administration in place, the CCT and Listahanan need to evolve to adjust to the new
priorities, and the Bank should remain engaged to facilitate that transition. In that sense, the SPL team expects a follow up
TA focused on second generation issues on the CCT and Targeting agenda (financial inclusion, responsiveness to disaster
shocks, dynamic updating, linkages to sustainable livelihood options) as other countries have undertaken. Ideally, team
would explore opportunities for additional TF resources from DFAT or other development partners to leverage Bank
resources. On the labor front, a new TA task focused on skills can help operationalize many of the findings and
recommendations from the labor report. The team will continue exploring options for further engagement on social security

                                                                                                                         Page 18 of 19
   The World Bank


aspects.




                    Page 19 of 19
