Mental Health Among Displaced People and Refugees:
Making the Case for Action at The World Bank Group

Prepared by Patricio V. Marquez, Lead Public Health Specialist and Coordinator of the Global
Mental Health Initiative, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice (HNP GP), The
World Bank Group (WBG).
Contributions provided by Sheila Dutta, Senior Health Specialist, and Jaime Bayona, Senior
Health Specialist, HNP GP, WBG, as well as by Giuseppe Raviola, Director, Mental Health,
Partners in Health (PIH), Inka Weissbecker, Senior Global Mental Health and Psychosocial
Support Advisor, International Medical Corps, Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of
Mental Health and Substance Abuse, World Health Organization (WHO), Mark van
Ommeren, Public Mental Health Adviser, WHO, Eliot Sorel, Senior Scholar in Healthcare
Innovation and Policy Research, George Washington University School of Medicine & School
of Public Health, Pamela Collins, Associate Director for Special Populations, Office for
Research on Disparities & Global Mental Health/Director, Office of Rural Mental Health
Research, US National Institute of Mental Health, and Melanie Walker, Senior Adviser to the
President of the World Bank Group. Aakanksha Pande, Senior Health Economist, and Ana
Holt, Senior Health Specialist, HNP GP, WBG, also contributed as part of policy discussions.
Overall guidance and support provided by Tim Evans, Senior Director, and Enis Baris,
Program Manager, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank Group,
as well as by Colin Bruce, Senior Adviser, Fragility, Conflict and Violence, The World Bank
Group. Edited by Alexander Irwin. Operational support from Akosua Dakwa.
                          Washington, D.C. December 19, 2016


                                        December
                                    December 11, 2016




                                             1
                                         Contents

Executive Summary                                                        4
1. The challenge                                                         5
2. Mental Disorders: An “Invisible” Burden                               5
3. The Economic and Social Impact of Mental Disorders                    7
4. Mental Health of Displaced Populations and Refugees                   8
5. How Should We Address Mental Health Needs in Conflict- and            9
Post-Conflict-Related Situations?
6. Collaborative, Multi-Sectoral Approaches                              10
7. Essential Mental Health Interventions at the Community Level          11
8. Treatment Settings and Integration with Health and Social Systems     15
9. Are Mental Health Interventions Affordable and Cost-Effective?        18
10. Dealing with Malnutrition in Conflict and its Psychological Causes   18
11. Mental Health Care Over the Long Term                                19
12. Key Lessons Learned                                                  24
13. The Role of the World Bank Group                                     24
14. The WBG’s Health Sector Activities on Mental Health                  25
Country-Level Operations                                                 26
Key Partnerships and Knowledge-Sharing                                   28
Endnotes                                                                 30
References                                                               33




                                               2
"It was as if God had decided to put to the test every capacity for surprise and was keeping the
 inhabitants of Macondo in a permanent alteration between excitement and disappointment,
  doubt and revelation, to such an extreme that no one knew for certain where the limits of
                                          reality lay."
                                   Gabriel García Márquez
                               “One Hundred Years of Solitude”
                  1982 Nobel Prize in Literature-winning Colombian author


                             "I decline to accept the end of man"
                                       William Faulkner
                 1949 Nobel Prize in Literature-winning United States author


 “Every day, millions of men, women and children around the world are burdened by mental
illness. Yet mental health too often remains in the shadows, as a result of stigma and a lack of
                             understanding, resources, and services.
 Two decades ago, we faced a similar situation with HIV and AIDS. People affected by AIDS
  faced severe stigma, and there was a widespread failure of policymakers to acknowledge or
address the growing number of people dying in the world – especially in Africa – from the lack
 of access to affordable treatment. It was unjust, it was wrong, and it was unleashing a health
and development catastrophe. So a group of us decided to raise our voices and bring HIV and
                      AIDS out of the shadows, and we demanded action.
   Today, we are here to bring mental health into the spotlight and squarely on the global
                          development agenda where it belongs.”
                         Jim Yong Kim, President, World Bank Group
                                  High-Level Opening Panel
         “Out of the Shadows: Making Mental Health a Global Development Priority”
                      Flagship Event at 2016 IMF/WBG Spring Meetings
                             Washington D.C., April 13-14, 2016




                                               3
                                       Executive Summary

The current global crisis of forced displacement poses multiple humanitarian and development
challenges. Forcibly displaced people’s mental health needs have often been neglected in response
plans. Yet meeting these needs is critical to help displaced persons overcome trauma and rebuild
their lives. Without appropriate mental health care, forcibly displaced people will often be unable
to benefit fully from other forms of support that are provided to them.

In 2010, mental, neurological, and substance use disorders (MNS) were the leading cause of years
lived with disability in the world. These disorders also impose high costs on economies. While
they are prevalent in all settings, mental disorders can be triggered or exacerbated by extreme
adversity, including violence and forced displacement. Common mental health diagnoses among
refugee populations include depression, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and generalized
anxiety disorder. Refugee children and adolescents suffer most, with studies finding PTSD rates
from 50-90 percent in this population.

MNS disorders can be successfully treated. Evidence-based treatments for depression and anxiety
disorders include time-limited psychosocial therapies and antidepressant medications. Anti-stigma
campaigns can be powerful tools in confronting barriers to support for people with mental
disorders.

Mental health and psychosocial support services at the community level, including for displaced
people and refugees, should not be stand-alone interventions. They work best as part of an
integrated platform of social, educational, and health services. Evidence shows that non-specialist
workers in primary-care and community settings can deliver mental health services successfully.
MNS services are cost-effective.

Projects funded by the World Bank Group (WBG) and other organizations utilize a bottom-up,
multidisciplinary approach to re-integrate displaced populations after conflicts and natural
disasters. As part of this approach, development efforts in post-conflict and post-disaster societies
should include mental health services integrated into primary health care structures. Priority mental
health interventions in these contexts: (a) have a strong evidence base; (b) aim to improve people’s
daily functioning; and (c) help protect the most vulnerable from further trauma. Examples exist of
how disaster and emergency contexts have been used to make sustainable improvements in mental
health systems in low- and middle-income countries. Investing in mental health as part of early
recovery can strengthen the long-term availability of services for survivors—and improve
development outcomes.

A shared commitment is needed from national and international actors to champion mental health
parity in the provision of health and social services, including in humanitarian emergencies. High
priority should go to identifying alternative sources of financing for mental health parity in health
systems. For example, raising tobacco taxes can expand a country’s resources to fund essential
services for the population and strengthen human capital, including among displaced people. By
investing in care for MNS disorders, we can help ensure that relief and development programs
yield the greatest benefits for refugees and host communities over the short-and medium-terms.



                                                 4
 Mental Health Among Displaced People and Refugees:
  Making the Case for Action at the World Bank Group

1. The Challenge
The current crisis of forced displacement is posing serious humanitarian and development
challenges across the world. The World Bank Group and the international community at large
cannot ignore these challenges, given their scale and complexity. As documented in a recent World
Bank report,1 about 65 million people – one percent of the world’s population – live in forced
displacement and extreme poverty. In contrast to economic migrants, who move in search of better
opportunities, and to persons affected by natural disasters, the forcibly displaced are fleeing
conflict and violence. Forcibly displaced people include refugees and asylum-seekers (currently
about 24 million people) and internally displaced persons (about 41 million). These are the highest
numbers of forcibly displaced people since World War II.
Host countries often have limited resources even before taking in refugees. The refugee influx can
quickly overwhelm existing capacities, including health, housing, educational, and social welfare
systems and services. Inflows of displaced people can cause social and economic challenges and
disruptions to host communities. However, refugees can also bring skills, expertise, and labor that
can benefit communities in the longer term.
The international community can act to reduce vulnerabilities among the forcibly displaced during
a crisis and then help them rebuild their lives. Such action can also mitigate the impact of forced
displacement on host communities and governments. This requires action to support economic
activity, job creation, and social cohesion, as well as to strengthen and expand essential services.
2. Mental Disorders: An “Invisible” Burden
Mental, neurological, and substance use disorders (MNS) account for a significant proportion of
the global disease burden. Yet MNS illnesses often remain “invisible.”2 3 MNS disorders include
a heterogeneous range of conditions that owe their origin to genetic, biological, psychological, and
social factors. They can have their onset across the life course. MNS disorders often run a chronic
course, are highly disabling, and are associated with significant premature mortality.4 These forms
of illness also hamper development in countries around the world.5 6 MNS disorders include
anxiety disorders, autism, dementia, depression, epilepsy, illicit drug use and alcohol use disorders,
intellectual disability, migraine, and psychotic conditions (schizophrenia and bipolar disorders),
among others.

Within the MNS spectrum, mental disorders are syndromes characterized by clinically significant
disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotion, regulation, or behavior that reflects a
dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental
functioning.7 As such, these disorders affect mood, thinking, and behavior. They contribute to
behavioral or mental patterns that may cause suffering or a poor ability to function in life. Such
features may be persistent, relapsing and remitting, or occur as a single episode.


                                                  5
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that mental health disorders account for
approximately 10 percent of the global burden of disease.8 Some researchers argue that the global
burden of mental illness tends to be underestimated because of five main causes: overlap between
psychiatric and neurological disorders; the grouping of suicide and self-harm as a separate
category; conflation of all chronic pain syndromes with musculoskeletal disorders; exclusion of
personality disorders from disease-burden calculations; and inadequate consideration of the
contribution of severe mental illness to mortality from associated causes.9

According to a recent report,10 absolute disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) caused by MNS
disorders increased by 41 percent increase between 1990 and 2010: from 182 million to 258
million DALYs. The proportion of the global disease burden caused by these disorders increased
from 7.3 to 10.4 percent. With the exception of substance use disorders, which increased because
of changes in prevalence over time, this increase was largely caused by population growth and
aging. The report also indicates that, in 2010, MNS disorders were the leading cause of years lived
with disability (YLDs) in the world.




              Box 1: Social Determinants of Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders

 A range of social determinants influences the risk and outcome of MNS disorders. In particular, the following
 factors have been shown to be associated with several MNS disorders:

 1. Demographic factors, such as age, gender, and ethnicity
 2. Socioeconomic status: low income, unemployment, income inequality, low education, and low social
 support
 3. Neighborhood factors: inadequate housing, overcrowding, neighborhood violence
 4. Environmental events: natural disasters, war, conflict, climate change, and migration.
 5. Social change associated with changes in income, urbanization, and environmental degradation

 The causal mechanisms of the social determinants of MNS disorders indicate a cyclical pattern. On the one hand,
 socioeconomic adversities increase the risk for MNS disorders (the social causation pathway); on the other hand,
 people living with MNS disorders drift into poverty during the course of their life through increased health care
 expenditures, reduced economic productivity associated with the disability of their condition, and stigma and
 discrimination associated with these conditions (the social drift pathway).

 Understanding the vicious cycle of social determinants and MNS disorders provides opportunities for interventions
 that target social causation and social drift. In relation to social causation, the evidence for the mental health
 benefits of poverty-alleviation interventions is mixed but growing. In relation to social drift, the evidence for the
 individual and household economic benefits of the prevention and treatment of MNS disorders is compelling, and
 supports the economic argument for scaling up these interventions (Lund and others 2011).

 Source: Adapted from Patel, Vikram, Dan Chisholm, Tarun Dua, Ramanan Laxminarayan, and Maria Elena
 Medina-Mora. 2016. Disease Control Priorities, Third Edition: Volume 4. Mental, Neurological, and Substance
 Use Disorders. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                          6
In 2010, DALYs for MNS disorders were highest during early to mid-adulthood, explaining 18.6
percent of total DALYs for individuals aged 15 to 49 years, compared with 10.4 percent for all
ages combined. Within the 15-49 age group, mental and substance use disorders were the leading
contributor to the total burden caused by MNS disorders. For neurological disorders, DALYs were
highest in the elderly. Overall, males accounted for 48.1 percent and females for 51.9 percent of
DALYs for MNS disorders. The relative proportion of DALYs for MNS disorders to overall
disease burden was estimated to be 1.6 times higher in high-income countries (HICs) (15.5 percent
of total DALYs) than in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) (9.4 percent of total DALYs),
largely because of the relatively higher burden of other health conditions, such as infectious and
perinatal diseases, in LMICs. However, because of the larger population of LMICs, the report
noted that absolute DALYs for MNS disorders are higher in LMICs compared with HICs.

The 2015 Global Burden of Disease (GBD) studies also confirm the large contribution of mental
and substance use disorders to global disability. Depressive disorders and anxiety disorders are
among the ten leading causes of global years lived with disability (YLDs) for both sexes. (These
two types of conditions ranked fourth and eighth, respectively, as sources of YLDs.11) Depressive
disorders and anxiety disorders are also among the 30 leading causes of global disability-adjusted
life years (DALYs) for both sexes (ranking 15th and 28th).12 13 Suicide, which is frequently caused
by mental disorders, also exacts an enormous toll on society. In India, for example, it has overtaken
complications from pregnancy and childbirth as the leading cause of death among women aged 15
to 49.14

There is also frequent comorbidity and a notable link between mental disorders and other costly,
chronic medical conditions. Relevant chronic conditions include cancer, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, HIV, and obesity, as well as a host of risky behaviors.15 Those with mental disorders are
more likely to engage in unhealthy behaviors such as smoking, alcohol use, poor nutritional
choices, and lack of physical activity. Mental disorders greatly increase the risk of a person’s
developing another chronic disease, 16 and are associated with reduced health care-seeking and
poorer compliance with medical regimens. At the same time, those suffering from chronic diseases
are also more likely to develop mental health problems.
The WHO “Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2020”17 emphasizes that homelessness and
inappropriate incarceration are far more common for people with mental disorders than for the
general population, and this tends to exacerbate their marginalization and vulnerability. It is clear
that mental disorders are closely linked with physical health and affect both a significant portion
of the overall population and disproportionate numbers of the vulnerable and underserved.
3. The Economic and Social Impact of Mental Disorders
Not only do mental disorders represent a significant disease burden, they are also very costly
to country economies. The global cost of mental disorders was estimated at approximately $2.5
trillion in 2010; by 2030, that figure is projected to rise by 240 percent, to $6 trillion.18 In 2010,
54 percent of that burden was borne by low- and middle-income countries; by 2030, the proportion
is projected to reach 58 percent. Worsened by low levels of investment and effective treatment
coverage, mental disorders have serious economic consequences and may limit the impact or
effectiveness of development assistance.


                                                  7
Studies done in high-income countries have found that the costs associated with mental disorders
total between 2.3 and 4.4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP).19 Roughly two-thirds of those
costs are indirect, associated with the loss of productivity and income due to disability or death.
Spending on mental health can be among the highest areas of health expenditure, representing
between 5 and 18 percent of total health expenditures for a selection of countries able to break
down total spending (Germany, Hungary, Korea, the Netherlands, and Slovenia). While these
figures suggest high spending on mental health, the investments are still likely insufficient, given
the high prevalence of mental health conditions and the social and economic burden they inflict.
The proportion of total public health expenditure allocated to mental health care is often very
small. For example, mental disorders are responsible for 23 percent of England’s total burden of
disease, but receive 13 percent of National Health Service expenditures.
The indirect costs of mental health are particularly high. These include the economic consequences
attributable to disease but which are not captured in the cost of medical services directly related to
the disease. Calculations of indirect costs incorporate, for example, the value of lost production
due to unemployment, absences from work, and “presentism” (the loss in productivity that occurs
when employees come to work, but are unwell and consequently function at less than full
capacity). These calculations also include the losses associated with premature mortality.
4. Mental Health of Displaced Populations and Refugees
Traditionally the refugee experience is divided into three stages: preflight, flight, and
resettlement.20 The preflight phase may include, for example, losses of family members,
livelihoods, and belongings, paired with possible physical and emotional trauma to the individual
or family, the experience of witnessing extreme violence, and social upheaval. Adolescents may
also have participated in violence, voluntarily or not, as child soldiers or militants. Flight involves
an uncertain journey from the home area to the resettlement site and may involve arduous travel,
refugee camps, and/or detention centers, often including further losses and traumatic stressors.
Children and adolescents are often separated from their families and at the mercy of others for care
and protection. The resettlement process includes challenges such as the loss of culture,
community, and language, as well as the need to adapt to a new and foreign environment. Children
often straddle the old and new cultures, as they learn new languages and cultural norms more
quickly than their elders. All of these experiences may play a role in the acquisition of, or
protection from, mental health conditions in each individual within a refugee population.
Mental disorders can be triggered by extreme adversity, such as massive displacement.
Conflict exposes displaced populations and refugees to violence and high levels of stress,21 causing
dramatic rises in mental illness that can continue for decades after armed conflict has ceased, as
documented in multiple studies.22 Armed conflict and violence disrupt social support structures
and expose civilian populations to high levels of stress. Consistent with the findings of earlier
Global Burden of Disease (GBD) studies, GBD 201523 confirmed the large contribution of mental
and substance use disorders to global disability, and a positive association between conflict and
depression and anxiety disorders.




                                                  8
Most of those exposed to emergencies suffer some form of psychological distress. Accumulated
evidence24 shows that the prevalence of common mental disorders such as depression, anxiety, and
post-traumatic stress disorders (PTSD), increases from a baseline of 10 percent to 15-20 percent
among crisis-affected populations, while severe mental disorders, such as psychosis or debilitating
depression and anxiety, can increase from 1-2 percent to 3-4 percent. Such mental health problems
have especially severe consequences in humanitarian settings, where they affect the ability of
affected populations to function and survive.
The more common mental health diagnoses associated with refugee populations are
depressive and anxiety disorders, including PTSD, generalized anxiety, panic attacks,
adjustment disorder, and somatization.25 The incidence of disorders varies with different
populations and their experiences. Researchers studying settled refugees have found rates of PTSD
and major depression of 5-15 percent or 10-40 percent, depending on the study. Children and
adolescents often have higher prevalence, with various investigations revealing rates of PTSD
from 50-90 percent and major depression from 6-40 percent. Risk factors for the development of
mental health problems include the number of traumas, delayed asylum application process,
detention, and the loss of culture and support systems. On the other hand, protective factors include
a supportive environment where affected populations can access basic needs, maintain or form
new social connections and relationships, and are supported in pursuing educational and economic
opportunities.
If mental health issues are not effectively addressed, the long-term mental health and psychosocial
wellbeing of the displaced population and refugees may be affected. Many Cambodians, for
example, continue to suffer mental disorders and poor health almost four decades after the Khmer
Rouge-led genocide of the late 1970s.26
5. How Should We Address Mental Health Needs in Conflict- and Post-Conflict-Related
   Situations?
Mental health is an integral part of overall health, but has received inadequate attention from health
care planners and from society in general, worldwide. Despite their enormous social burden,
mental disorders continue to be driven into the shadows by stigma, prejudice, and people’s fear of
disclosing an affliction because a job may be lost or social standing ruined. In other cases, these
diseases go untreated because health and social support services are either not available at all, or
are out of financial reach for the afflicted and their families. The vast majority of low- and middle-
income countries allocate less than 1 percent of their health budgets for mental health.
Mental disorders tend to be more acute and often unattended in conflict and post-conflict
situations, where large segments of the population may have lived through long periods of armed
conflict and ethnic confrontations.27 Many have been the subject of harassment, sexual abuse and
rape, incarceration, and torture.
Unlike physical wounds and losses, conditions such as depression, anxiety (including post-
traumatic stress disorder), and traumatic brain injuries, which affect mood, thoughts, and behavior,
are often invisible. They persist unrecognized, unacknowledged, or ignored in humanitarian and



                                                  9
development-assistance programs, undermining efforts to help rebuild and sustain the lives of
displaced populations.
Most countries are ill-equipped to deal with this “invisible” challenge – which is amplified today
by conflict and refugee crises in the Middle East and other parts of the world. Refugees and
displaced populations often face significant barriers in accessing quality mental health services.
Obstacles include lack of knowledge about available services; lack of transport or other resources
to access services; language and cultural barriers between refugees and service providers; and
limited follow-up supports.
Addressing mental health needs is important at all times. But it is critical in times of crisis
and recovery. Examples exist of how disaster and emergency contexts have successfully been
used to make sustainable improvements in mental health systems in low- and middle-income
countries.28
Displaced people have not only experienced traumatic events, but have also lost many of their
assets and risk further depletion of human and social capital. People may have experienced the
killing of loved ones, family separation, abandonment of children and the elderly, and may have
been subjected to torture, rape, and other forms of violence that can leave deep mental scars.
Refugees in host communities also face continuing hardships that may affect their mental health.
Ongoing stressors such as lack of access to employment, disruption of educational aspirations,
bullying of children at school, as well as social isolation and uncertainty, can increase mental
illness risks. Some studies of conflict-affected populations have shown that daily stressors in the
host environment were actually more predictive of developing mental health problems than was
past trauma.29
6. Collaborative, Multisectoral Approaches
WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Plan (mhGAP) aims to scale-up mental health services in low-
income and middle-income countries.30 The mhGAP plan, together with the report and
commentary prepared after the 2016 WBG/WHO “Out of the Shadows” event,31 32 emphasize that
evidence-based interventions have been effective in promoting, protecting, and restoring mental
health—far more effective than the institutionalization approaches of the past.
Mental health and psychosocial interventions and programs can improve economic, social, and
human development, and strengthen health systems. Properly implemented, these interventions
represent “best buys” for any society, with significant returns both in terms of health and economic
gains. Some key interventions are deployed within the health sector (e.g., treatment with medicines
or psychological interventions), others outside it (e.g., psychological interventions delivered
through social services, or providing timely humanitarian assistance to refugees). A growing focus
on mental health and psychosocial program implementation is consistent with their inclusion in
Sustainable Development Goal 3,33 ensuring healthy lives and promoting wellbeing for all ages,
and in Priority 4 of the 2015 Sendai Framework, which identifies mental health as an essential
aspect of disaster risk reduction.34




                                                10
A collaborative response is required to tackle mental health as a development challenge. Such a
response would involve multidisciplinary approaches that integrate health services at the
community level,35 in schools, and in workplaces to explicitly address the mental health and
psychosocial needs of displaced people and host communities. The model would include services
to address alcohol and other drug use problems. It would also include innovative social protection
and employment schemes that facilitate the reintegration of affected persons into social and
economic activities. An example is Canada’s RISE Asset Development program, which provides
seed capital and lends at low-interest rates to people with a history of mental health and addiction
challenges.36
7. Essential Mental Health Interventions at the Community Level
Effective, scaled-up responses to improve the mental health and psychosocial wellbeing of
conflict-affected populations require adaptation to specific contexts. The most successful
approaches mobilize multi-layered systems of services and supports. They encompass the
provision of food, shelter, water, sanitation, basic health care, and other essential services;
action to strengthen community and family supports; emotional and practical support
through individual, family or group interventions; and ongoing care through community-
based primary health care systems.
Most common mental disorders, such as anxiety and depression, are prevalent and disabling.
Fortunately, these illnesses also respond to a range of safe and effective treatments. However,
owing to stigma and inadequate funding, these disorders are not being treated in most primary-
care and community settings. The Interagency Standing Committee37 has provided guidance on
tiered action in emergency settings, including for camp coordination and management, that is
human rights-based and takes a “do no harm” approach. This allows a focus on affected individuals
as whole persons, addressing both their physical and mental health needs, while reducing the risk
of stigma and discrimination among families and communities. This is important since mental
disorders are highly co-morbid with other priority conditions (e.g., maternal and child health
conditions, HIV/AIDS, and non-communicable diseases such as cancer and diabetes).
To inform the design of context-specific interventions in emergency settings, the mapping of the
problem is of paramount importance. Mapping includes gathering information on mental health as
part of current governmental policies and plans. It also requires assessment of mental health and
psychosocial information about the affected population (e.g., access and utilization of mental
health services, culturally specific understandings of mental health problems, and help-seeking
behaviors). The mapping exercise must include both persons with disorders induced by the crisis
and those with preexisting disorders.38 Such assessments can also clarify the current availability
of mental health services in affected settings.
New kinds of tools are offering program implementers additional guidance on how to consider the
complex articulation of systems of care in contexts with especially limited resources and
potentially competing priorities. The continuum of action spans service-delivery science, quality-
improvement methods, implementation science, and “mixed” qualitative and quantitative methods,
along with formal randomized controlled trials and anthropological research. All these approaches



                                                11
contribute to our knowledge of what works in context. Implementing organizations such as
Partners In Health (PIH), International Medical Corps (IMC), or World Vision are actively
adapting this kind of knowledge to practice in post-disaster and emergency settings.
As illustrated in the matrix below, PIH experience in countries such as Haiti, Liberia, Peru, and
Rwanda39 40 shows that many effective, evidence-based interventions can be implemented at the
community and facility levels to deal with anxiety and depression—two of the most common
forms of mental disorder—along with psychosis. Adapting knowledge from WHO’s mhGAP and
existing evidence, PIH has worked to develop a mental health service-delivery planning matrix to
achieve universal health coverage. This matrix includes a care delivery “value chain,” adapted
from the business literature. The resulting “Total Health For All”41 approach integrates primary
care, mental health, and public health. The model supports understanding of how various activities
fit together as part of a coherent care delivery process. Implemented at community and facility
levels, the interventions can be grouped into an essential package of services that includes:
      Promotion and prevention, including stigma reduction interventions
      Case finding (e.g., psychological assessment, diagnosis)
      Treatment (e.g., counseling, psychosocial interventions such as cognitive behavioral
       therapy, and treatment with essential medicines such as antidepressant and antipsychotic
       medications)
      Follow-up (e.g., monitoring of symptoms)
      Reintegration (e.g., social and economic interventions).
Core, cross-cutting components of the system include sustained supervision in clinical,
programmatic, and academic spheres for local implementation teams, as well as a focus on patient
safety, quality of care, outcomes measurement (monitoring and evaluation), and the use of data to
drive performance improvement.
There are examples from refugee countries as well. For example, IMC has successfully scaled up
mental health services within primary health care in response to the Syrian crisis. The program
spans several countries, including Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Turkey. IMC’s approach
includes: using the WHO mhGAP Intervention Guidelines to train general health care staff;
mobilizing community health workers for outreach and follow-up; assigning psychosocial workers
to clinics to address multiple needs and deliver scalable psychosocial interventions; and
establishing networks and referral pathways among service providers.42




                                               12
Anti-stigma campaigns can be powerful tools in confronting barriers to support for people with
mental disorders. Stigma and discrimination in relation to mental illnesses have been described as
having worse consequences than the conditions themselves.43 Stigma associated with mental
disorders can result in social isolation, low self-esteem, and limited opportunities in areas such as
employment, education, and housing. Stigma can also hinder patients from seeking help, thereby
increasing the treatment gap for mental disorders.44 What is more, stigma associated with mental
disorders also influences how these disorders are prioritized and contributes to some clinicians’
discriminatory attitudes toward people with mental illnesses.45 Thus, stigma has adverse
consequences for the quality of mental health services delivered.46 Anti-stigma campaigns as well
as peer-to-peer support models can help break down stigma and raise awareness. Peer-to-peer
models engage those recovering from mental health problems in helping others and encourage
them to take on visible, proactive roles in their communities.
A recent global review47 provides evidence that social contact is the most effective type of
intervention to improve stigma-related knowledge and attitudes in the short term. However, the
evidence for longer-term benefit of social contact in reducing stigma is weak. The review’s main
findings are the following: (1) At the population level, there is a fairly consistent pattern of short-
term benefits for positive attitude change, and some lesser evidence for knowledge improvement;
(2) for people with mental illness, some group-level anti-stigma inventions show promise and



                                                  13
merit further assessment; (3) for specific target groups, such as students, social-contact-based
interventions usually achieve short-term (but less clearly long-term) attitudinal improvements, and
less often produce knowledge gains; (4) this is a heterogeneous field of study with few strong study
designs with large sample sizes; (5) research from low-income and middle-income countries is
conspicuous by its relative absence; (6) caution needs to be exercised in not overgeneralizing
lessons from one target group to another; (7) there is a clear need for studies with longer-term
follow-up to assess whether initial gains are sustained or attenuated, and whether booster doses of
the intervention are needed to maintain progress; (8) few studies in any part of the world have
focused on either the service user's perspective regarding stigma and discrimination or on the
behavior domain of behavioral change regarding stigma, whether in people with or without mental
illness. In view of the magnitude of challenges that result from mental health stigma and
discrimination, the review finds a need for new, methodologically strong research that will support
decisions on investment in stigma-reducing interventions.
Current evidence-based treatments for moderate to severe depression and anxiety disorders include
structured, time-limited psychological treatments and antidepressant medications. Numerous
randomized trials support the efficacy of psychological treatments, especially in the form of brief
treatments based on cognitive, behavioral, and inter-personal mechanisms. For example, a recent
study48 assessed the effectiveness of a brief multicomponent intervention incorporating behavioral
strategies delivered by lay health workers to adults functionally impaired by symptoms of
psychological distress in a conflict-affected setting. The study examined a lay worker–
administered intervention consisting of five weekly 90-minute individual sessions that included
empirically supported strategies of problem solving, behavioral activation, strengthening social
support, and stress management. Researchers found that, compared to enhanced usual care, the
intervention may be a practical approach for treating adults with psychological distress in conflict-
affected areas. The application of this intervention resulted in clinically significant reductions in
anxiety and depressive symptoms at 3 months.
“Task-sharing” models, by which non-specialist providers deliver care, have been adapted from
the global HIV/AIDS care movement to the mental health field over the past two decades. These
models are now offering hope for the spread and scaling of mental health services in high- as well
as low-income countries. There is also a growing body of evidence49 demonstrating that non-
specialist workers in primary-care and community settings can deliver mental health care with
great effectiveness to a variety of populations.
As for pharmacological therapies, several major groups of antidepressants are in common use
today, including tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).50
Studies have found strong evidence for the efficacy of antidepressant pharmacotherapy and no
evidence of an advantage for any specific drug over another. Antidepressants generally, and SSRIs
in particular, have well-documented efficacy in the treatment of anxiety disorders, trauma-related
disorders like PTSD, and other disorders related to depression. Similarly, evidence for
psychosocial and psychopharmacological interventions for psychosis is adequate.




                                                 14
8. Treatment Settings and Integration with Health and Social Systems
Displaced people and refugee populations are confronted with extraordinary stresses and
challenges to their physical and psychological health. Whether mobile or in a camp setting, they
can easily fall through the cracks of assistance mechanisms. For this reason, the articulation of
mental health and psychosocial services within other government programs, as well as with the
development and NGO sector, can provide a critical safety net for these vulnerable populations.
The provision of mental health and psychosocial support services at the community level
cannot be seen as a vertical or free-standing intervention offered in a health facility. Rather,
it needs to be part of broad, integrated platforms offering a range of community, health,
social, and educational services. Such platforms provide basic services and security, promote
community and family support through participatory approaches, and strengthen coping
mechanisms. An integrated service model seeks first of all to improve people’s daily functioning
and protect the most vulnerable from further adversity. It addresses, for example, the specific needs
of vulnerable constituencies, including women, children, adolescents, the elderly, and those with
severe mental disorders. In addition, a successful holistic service model can empower affected
people to take charge of their lives.
Mental health planners and policy makers need to support, through public awareness and
community engagement, care delivery systems that are sensitive to local social, economic, and
cultural contexts. This will help ensure that mental health care is appropriately sought and utilized
by potential beneficiaries.
The Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) intervention pyramid for mental health and
psychosocial support, presented below, illustrates task responsibility by levels of care.

Intervention Pyramid for Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in
Emergencies51




                                                 15
Efforts at collaborative, integrated care – an evidence-based approach to care for chronic illness
applied in primary care settings – should guide the effective use of resources for delivery of quality
mental health care. Such efforts emphasize systematic identification of patients, self-care, and
active care management by clinical providers, blended with other medical, mental health, and
community supports.52

Given that anxiety and depression play large roles in the health of expectant and new mothers and
their children, maternal care settings can be a viable platform for delivering depression care, where
early and effective intervention for maternal depression can be implemented. Depressive
symptoms in mothers are associated with preeclampsia, preterm birth, intrauterine growth
retardation, and low birth weight in infants. The prevalence and severity of antenatal anxiety and
depression are higher in low-and middle-income countries.53 54 Interpersonal psychotherapy,
however, is associated with a reduction in depressive symptomatology in pregnant women.55
Importantly, mothers with high levels of psychological distress exclusively breastfeed for a shorter
duration. However, WHO considers exclusive breastfeeding the safest and most effective
intervention to reduce infant morbidity and mortality. Cognitive behavioral counseling delivered
in the postpartum period can reduce the risk that a mother will stop exclusive breastfeeding.56 57


In addition to their impact on overall physical health, mental disorders can exacerbate common
co-occurring diseases, such as diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and cancer,
communicable diseases such as HIV and TB, and major health challenges affecting mothers and
children in the pre- and post-partum periods. Mental disorders are also a barrier to patient
adherence to TB treatment, and WHO recommends therapeutic relationships and mutual goal-
setting as interventions to improve TB treatment adherence by reducing psychological stress. 58 59

There is significant evidence that integrated delivery of mental health and psychosocial support
services can be effective for these complex health problems. For example, psychiatric diagnoses
are more common in HIV patient groups than other populations and are associated with poor ART
adherence. However, antidepressant treatment for depressed HIV patients is associated with
improved antiretroviral medication adherence,60 61 62 and psychological interventions in this
population can lead to improved immune status.63 64 65 66

The reality of comorbidity in affected populations implies the need to develop and implement
coordinated mental health promotion, protection, illness prevention, screening, and interventions.
These services can be delivered by integrated primary-care, mental-health, and public-health teams
in an effective TOTAL Health model, supporting collaboration among public, private, and NGO
partners.67

The collaborative care approach has proven effective in general population samples and vulnerable
sub-populations in high-income countries, and increasingly in LMICs.68 Evidence from low-
income countries demonstrates the effectiveness of care delivery by community or lay health
workers.




                                                 16
As shown in Box 2,69 recent efforts in Syria illustrate the types of investments and activities
required to build a mental health system responsive to population needs during a crisis.

                                   Box 2: Mental Health Care Efforts in Syria

 The reality of the conflict:

 4.8m Registered Syrians refugees abroad, according to the UNHCR

 6.6m Registered refugees inside the country, according to UNHCR

 450,000 People killed in the fighting in Syria

 In Syria, the World Health Organization (WHO) is working with partners to cope with the emerging needs of the
 population. Despite the challenges presented by the ongoing conflict, mental health services are becoming more
 widely available in Syria. Mental health care is now being offered in primary and secondary health facilities in
 some of the most affected Syrian governorates (Damascus, Rural Damascus, Homs, Suwayda, Aleppo, Al
 Hassakeh, Hama, Tartous, and Lattakia). This is in contrast to the situation before the conflict, at which time
 mental health care was provided in at only three hospitals, and only in Damascus and Aleppo.

 Key to addressing this gap was training and continuous technical supervision of primary health care physicians on
 the management of stress, depression, psychosis, suicide, and psychosomatic disorders. The WHO mhGAP
 Intervention Guide, an integrated guide for the management of priority mental health conditions, was the main tool
 used. WHO recruited a team of field-based national supervisors to support this process. mhGAP training materials
 were translated into Arabic and adapted for use in the Syrian context by Syrian mental health professionals, with
 support from WHO.

 WHO supported the training of Syrian health professionals and provision of psychotropic medicines, not only
 through its Damascus office, but also its sub-offices in Homs and Aleppo, and its field presence in
 Gaziantep/Turkey.

 Key achievements to date include the following:

 •        Mental health is now seen as a public health priority in Syria.

 •        A team of Syrian mental health professionals play a leadership role in prevention and treatment of mental
 health conditions in Syria.

 •       Mental health services are provided for people with mental disorders at primary-care facilities in
 Damascus, Rural Damascus, Homs, Aleppo, Hamma, Lattaki Hasaka, and Tartus. These services are provided by
 non-specialist general practitioners under the supervision of specialists, all trained through the WHO mhGAP
 program.

 •        A team of psychologists is providing a wide range of psychotherapeutic interventions through
 multidisciplinary teams at the primary and secondary care levels.

 •         Psychotropic medication provided through WHO and partners is available at primary and secondary care
 levels for the first time in the country.

 •       An inpatient unit for mental disorders has been established for the first time in Syria, in a general hospital
 in Damascus. Two more inpatient facilities are expected to open soon.




                                                          17
   9. Are Mental Health Interventions Affordable and Cost-Effective?
A WHO-led study70 estimated the cost of treatment interventions at the community level for
moderate to severe cases of depression. Prepared for the WBG/WHO global mental health event
at the 2016 WBG/IMF Spring Meetings, the study examined a range of treatment options. These
included basic psychosocial treatment for mild cases and either basic or more intensive
psychosocial treatment plus antidepressant drug therapy for moderate to severe cases.
The study incorporated key categories of resource use, including:
      Medication, with six months of continual generic antidepressants for moderate to severe
       cases
      Outpatient and primary care, including regular visits for all cases, with frequencies
       ranging from four per case per year for basic psychosocial treatment, up to 14–18 visits for
       moderate to severe cases receiving antidepressant medication and intensive psychosocial
       treatment
      Inpatient care, with only a few cases expected to be admitted to hospital (2–3 percent of
       moderate to severe cases only, for an average length of stay of 14 days).
An assumption of the study was that care and follow-up would largely be undertaken in non-
specialist health care settings by doctors, nurses, and psychosocial care-providers trained in the
identification, assessment, and management of depression and anxiety disorders
Estimations also included expected levels of program costs and shared health-system resources
needed to deliver interventions as part of an integrated model of chronic disease management.
These included program management and administration, training and supervision, drug safety
monitoring, health promotion and awareness campaigns, and strengthened logistics and
information systems. The latter were estimated as on-cost to the estimated direct healthcare costs.
The baseline value for on-cost was 10 percent (and therefore grows in absolute terms during scale-
up).
The results of the estimation, which would need to be adapted to the particular conditions of given
emergency contexts, show that the cost of scaling up the delivery of these interventions is relatively
low. The average annual cost during 15 years of scaled-up investment is $.08 per person in low-
income countries, $0.34 in lower middle-income countries, $1.12 in upper middle-income
countries, and $3.89 in high-income countries. Per-person costs for treatment of anxiety disorders
are approximately half those for depression. Across country income groups, resulting benefit-to-
cost ratios amount to 2·3–3·0 to 1 when only economic benefits are considered, and 3·3–5·7 to 1
when the value of health returns is also included.
   10. Dealing with Malnutrition in Conflict and its Psychological Causes
In a study of the 2013 outbreak of violence in Bangui, Central African Republic,71 researchers
found that dealing with malnutrition in such a crisis is more complex than simply curing disease
and providing children with therapeutic foods. The reason is clear: often, post-traumatic stress
disorder hinders treatment success among a large number of children suffering from life-
threatening malnutrition.


                                                 18
The humanitarian relief organization Action Against Hunger collected data on more than 1,000
parents of malnourished children between July 2013 and March 2014. The researchers reported
that, in 75 percent of cases studied, the parents presented symptoms of post-traumatic stress linked
to their exposure to extreme violence. It was found that this condition contributed to behavioral
changes, flashbacks, fatigue, isolation, excessive irritability, and feelings of hopelessness and
despair, which in turn had a temporary but disabling impact on many mothers’ ability to nurse and
feed their children. In some cases, this resulted in early weaning that can be deadly in an already
challenging environment. Some mothers had also reportedly attempted suicide and infanticide. It
was found that children, while too young to fully understand what they have witnessed, may
develop physical symptoms such as continuous crying, refusing to eat, bed wetting, sleep
disturbances, and poor interaction. To recognize these signs, malnourished children and their
caretakers need to receive psychological and social support from specialized counseling teams.
Regular feeding times, medical monitoring, and psychological and motor activities also need to be
included as part of daily routines.
Overall, besides adequate nutrition, psychosocial stimulation from a caregiver is required to
support a child’s optimal physical, motor, cognitive, and language development, as well as mental
health. Psychosocial stimulation refers “to the extent that the environment provides physical
stimulation through sensory input (e.g., visual, auditory, tactile), as well as emotional stimulation
provided through an affectionate caregiver-child bond.”72 It is recommended that nutrition
programs targeting displaced populations combine nutrition, maternal mental health, and
psychosocial stimulation interventions.73
   11. Mental Health Care Over the Long Term
Projects funded by the World Bank Group and other organizations utilize a bottom-up,
multidisciplinary approach to re-integrate displaced population groups after conflicts and natural
disasters. Incorporating integrated care and treatment for mental illness into these existing projects
would help to overcome barriers to securing employment among the poor and vulnerable. Further
investment in education, social protection, and employment training would help prevent social
exclusion and build social resilience by serving the unique needs of vulnerable groups.
To the above end, development efforts in post-conflict and post-disaster societies should
include expanding mental health services that are well integrated into primary health care
systems. Box 3 provides case examples of countries/regions that have seized opportunities during
and after emergencies to build better mental health care.74 They represent a wide range of
emergency situations and political contexts, and provide evidence that it is possible to take action
in emergencies to create better mental health systems for the long term.
Building out mental health services that are well integrated into primary care and public health in
countries hosting refugees, and in post-conflict and post-disaster societies, would require treating
mental and substance use disorders like other chronic health conditions.19 After all, these are
disorders of the brain, an organ of the human body just as important as the heart, liver, or lungs.
Nor, in fact, are they truly separable. As discussed above, untreated mental disorders can




                                                 19
negatively affect risk, patient management, and outcomes in such co-occurring diseases as
tuberculosis and HIV, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and cancer.
In moving forward, a firm commitment is needed from national and international actors to
champion mental health parity in the provision of health and social services, as part of
dedicated development support and assistance programs (see Box 4 on Peru’s recent
experience). This is crucial in order to help displaced people and refugees overcome their
vulnerabilities, build mental resilience, and take full advantage of poverty-reduction programs,
economic opportunities and legal protections, particularly with regard to stigma and
discrimination.75
If the World Bank and WHO are to fully embrace and support the progressive realization
of universal health coverage, we must work to ensure that prevention, treatment, and care
services for mental disorders at the community level, along with psychosocial support
mechanisms, are integrated into existing service delivery platforms, are accessible, and are
covered under financial protection arrangements.76




                                              20
Box 3: Country/Regional Examples of Sustainable Mental Health Care after Conflicts and Emergencies

Afghanistan: Following the fall of the Taliban government in 2001, mental health was declared a priority issue
and was included in the country’s Basic Package of Health Services. Much progress has been made. For
example, since 2001, more than 1,000 health workers have been trained in basic mental health care, and nearly
100,000 people have been diagnosed and treated for mental health conditions in Nangarhar Province alone.

Burundi: Modern mental health services were almost non-existent prior to the past decade, but today the
government supplies essential psychiatric medications through its national drug distribution center, and
outpatient mental health clinics are established in several provincial hospitals. From 2000 to 2008, more than
27,000 people were helped by newly established mental health and psychosocial services.

Indonesia (Aceh): In a matter of years following the tsunami of 2004, Aceh’s mental health services were
transformed from a single mental hospital to a basic system of mental health care, grounded by primary health
services and supported by secondary care offered through district general hospitals. Now, 13 of 23 districts have
specific mental health budgets, compared with none a decade ago. Aceh’s mental health system is viewed as a
model for other provinces in Indonesia.

Iraq: Mental health reform has been ongoing since 2004. Community mental health units now function within
general hospitals, and benefit from more stable resources. Since 2004, 80 –85 percent of psychiatrists, more than
50 percent of general practitioners, and 20–30 percent of nurses, psychologists, and social workers working in
the country have received mental health training.

Japan: A series of catastrophic earthquakes in Japan, including the 1995 Hanshin-Awaji earthquake, the 2006
Niigata Chuetsu earthquake, and the 2011 Great East Japan earthquake, has provided evidence that mental health
and psychosocial support can also be effectively integrated into humanitarian response and disaster risk
management.

Jordan: The influx of displaced Iraqis into Jordan drew substantial support from aid agencies. Within this
context, community-based mental health care was initiated. The project’s many achievements built momentum
for broader change across the country. New community-based mental health clinics helped more than 3550
people in need from 2009 to 2011.

Kosovo: After conflict, rapid political change generated an opportunity to reform Kosovo’s mental health
system. A mental health taskforce created a new strategic plan to guide and coordinate efforts. Today, each of
Kosovo’s seven regions offers a range of community-based mental health services.

Somalia: The governance structure in Somalia has been fragmented for more than 20 years, and during most of
that time the country has been riddled with conflict and emergencies. Despite these challenges, mental health
services have improved. From 2007 to 2010, chains were removed from more than 1700 people with mental
disorders.

Sri Lanka: In the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami, Sri Lanka made rapid progress in the development of basic
mental health services, extending beyond tsunami-affected zones to most parts of the country. A new national
mental health policy has been guiding the development of decentralized and community-based care. Today, 20
of the country’s 27 districts have mental health services infrastructure, compared with 10 before the tsunami.

Timor-Leste: Building from a complete absence of mental health services in 1999, the country now has a
comprehensive community-based mental health system. Today, the Timor-Leste National Mental Health
Strategy is part of the Ministry of Health’s overall long-term strategic plan. Mental health-trained general nurses
are available in around one-quarter of the country’s 65 community health centers, compared with none before
the emergency.

West Bank and Gaza Strip: Significant improvements in the mental health system have been made over the
past decade, towards community-based care and integration of mental health into primary care. In 2010, more
than 3000 people were managed in community-based mental health centers across the West Bank and Gaza
Strip.




                                                      21
In the United States, as well as countries such as Chile, Colombia, and Ghana, attempts to promote
treatment equality for mental disorders including addiction programs have run up against clauses
that deny health insurance coverage for pre-existing conditions, a common barrier. When this
hurdle is overcome, the next barrier has included determination of what is covered and funded at
the provider level. This leads to a host of additional questions, such as what conditions to cover,
how to select a menu of evidence-based treatments to be offered by service providers at different
levels of care (as is commonly done for other health conditions), and how these services will be
funded and reimbursed without perpetuating indirect medical discrimination through high
deductibles, copayments, and lifetime limitations in coverage.

 Box 4. Bringing Mental Health Services to Those Who Need Them Most: Peru’s Carabayllo Experience

  “Welcome to my house!” said World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim during his opening remarks to the
 Peruvian President, First Lady, Minister of Health, and Mayor of the district of Carabayllo. Dr. Kim felt like he
 was at home, because he had been a regular visitor to Carabayllo since 1994, when he led an initiative to implement
 the first community-based approach to control multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in a resource-poor
 setting.

 This time, Carabayllo was making history again. Peru’s President had recently signed a law that protects the rights
 of people with mental health problems. The regulation includes a set of community mental health services
 integrated at the primary health care level, which require the direct involvement of the community and the family
 of the patients. It is a first step to decentralize mental health services through the implementation of the new model
 of community care for mental health, including general and specialized mental health care services.

 Across six regions in Peru, there are 21 community centers for mental health. The coordinated effort —by the
 Ministry of Health, the National Institute of Mental Health, local government in Carabayllo, and several
 international and national organizations—is promoting social participation and is strengthening the network of
 community-based mental health approaches to implement psychosocial interventions in families with mental
 disorders. In the past, mental health patients were hospitalized; now, in this new model of health care delivery,
 patients are ambulatory. Community health workers conduct home visits to beneficiaries and provide psycho-
 education, support adherence to treatment, and encourage the participation of family members in the recovery of
 the patient with mental health problems.

  Anxiety and depression are common problems in Peru. In Carabayllo, as in other districts with high levels of
 poverty, social problems like domestic violence, sale and consumption of drugs, gangs, prostitution, assaults, and
 robberies are common. Community organizations in Carabayllo are trying to implement a comprehensive approach
 to deal with these complex challenges.

  Efforts in Carabayllo include opening the first home for people with severe mental disorders in socially neglected
 situations. Six therapeutic caregivers, who are community health workers with ad-hoc training, are taking care of
 eight women, ranging from 21 to 63 years old. Health workers are responsible for overseeing residents’ treatment,
 for providing new skills training, and for enabling the socialization and reintegration of patients into the
 community. The National Institute of Mental Health is providing technical advice, training, monitoring, and
 therapeutic support to caregivers.

 As we left the district of Carabayllo, I thought about the great challenges the community is still facing to become
 a healthy society. Undoubtedly, the lessons from the past allow for active community participation, creating a
 platform for true collaboration among government bodies and community-based organizations.
 Source: Bayona, J. 2015. “Bringing Mental Health Services to Those Who Need Them Most”. The World Bank Blogs, October 30, 2015.
 Available at http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/bringing-mental-health-services-those-who-need-them-most.




                                                              22
This is not an easy task. Strategies and plans for the medium term are required to integrate mental
health care into health services delivery platforms that focus on the whole person, rather than an
aggregation of diseases. Even if these policy and service delivery changes were adopted, the need
would remain for unrelenting efforts to support affected persons and their families, empowering
them to defy stigma, access services, and adhere to prescribed treatments. There is an ongoing
imperative to identify entry points across sectors to address the social and economic factors that
contribute to the onset and perpetuation of mental disorders.
High priority should go to identifying alternative sources of financing for mental health
parity in the health system, and to mainstreaming mental health across system entry points.
Development lifts lives, and new and innovative funding approaches for development are “game
changers.” Recalling the 2015 Financing for Development Addis Ababa Action Agenda,77 one can
argue that the development community needs to redouble its advocacy with national governments
to raise “sin taxes”: including on tobacco, alcohol, and sugary drinks. These taxes represent a win-
win for public health and domestic revenue mobilization.
For example, taxing tobacco is one of the most cost-effective measures to reduce consumption of
products that kill prematurely, make people ill with diverse diseases (e.g., cancer, heart disease,
and respiratory illnesses), and burden health systems with enormous costs. Hiking tobacco taxes
can expand a country’s tax base to fund essential public services for the entire population
and strengthen human capital. One clear example is the progressive realization of universal
health coverage, including mental health care.78
Data from different countries indicate that the annual tax revenue from excise taxes on tobacco
can be substantial. In the United States, for example, as part of the 2009 reauthorization of the
Children’s Health Insurance Program, a 62 percent per-pack increase in the federal cigarette tax
was adopted to help fund the program. The measure increased the total federal cigarette tax to
about $1 a pack. Federal cigarette tax revenue rose by 129 percent, from $6.8 billion to $15.5
billion, in the 12 months after the tax, while cigarette pack sales declined by 8.3 percent in 2009 –
the largest decline since 1932.79
In the Philippines, the adoption of the 2012 Sin Tax Law confirmed that substantial tax increases
on tobacco and alcohol can yield both direct public health impact and new resources for health
investments. In the first three years of the law’s implementation, $3.9 billion in additional fiscal
revenues were collected. The additional fiscal space multiplied the Department of Health budget
threefold. The Department was able to expand the number of families whose health insurance
premiums were paid by the National Government. The number of primary recipients benefiting
rose from 5.2 million in 2012 to 15.3 million in 2015. In total, counting family members, about 45
million poor Filipinos benefited—roughly half of the country’s total population.
Both these country initiatives show that increasing taxes on tobacco and alcohol is “low hanging
fruit,” a high-yield strategy for raising domestic resources to reach development goals, including
expanding mental health care coverage.80




                                                 23
   12. Key Lessons Learned 81

      Mental health and psychosocial problems are extremely common in major crises.
       There is always a need for mental health and psychosocial support services (MHPSS) in
       humanitarian crises. During a humanitarian crisis, prevalence surveys are not needed
       to justify investing in MHPSS. In some exceptional cases, prevalence surveys, if done
       well, can be justified for advocacy and scientific knowledge. The dire situation of displaced
       person and refugees in the world today demands that investments be made to support their
       mental health and wellbeing. An area that requires priority attention is the mental health
       and psychosocial needs of children and adolescents. This issue has been prominent on
       the southern border of the United States and also in the recent large migration in Europe.
      Activities and programming should be integrated into wider systems (for example,
       existing community support mechanisms, formal/non-formal school systems, general
       health systems and services, social services, trusted protection networks). This reaches
       more people, is more sustainable and carries less social stigma.
      Relative priority should be given to those MHPSS projects that (a) have a relatively
       strong evidence-basis; (b) seek to demonstrate improvements in people’s daily functioning;
       and (c) are likely to protect the most vulnerable, including people with severe mental
       disorders, by reducing their exposure to further adversity.
      Investing in mental health as part of early recovery can make a substantial difference
       in the long-term availability of services for the most severely affected survivors—and
       ultimately in development outcomes. Emergencies are unique opportunities to build
       back/up sustainable mental health care (See the Resources section, below).
      Practical tools and guidelines exist for assessment and response (See Resources).


   13. The Role of the World Bank Group

To highlight the scale of mental health issues and the gains from addressing them, the WBG and
WHO co-hosted an event at the Spring Meetings of the IMF/WBG, in April, 2016. Entitled “Out
of the Shadows: Making Mental Health a Global Priority,”82 the event aimed to put the mental
health agenda at the center of global health and development priorities by spurring efforts to:
increase awareness about mental health as a development challenge; highlight the economic and
social costs of inaction; debate the economic and social benefits of investing in mental health; and
identify ways for stakeholders to act across sectors.

Jim Y. Kim, President of the WBG, and Margaret Chan, Director-General of WHO, along with
other leaders,83 called for a collaborative response to tackle mental health as a development
challenge by pursuing multidisciplinary approaches. Successful approaches encompass integrated
health services at the community level, in schools and in workplace programs, and initiatives to
address the mental health and psychosocial needs of displaced populations.




                                                24
Addressing mental health as an integral part of the global development agenda adds value
by increasing the effectiveness of programs in other sectors such as health, maternal and
child health, nutrition, education, social protection, and jobs. Mental health problems are
especially common in conflict- and crisis-affected populations. They may impair the ability of
affected persons and their families to take advantage of any type development program.
Addressing mental health alongside other sectors can unlock additional human potential,
contribute to a more inclusive rights-based approach, and help accelerate the positive impact of
programs on affected communities.


The WBG could bring four primary comparative advantages to support scaling up mental
health services for displaced people and refugees: (1) Strong influence on the global
development agenda; (2) involvement in virtually all sectors, including health, nutrition and
population; education; social protection; fragility, conflict and violence; macroeconomics; and
finance; (3) ability to support scale-up of effective programs as part of broader development action
under IDA18 funding; and (4) public-health and economic expertise.
An effective response to the mental health needs of the displaced and refugees would require
strengthening partnerships between the WBG, WHO, UNHCR, and other international and
national partners, such as PIH and IMC. Because mental health affects so many aspects of
development, external actors must work in partnership with civil society and the private sector,
under the leadership of governments, to harness the comparative advantage of each. Support must
be well planned and coordinated to enhance synergy and avoid duplication of effort. Bureaucracy
should be minimized and processing of aid dramatically accelerated. Most of all, a concerted effort
to break the silence surrounding mental health needs is required, and consolidated action must be
taken early in crisis and post-crisis situations to ensure timely and effective support for people
affected, including displaced persons and refugees.
If this is done, as Toluwalola Kasali observed, we will be helping affected people regain “the
ability to dream, desire and work for a future, one very different from their present
circumstances.”84
   14. The WBG’s Health Sector Activities on Mental Health

Since 1994, WBG-funded projects have incorporated mental health components in a number of
fields, including health and health-systems development, early child development, conflict and
emergencies, social protection, and legal and judiciary reform. The WBG’s recent work in this
area has focused on developing a collaborative response to address mental health as a development
challenge by pursuing multidisciplinary approaches. Such approaches encompass integrated health
services at the community level, in schools and in workplace programs, along with specific
initiatives to address the mental health and psychosocial needs of displaced populations. This
approach builds upon previous and ongoing efforts, in addition to dialogue and support to develop
new activities, as noted below.




                                                25
The WBG’s health-sector activities on mental health are summarized here:

Country-level operations:

Previous examples of the WBG’s mental health support to countries include the following:
    Country projects implemented over the decade of the 2000s included psychosocial support
       components under the African and the Caribbean Multi-Country Programs for the
       Control of HIV/AIDS.
    Support for de-institutionalization of people with mental illness in Albania, Lithuania,
       and Romania under Health Sector Reform Projects.
    Technical support to the Ministry of Health in Thailand for mental health reform.
    Technical support in mental health to the Afghanistan Health Project.
    Technical support to Lesotho in mental health policy development, community health
       assessment, and inclusion of mental health in the District Health Package.
    The World Bank’s Post-Conflict Unit funded the integration of mental health into primary
       health care in Bosnia. The program trained primary health care physicians in the
       management of common mental disorders. In Bosnia, the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire
       and Beck Depression Inventory were integrated as a module in the Living Standards
       Measurement Survey (LSMS).
    The integration of mental health into primary health care in the West Bank and Gaza
       advanced by streamlining referral mechanisms, addressing children’s mental health needs,
       and developing an in-patient care master plan and mental health information system.
    Technical support to Turkey in the development and implementation of an emergency
       mental health response to earthquakes, within the framework of a new national mental
       health policy.
    Providing technical support in mental health as part of a Legal and Judiciary Reform
       project in Sierra Leone. The project included assessing the feasibility of integrating mental
       health components in Legal Aid Clinics and within Peace and Reconstruction activities.

Examples of active and pipeline country projects with mental health components include
the following:

      Liberia (active): This project responds to the intermediate psychosocial/mental health
       impact of the Ebola crisis. It also seeks to build long-term psychosocial health and
       resilience at the individual and community levels in defined project target areas. Support
       is provided to: (a) training and capacity-building for new and existing cadres of mental
       health providers; and (b) the implementation of mental health interventions at the
       individual, family, and community levels.
      Great Lakes Emergency Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Women’s Health
       Project (covering Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda; active): This
       regional operation expands utilization of a package of health interventions targeted to
       poor and vulnerable females (including those impacted by sexual and gender-based
       violence). It includes mental health and psychosocial support subcomponents.
      Nigeria (active): This project includes mental health support to internally displaced people
       in northeast Nigeria who have been impacted by the Boko Haram insurgency.



                                                26
   Yemen (pipeline): The Emergency Health and Nutrition Project will be financing mental
    health and psychosocial support interventions, as part of a comprehensive package of
    health services that will be delivered in partnership with UNICEF and WHO.
   Lebanon (pipeline): A scale-up of Lebanon’s National Volunteer Service Program is
    currently being prepared to address: (a) the unmet social service delivery needs
    (including mental health) in some of the most vulnerable Lebanese communities hosting
    Syrian refugees, as well as (b) fragile inter-communal relations and social tensions
    between Lebanese citizens and Syrian refugees living in the selected host communities.
   Nepal (pipeline): A project is under preparation to support the reconstruction of the
    affected regions from the recent earthquake. The plan would incorporate a component on
    psychosocial support to affected populations as part of a larger effort to reintegrate these
    populations into economic and social activities.
   Colombia (pipeline): The anticipated approval of the Peace Agreement is opening the
    door to scale up support on mental health and psychosocial support to an internally
    displaced population of 7 million.
   GFF: As part of ongoing discussions with the GFF team, we foresee future opportunities
    to push the mental health agenda forward as part of GFF-supported projects, and
    particularly to address maternal depression and mental health in early childhood.
   Promotion of Mental Health Parity under UHC initiatives: Kosovo Health Project
    (active): The delivery of mental health and psychosocial support services is being
    facilitated through support for the mandatory health insurance system.
   Armenia: Technical support focusing on integration of mental health services into primary
    health care and adoption of best practices for in-patient care.




                                            27
Key partnerships and knowledge-sharing

      Health and Wellness in the Workplace: Ongoing mental health dialogue initiated with
       different institutions, including the International Finance Corporation (IFC).
      Close partnership established with WHO and other institutions, such the United Nations
       Refugee Agency (UNHCR), Partners in Health (PIH), International Medical Corps (IMC),
       Grand Challenges Canada, and the Mental Health Innovations Network, for knowledge-
       sharing to support WBG task teams.
      Strategic Communication Post-2016 Spring Meetings Events: To increase awareness
       about mental health as a development challenge, the economic and social costs of
       inaction, and the economic and social benefits of investing in mental health.

          WBG/WHO Global Mental Health event: Out of the Shadows: Making Mental
           Health a Global Development Priority. Report of Proceedings of Event, May
           2016.
          The Lancet Comment. Time for mental health to come out of the shadows, Vol
           387 June 4, 2016 2275. By Arthur Kleinman, Georgia Lockwood Estrin,
           Shamaila Usmani, Dan Chisholm, Patricio V Marquez, Tim G Evans, Shekhar
           Saxena.
          Grand Challenges Canada: Mental health funding and the SDGs What now and
           who pays?
          How to Fix a Broken Mental-Health System by Norman Ornstein, The Atlantic,
           Jun 8, 2016.
          Maintaining the Momentum: Out of the Shadows. A series of articles on the event
           posted at the Mental Health Innovations Network/London School of Hygiene and
           Tropical Medicine, June 2016.
          http://www.mhinnovation.net/blog/2016/jun/15/maintaining-momentum-out-
           shadows?mc_cid=b520df69c0&mc_eid=28df1f433d#.WBnv203fM5u
          Cerebrum/The Dana Foundation. Making Mental Health a Global Priority, by
           Patricio Marquez and Shehkar Saxena. August 16, 2016.
          Nature. The mental-health crisis among migrants, 10 October 2016.

WBG Blogs (Investing in Health, Voices sites):

Blog: Mental health services in situations of conflict, fragility and violence: What to do?:
https://blogs.worldbank.org/health/mental-health-services-situations-conflict-fragility-and-
violence-what-do

Blog: Invisible wounds: Mental health among displaced people and refugees:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/invisible-wounds-mental-health-among-displaced-people-and-
refugees

Mental Health Parity in the Global Health and Development Agenda:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/mental-health-parity-global-health-and-development-agenda



                                                28
Shining a light on mental illness: An “invisible disability”:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/shining-light-mental-illness-invisible-disability

Bringing Mental Health Services to Those Who Need Them Most:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/bringing-mental-health-services-those-who-need-them-most

Blog: The “zero hour” for mental health: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/zero-hour-mental-
health

Blog: Mental Health: Time for a Broader Agenda: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/mental-
health-time-broader-agenda

Blog: Is Violence a Public Health Problem?: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/violence-public-
health-problem

Blog: Is Unemployment Bad for Your Health?:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/unemployment-bad-your-health

Blog: Healthier Workplaces = Healthy Profits: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/healthier-
workplaces-healthy-profits

Dedicated WBG Mental Health website:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/mental-health




                                                29
                                            Endnotes

1
  World Bank 2016.
2
  Marquez, P.V. 2015b; Evans, T., Marquez, P.V., and Saxena, S. 2015.
3
  Mnookin S., et al. 2016.
4
  Patel, V., Chisholm, D., Parikh, R., Charlson, F.J, Degenhardt, L., Dua, T., et al. 2015.
5
  Marquez, P.V. 2015; Evans, T, Marquez, P.V., and Saxena, S. 2015.
6
  Mnookin, S., et al. 2016.
7
  American Psychiatric Association 2013.
8
  World Health Organization (WHO ) n.d.
9
  Vigo, D., Thornicroft, G., and Atun, R. 2016.
10
   Patel, V., Chisholm, D., Dua, T., Laxminarayan, R., Medina-Mora, M.E. 2016.
11
   GBD 2015 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators 2016.
12
   GBD 2015 DALYs and HALE Collaborators 2016.
13
   The 2015 GBD Study uses the disability-adjusted life-year (DALY), combining years of life
lost (YLLs) due to mortality and years lived with disability (YLDs) in a single metric. One
DALY can be thought of as one lost year of healthy life.
14
    Patel, V., et al. 2012.
15
   See for example Sorel, E. 2016.
16
   Bloom, D.E., et al. 2011; Marquez, P.V. and Farrington, J. 2013.
17
   WHO 2013.
18
   Bloom, D.E., et al. 2011.
19
   Hewlett, E. and Moran, V. 2014.
20
   Studies cited at Refugee Health Technical Assistance Center
(http://refugeehealthta.org/physical-mental-health/mental-health/) include: Birman, D., Beehler,
S., Harris, E. et al. 2008; Carswell, K., Blackburn, P., Barker, C. 2011; Lustig, S., Kia-Keating,
M., Kight, W. et al. 2004; Murray, K., Davidson, G., Schweitzer, R. 2010.
21
   Mnookin S., et al. 2016; Sorel, E.R., et al. 2005.
22
   Mnookin S., et al. 2016; Bolton, P., et al. 2002; Chung, R. and Kagawa-Singer, M. 1993; De
Jong, J., et al. 2001; De Jong, J., et al. 2003; Dubois, V., et al. 2004; Karam, E.G., et al. 2008;
Mollica, R.F., et al. 1997; Mollica, R.F., et al. 2004; Pham, P.N, et al. 2004; Silove, D., et al.
2008.
23
   GBD 2015 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators 2016.
24
   WHO & UNHCR 2012; WHO & UNHCR 2015; WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNHCR, & UN
Action n.d.
25
   Studies cited at Refugee Health Technical Assistance Center
(http://refugeehealthta.org/physical-mental-health/mental-health/): include: Birman, D., Beehler,
S., Harris, E. et al. 2008; Carswell, K., Blackburn, P., Barker, C. 2011; Lustig, S., Kia-Keating,
M., Kight, W. et al. 2004; Murray, K., Davidson, G., Schweitzer, R. 2010.
26
   Mollica, R.F., et al. 2014.
27
   Marquez, P.V. 2014.
28
   Epping-Jordan JE, Ommeren MV, Nayef Ashour H, Maramis A, Marini A, Mohanraj A, Noori
A, Rizwan H, Saeed K, Silove D, Suveendran T, Urbina L, Ventevogel P, Saxena S. 2015.
29
   There are several studies by Ken Miller on this, e.g. Miller, K. E., Omidian, P., Rasmussen, A.,
Yaqubi, A., Daudzai, H., Nasiri, M., Bakhtyari, M.B., Quraishi, N., Usmankhil, S., & Sultani, Z.
2008.


                                                30
30
   WHO 2010.
31
   World Bank Group, WHO 2016.
32
   Kleinman, A., Lockwood Estrin, G., Usmani, S., Chisholm, D., Marquez, P.V., Evans, T.G.,
and Saxena, S. 2016.
33
   United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals, Goal 3. Available at:
http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/health/
34
   United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) 2015.
35
   American Psychiatric Association (APA) 2016.
36
   See Rise Asset Development: http://www.riseassetdevelopment.com/.
37
   Interagency Standing Committee 2014. This and other documents accessed at:
https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/product-categories/mental-health-and-psychosocial-
support
38
   See WHO & UNHCR 2012; WHO & UNHCR. 2015; WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNHCR, &
UN Action n.d.
39
   Marquez, P.V. and Walker, M. 2016.
40
   See Partners in Health Mental Health site: http://www.pih.org/priority-programs/mental-
health. Cf. Partners In Health (PIH) 2016. Also see PIH Mental Health Planning Matrix to
Achieve UHC. Discussed in personal communication with Giuseppe Raviola, MD, MPH,
Director, Mental Health, Partners In Health, October 21, 2016.
41
   Sorel, E. 2015.
42
   See International Medical Corps (IMC) 2015.
43
   Thornicrofts, G., et al. 2016.
44
   Quinn, N., et al. 2013.
45
   Sartorius, N. 2007.
46
   Sartorius, N. 2002; Sartorius, N. 2007; Magliano, L., et al. 2004; Magliano, L., et al. 2011.
47
   Thornicrofts, G., et al. 2016.
48
   Rahman, A., et al. 2016.
49
   Chowdhary, Neerja; Anand, Arpita; Dimidjian, Sona; Shinde, Sachin; Weobong, Benedict;
Balaji, Madhumitha; Hollon, Steven D.; Rahman, Atif; Wilson, G. Terence; Verdeli, Helena;
Araya, Ricardo; King, Michael; Jordans, Mark; Fairburn, Christopher; Kirkwood, Betty; Patel,
Vikram 2016.
50
   Mnookin S., et al. 2016.
51
   Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) 2007.
52
   Druss, B., and Reisinger, E. 2011; Katon, W., et al. 2006; O’Neil, A., et al. 2015; Patel, V., et
al. 2013; Jamison, D. (in press).
53
   Verbeek, T., et al. 2015.
54
   Kim, D.R., et al. 2013.
55
   Spinelli, M.G., Endicott J. 2003.
56 Wachs, T.D, Black, M.M., Engle, P.L. 2009.
57 Sikander, S., et al. 2015.
58 Pachi ,A., Dionisios, B., Moussas, G., Tslebis 2013.
59 WHO 2003.
60 Gaynes, B.N., Pence, B.W., Eron J.J., Miller, W.C. 2008.
61 Kumar, V., Encinosa, W. 2009.
62 Carrico, A., Antoni, M. 2008.
63 Gaynes, B.N., Pence, B.W., Eron J.J., Miller, W.C. 2008

                                                 31
64 Kumar,V., Encinosa, W. 2009.
65 Carrico, A., Antoni, M. 2008.
66 Based on Partners In Health (PIH), Four Zeros Strategic Plan, analysis and references
compiled by Alexandra Rose, MSc GMH.
67 Personal communication with Prof. Eliot Sorel, George Washington University School of
Public Health, December 7, 2016.
68 Layard, R., et al. 2007; Ngo, V., et al. (in press); Pemjean, A. 2010; UK Department of
Health 2012.
69
   Personal communication with Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental Health and
Substance Abuse, and Mark van Ommeren, Public Mental Health Adviser, WHO, November 11,
2016. Syrian conflict data from the Financial Times’s article ‘It felt like the last goodbye’, by
Erika Solomon and Geoff Dyer, December 17, 2016, p.6.
70
   Chisholm, D., Sweeny, K., Sheehan, P., et al. 2016.
71
   Duvergé, S. 2014.
72
   WHO 2006.
73
   McGrath, M. and Schafer, A. 2014.
74
   WHO 2013.
75
   Marquez, P.V. 2016d.
76
   Marquez, P.V. 2016a.
77
    Marquez, P.V., and Moreno-Dodson, B. 2016; Marquez, P.V. 2016b.
78
   Marquez, P. V. 2015a.
79
   Marquez, P.V. 2016c.
80
   Marquez, P.V. 2016c.
81
   Personal communication with Shekhar Saxena, Director, Department of Mental Health and
Substance Abuse and and Mark van Ommeren, Public Mental Health Adviser, WHO, October
18, 2016.
82
   World Bank Group, WHO. 2016.
83
   World Bank Live. Out of the Shadows: Making Mental Health a Global Development Priority.
April 13–14, 2016. http://live.worldbank.org/out-ofthe-shadows-making-mental-health-a-global-
development-priority.
84
   Kasali, T. 2016.




                                               32
                                            References

American Psychiatric Association (APA). 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (Fifth ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.

American Psychiatric Association (APA). 2016. “Position Statement on Integrated Care.”
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.

Birman, D, Beehler, S, Harris, E, et al. 2008. “International family, adult, and child enhancement
services (FACES): a community-based comprehensive services model for refugee children in
resettlement.” Am J Orthopsychiatry 78(1): 121-32.

Bloom DE, Cafiero E, Jané-Llopis E, et al. 2011. The global economic burden of
noncommunicable diseases. Geneva: World Economic Forum.

Bolton, P., et al. 2002. “Prevalence of depression in rural Rwanda based on symptom and
functional criteria.” The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 190(9):631-637.

Carrico A, Antoni, M. 2008. “Effects of Psychological Interventions on Neuroendocrine
Hormone Regulation and Immune Status in HIV-Positive persons: A review of Randomized
Controlled Trials.” Psychosomatic Medicine. 2008; 70(5): 575-584.

Carswell, K, Blackburn, P, Barker, C. 2011. “The relationship between trauma, post-migration
problems and the psychological well-being of refugees and asylum seekers.” Int J Soc Psychiatry
57: 1007.

Chisholm D, Sweeny K, Sheehan P, et al. 2016. “Scaling-up treatment of depression and anxiety:
a global return on investment analysis.” Lancet Psychiatry 3: 415–24.

Chowdhary, Neerja; Anand, Arpita; Dimidjian, Sona; Shinde, Sachin; Weobong, Benedict;
Balaji, Madhumitha; Hollon, Steven D.; Rahman, Atif; Wilson, G. Terence; Verdeli, Helena;
Araya, Ricardo; King, Michael; Jordans, Mark J D; Fairburn, Christopher; Kirkwood, Betty;
Patel, Vikram. 2016. “The healthy activity program lay counselor-delivered treatment for severe
depression in India. Systematic development and randomised evaluation.” British Journal of
Psychiatry, Vol. 208, No. 4, 01.04.2016, p. 381-388.

Chung, R. and M. Kagawa-Singer. 1993. “Predictors of psychological distress among Southeast
Asian refugees.” Social Science & Medicine 36, no. 5: 631-639.

De Jong, J., et al. 2001. “Lifetime events and posttraumatic stress disorder in 4 post conflict
settings.” JAMA 286, no. 5:555-562.

De Jong, J., et al. 2003. “Common mental disorders in post conflict settings.” Lancet 361, no.
9375:2128-2130.




                                                 33
Druss, B., and E. Reisinger. 2011. “Mental disorders and medical comorbidity.” The Synthesis
Project: Research Synthesis Report No. 21.

Dubois, V., et al. 2004. “Household survey of psychiatric morbidity in Cambodia.” International
Journal of Social Psychiatry 50, no. 2: 174-185.

Duvergé, S. 2014. “Malnutrition in conflict: the psychological cause.” The Guardian. First
published 2 June 2014 10.54 BST.

Epping-Jordan JE, Ommeren MV, Nayef Ashour H, Maramis A, Marini A, Mohanraj A, Noori
A, Rizwan H, Saeed K, Silove D, Suveendran T, Urbina L, Ventevogel P, Saxena S. 2015.
“Beyond the crisis: building back better mental health care in 10 emergency-affected areas using
a longer-term perspective.” International Journal of Mental Health Systems 9:15.

Evans, T, Marquez, P.V., and Saxena, S. 2015. “The zero hour for mental health.” The World
Bank Blogs, May 4, 2015. Available at http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/zero-hour-mental-
health.

Gaynes, B.N., Pence, B.W., Eron J.J., Miller, W.C. 2008. “Prevalence and comorbidity of
psychiatric diagnoses based on reference standard in an HIV+ patient population.”
Psychosomatic Medicine. 2008; 70: 505–511.

GBD 2015 DALYs and HALE Collaborators. 2016. “Global, regional, and national disability-
adjusted life-years (DALYs) for 315 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE),
1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.” Lancet 388:
1603–58.

GBD 2015 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators. 2016. “Global, regional,
and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 310 diseases and
injuries,1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.” Lancet
388: 1545–602.

Hewlett, E. and Moran, V. 2014. Making Mental Health Count: The Social and Economic Costs
of Neglecting Mental Health Care. OECD Health Policy Studies, OECD Publishing.

International Medical Corps (IMC). 2015. “The Syria Crisis. Addressing Mental Health Needs
and Gaps in the Context of the Syrian Crisis.”
http://internationalmedicalcorps.org/document.doc?id=526.

Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC). 2007. IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and
Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings. Geneva: IASC.
(http://www.who.int/mental_health/emergencies/9781424334445/en/).


Interagency Standing Committee (IASC). 2014. “Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in
Emergency Settings: What Should Camp Coordination and Camp Management Actors Know?”

                                               34
Accessed at: https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/product-categories/mental-health-and-
psychosocial-support

Jamison, D. (in press). “Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition: improving health and reducing
poverty.” Lancet.

Karam, E.G., et al. 2008. “Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in Lebanon: first onset,
treatment, and exposure to war.” PLOS Medicine 5, no. 4:e61.

Kasali, T. 2016. “Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs): An Integrated Approach to
Rehabilitating IDPs with Dignity.” Available at:
http://www.slideshare.net/ToluwalolaKasali/internally-displaced-persons-an-integrated-
approach-to-rehabilitating-idps-with-dignity-updated-february-2016.

Katon, W., et al. 2006. “Cost-effectiveness and net benefit of enhanced treatment of depression
for older adults with diabetes and depression.” Diabetes Care 29, no. 2, 265–270.

Kennedy, P., and Fried, S. 2015. A Common Struggle: A Personal Journey through the Past and
Future of Mental Illness and Addiction. Blue Rider Press.

Kim DR, et al. 2013. Elevated risk of adverse obstetric outcomes in pregnant women with
depression. Archives of Women’s Mental Health. 2013; 16 (6): 475-482.

Kleinman, A., Lockwood Estrin, G., Usmani, S., Chisholm, D., Marquez, P.V., Evans, T.G., and
Saxena, S. 2016. “Time for mental health to come out of the shadows.” Lancet 2016: 387: 2274-
2275.

Kumar V, Encinosa, W. 2009. “Effects of Antidepressant Treatment on Antiretroviral Regimen
Adherence among depressed HIV-infected patients.” Psychiatric Quarterly. 2009; 80: 131-141.

Layard, R., et al. 2007. “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Psychological Therapy.” National Institute
Economic Review 202, no. 1:90-98.

Lustig, S, Kia-Keating, M, Kight, W et al. 2004. “Review of child and adolescent refugee mental
health.” J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 43(1): 24-36.

Magliano, L., et al. 2004. “Perception of patients’ unpredictability and beliefs on the causes and
consequences of schizophrenia.” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 39, no. 5:410-
416.

Magliano, L., et al. 2011. “The influence of causal explanations and diagnostic labeling on
medical students’ views of schizophrenia.” Academic Medicine 86, no. 9:1155-1162.

Marquez, P.V. 2014. “Mental Health: Time for a Broader Agenda.” The World Bank Blogs,
April 22, 2014. Available at http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/mental-health-time-broader-
agenda.

                                                35
Marquez, P. V. 2015a. “Making the public health case for tobacco taxation.” The World Bank
Blogs, July 7, 2015. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/making-public-health-case-
tobacco-taxation.

Marquez, P.V. 2015b. “Shining a light on mental illness: An “invisible disability”? The World
Bank Blogs, December 2, 2015. Available at http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/shining-light-
mental-illness-invisible-disability;

Marquez, P.V. 2016a. “Time to put “health” into universal health coverage?” The World Bank
Blogs, January 14, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/time-put-health-
universal-health-coverage.

Marquez, P.V. 2016b. Taxing tobacco and the new vision for financing development. The World
Bank Blogs, April 18, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/taxing-tobacco-and-
new-vision-financing-development.

Marquez, P.V. 2016c. “Expanding The Global Tax Base: Taxing To Promote Public Goods:
Tobacco Taxes Panel Session Held As Part Of ‘Winning The Tax Wars: Global Solutions For
Developing Countries’ Conference At The World Bank Group, May 23-24, 2016.” Summary
Report.

Marquez, P.V. 2016d. “Invisible wounds: Mental health among displaced people and refugees.”
The World Bank Blogs, October 11, 2016. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/invisible-wounds-mental-health-among-displaced-people-and-
refugees.

Marquez, P. and J. Farrington. 2013. “The challenge of non-communicable diseases and road
traffic injuries in Sub-Saharan Africa: an overview.” Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/06/17997739/challenge-non-
communicablediseases-road-traffic-injuries-sub-saharan-africa-overview.

Marquez, P.V., and Moreno-Dodson, B. 2016. “Economic slowdown and financial shocks: can
tobacco tax increases help?” The World Bank Blogs, Feb 8, 2016. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/economic-slowdown-and-financial-shocks-can-tobacco-tax
increases-help.

Marquez, P.V., and Walker, M. 2016. “Mental health services in situations of conflict, fragility
and violence: What to do?.” The World Bank Blogs, November 1, 2016.

McGrath, M. and Schafer, A. 2014. “Integrating psychosocial support into nutrition programmes
in West Africa during the Sahel food crisis Intervention.” War Trauma Foundation Volume 12,
Number 1, Page 115 – 126.




                                                36
Miller, K. E., Omidian, P., Rasmussen, A., Yaqubi, A., Daudzai, H., Nasiri, M., Bakhtyari, M.B.,
Quraishi, N., Usmankhil, S., & Sultani, Z. 2008. “Daily stressors, war experiences, and mental
health in Afghanistan.“ Transcultural Psychiatry, 45¸ 611-639.

Mnookin S., et al. 2016. “Out of the shadows: making mental health a global development
priority.” Report. Geneva: World Bank Group and World Health Organization. Available at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/270131468187759113/Out-of-the-shadows-making-
mental-health-a-global-development-priority

Mollica, R.F., et al. 1997. “Effects of war trauma on Cambodian refugee adolescents’ functional
health and mental health status.” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry 36, no. 8:1098-1106;

Mollica, R.F., et al. 2004. “Mental health in complex emergencies.” Lancet 364, no. 9450:2058-
2067.

Mollica, R.F., et al. 2014. “The enduring mental health impact of mass violence: A community
comparison study of Cambodian civilians living in Cambodia and Thailand.” International
Journal of Social Psychiatry 60, no. 1:6-20.

Murray, K, Davidson, G, Schweitzer, R. 2010. “Review of refugee mental health interventions
following resettlement: best practices and recommendations. Am J Orthopsychiatry 80(4): 576-
85.

Ngo V., et al. (in press). “Grand challenges: integrating mental health care into the non-
communicable disease agenda.” PLOS Medicine.

O’Neil, A., et al. 2015. “A shared framework for the common mental disorders and Non-
Communicable Disease: key considerations for disease prevention and control.” BioMed Central
Psychiatry 15.

Pachi A, Dionisios B, Moussas G, Tslebis A. 2013. Psychiatric Morbidity and other factors
affecting Treatment Adherence in Pulmonary Tuberculosis Patients. Tuberculosis Research and
Treatment. 2013.

Partners In Health (PIH). 2016. Partners In Health Mental Health Strategic Plan 2016-21: The
Imperative for Access and Quality. Boston, MA: Partners In Health.

Partners In Health (PIH). No date. Mental Health Planning Matrix to Achieve UHC. Internal
planning document. Boston, MA: Partners In Health.

Patel, V., et al. 2012. “Suicide mortality in India: a nationally representative survey.” Lancet
2012; 379:2343-51.

Patel, V., et al. 2013. “Grand challenges: integrating mental health services into priority health
care platforms.” PLOS Med 10, no. 5: e1001448.

                                                 37
Patel V, Chisholm D, Parikh R, Charlson FJ, Degenhardt L, Dua T, et al. 2015. “Addressing the
burden of mental, neurological, and substance use disorders: key messages from Disease Control
Priorities, 3rd edition”. The Lancet. Published online 8 October 2015.

Patel, Vikram; Chisholm, Dan; Dua, Tarun; Laxminarayan, Ramanan; Medina-Mora, Maria
Elena. 2016. Disease Control Priorities, Third Edition: Volume 4. Mental, Neurological, and
Substance Use Disorders. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/23832 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

Pemjean, A. 2010. “Mental health in primary healthcare in Chile.” International Psychiatry 7:7–
8.

Pham, P.N, et al. 2004. “Trauma and PTSD symptoms in Rwanda: implications for attitudes
toward justice and reconciliation.” JAMA 292, no. 5: 602-612.

Quinn, N., et al. 2013. “Nature and impact of European anti-stigma depression programmes.”
Health Promotion International: das076.

Rahman, A., et al. 2016. “Effect of a Multicomponent Behavioral Intervention in Adults
Impaired by Psychological Distress in a Conflict-Affected Area of Pakistan. A Randomized
Clinical Trial.” JAMA. Published online November 12, 2016. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.17165.

Sartorius, N., 2002. “Iatrogenic stigma of mental illness.” British Medical Journal 324, no.
7352:1470-1471.

Sartorius, N. 2007. “Stigma and mental health.” Lancet 370, no. 9590:810-811.

Sikander S, et al. 2015. “Cognitive-Behavioral Counseling for Exclusive Breastfeeding in Rural
Pediatrics: A Cluster RCT.” Pediatrics. 2015; 135 (2).

Silove, D., et al. 2008. “Estimating clinically relevant mental disorders in a rural and an urban
setting in post-conflict Timor Leste.” Archives of General Psychiatry 65, no. 10:1205-1212.

Solomon, E., and Dyer, G. 2016. “It felt like the last goodbye.” Financial Times, December 17,
2016, p.6.

Sorel, E. 2015. “Total Health For All In The 21st Century: Integrating Primary Care, Mental
Health And Public Health.” In World Federation For Mental Health. Dignity In Mental Health.
World Mental Health Day, 10 October 2015.

Sorel, E. 2016. “Depression and Comorbidity in Primary Care in China, India, Iran, Romania.”
International Medical Journal Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 118.

Sorel, E.R., et al. 2005. “Populations’ Mental Health in Post Conflict Contexts.” Advances in
Psychiatry Second Volume: 163.

                                                 38
Spinelli MG, Endicott J. 2003. “Controlled clinical trial of interpersonal psychotherapy versus
parenting education program for depressed pregnant women.” American Journal of Psychiatry
2003;160(3):555–62.

Thornicroft, G., et al. 2016. “Evidence for effective interventions to reduce mental-health-
related stigma and discrimination.” Lancet 387: 10023, p1123–1132.

United Kingdom Department of Health. 2012. “IAPT three-year report: The first million
patients.” Available at http://www.iapt.nhs.uk/silo/files/iapt-3-year-report.pdf.

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR). 2015. Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Available at: http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/43291

Verbeek T, et al. 2015. “Anxiety and depression during pregnancy in Central America: a cross-
sectional study among pregnant women in the developing country Nicaragua.” BMC Psychiatry
15(1): 292.

Vigo, D., Thornicroft, G. and Atun, R. 2016. “Estimating the true global burden of mental
illness.” Lancet Psychiatry 3: 171–78.

Wachs TD, Black MM, Engle PL. 2009. “Maternal Depression: A Global Threat to Children’s
Health, Development, and Behavior and to Human Rights.” Child Development Perspectives.
2009; 3(1): 51-59.

World Bank. 2016. Forcibly Displaced: Toward a Development Approach Supporting Refugees,
the Internally Displaced, and Their Hosts. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25016

World Bank Live. “Out of the Shadows: Making Mental Health a Global Development Priority.”
April 13–14, 2016. http://live.worldbank.org/out-ofthe-shadows-making-mental-health-a-global-
development-priority.

World Bank Group, World Health Organization. 2016. Report of Proceedings of the Event “Out
of the Shadows: Making Mental Health a Global Development Priority.” Washington, DC:
World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/mental-health.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2003. Adherence to long-term therapies: evidence for
action. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/pdf/s4883e/s4883e.pdf.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2006. Mental Health and Psychosocial Well–Being among
Children in Severe Food Shortage Situations. Geneva: WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2010. mhGAP (Mental Health Gap Action Programme)
Intervention Guide. Geneva: WHO.

                                                39
World Health Organization (WHO). 2013a. Mental Health Action Plan 2013-2020. Geneva:
WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2013b. Building back better: sustainable mental health
care after emergencies. Geneva: WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO). No date. Mental Health Statistics and Information Systems,
estimates for 2010-2012. Geneva: WHO.

World Health Organization (WHO) & United Nations High Commission for Refugees
(UNHCR). 2012. Assessing Mental Health and Psychosocial Needs and Resources: Toolkit for
Humanitarian Settings. Geneva: WHO
(http://www.who.int/mental_health/resources/toolkit_mh_emergencies/en/);

World Health Organization (WHO) & United Nations High Commission for Refugees
(UNHCR). 2015. mhGAP Humanitarian Intervention Guide (mhGAP-HIG): Clinical
management of mental, neurological and substance use conditions in humanitarian emergencies.
Geneva: WHO. http://www.who.int/mental_health/publications/mhgap_hig/en/

WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNHCR, & UN Action. No date. MHPSS for conflict-related sexual
violence: 10 myths. Geneva: WHO.
(http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/violence/rhr12_17/en/).




                                             40
