INCENTIVIZING
NUTRITION
Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
         LUC LAVIOLETTE, SUDARARAJAN GOPALAN, LESLIE ELDER, OLIVIER WOUTERS
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution
to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications,
The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@
worldbank.org.
Table of Contents
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Acknowledgements .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 6
Acronyms and Abbreviations.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                               7
Executive Summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
Introduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
  Why nutrition?
  Operational guidance for nutrition incentives
Part I. Investing in Nutrition: What, Why, and How? .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 17
 What is malnutrition?
 Why does malnutrition matter?
 How does malnutrition affect sectoral objectives?
 Is nutrition a good investment?
 What are the causes and determinants of malnutrition?
 What nutrition-specific interventions work?
 What nutrition-sensitive interventions work?
 When in the life cycle is nutrition critical?
 How has nutrition evolved as a global priority?
Part II. Financial and Non-Financial Incentives to Enhance Nutrition Results .   .   .   .   .   . 29
 What are financial incentive mechanisms?
 What has been the World Bank’s experience using financial incentive mechanisms
 for nutrition?
 What is the evidence on the use of financial incentive mechanisms for nutrition?
 How to select nutrition incentive mechanisms?
 Which incentives should be used at what levels?
 Financial Incentive Mechanisms: Strengths and Challenges
     Government Level: National and Sub-National
  1. 
     Development Policy Financing
     Program for Results and Disbursement-Linked Indicators
     Performance Based Budgeting
  2. H ealth Facility Level
      Performance-Based Financing
     Performance-Based Contracting
  3. Community Level
        Performance-Based Community Contracts and Community Performance
        Based Financing
     Community-Driven Development
  4. Household / Individual Level
     Conditional and Unconditional Cash Transfers
     Public Works Programs
 Non-Financial Incentives
Conclusions.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  67
Annexes
 Annex 1. Evidence Review of Financial Incentive Mechanisms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 71
 Annex 2. Glossary of Nutrition Terms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 80
 Annex 3. References .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 87
Foreword




At the World Bank, we view nutrition as a foundational factor of development. Investing
in nutrition will contribute to achieving the World Bank’s dual goals of ending extreme poverty
and promoting shared prosperity. The coordinated support of the international community is
important to optimizing the rising trend in nutrition investment, which was galvanized by the
global Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement, and reaffirmed at the 2012 World Health Assembly
where world leaders committed to reaching six global nutrition targets by 2025.
  The cost of underinvestment in nutrition is immense. Undernourished mothers give birth to
chronically ill and cognitively deficient children. Intergenerational malnutrition reinforces the
cycle of poverty and prevents countries from reaching their development potential. World Bank
President Jim Yong Kim observed that “One of the biggest obstacles to [a] better world is our col-
lective failure to help parents provide adequate nutrition…to children during the first 1,000 days.”
Governments must invest in a skilled, healthy, productive workforce to compete in the global
digital economy. And that investment needs to start with nutrition in the first 1,000 days of life.
  The World Bank is well positioned to advise its country clients on scaling up effective nutrition
interventions and to collaborate with partners to coordinate and enhance investments in nutri-
tion. Well-chosen incentives could increase the possibility that countries will succeed in imple-
menting effective nutrition interventions to achieve better outcomes for their populations. Until
recently, incentive mechanisms in support of nutrition results have been underutilized.
  The report, Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes—and the accom-
panying Practitioner’s Compendium—provide important guidance for cost-effective multisectoral
efforts to scale up nutrition programming by incentivizing nutrition interventions. Financial in-
centives are one tool to support nutrition interventions. However, incentives need to be carefully
chosen, underpinned by a clear theory of change, and designed for particular contexts and objec-
tives. When a decision is taken to use financial incentives, the report and compendium offer oper-
ational guidance to task teams and leaders. They highlight the potential challenges and strengths
of the various mechanisms, and include country examples and nutrition indicators to monitor
progress at the levels where the mechanism would exert its influence, i.e., national, sub-national,
facility, community, households, or individuals.
  I encourage managers to familiarize themselves with the available mechanisms to incentivize
nutrition in operations for country clients—particularly in countries most heavily burdened by
malnutrition. Malnutrition is a global crisis causing unnecessary pain, suffering, and economic
losses. We must accelerate our response to this global development challenge and become more
innovative in our approaches, including in our use of incentives. The World Bank is committed to
improving nutrition outcomes in partnership with the international community.

Timothy Grant Evans
Senior Director
Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
 

FOREW0RD 	                                                                                             5
     Acknowledgements




     This report was developed in response to requests from World Bank staff for guidance
     on how to use financial and non-financial incentive mechanisms to enhance nutrition results
     in World Bank operations. The report was prepared by a core team led by Luc Laviolette. Helle
     Alvesson supported Luc Laviolette in the initial consultations to prepare the concept review.
     Leslie Elder and Luc Laviolette co-wrote Part I. Sundararajan Gopalan lead the research for and
     co-wrote Part II with Luc Laviolette. Olivier Wouters carried out the evidence review, wrote
     related sections of this report, and provided research support for other sections. Rosemarie Es-
     ber contributed to the overall structure and led the editing. The graphic design was ensured by
     Nicole Hamam.
       We are grateful for the time that current and former World Bank staff dedicated to sharing their
     operational experience through interviews and / or participation in a quality review workshop.
     They include: Philippe Auffret, Anne Bakilana, Tekabe Belay, Manav Bhattarai, Benedicte de la
     Briere, Aaron Buchsbaum, Sadia Chowdhury, Sarah Coll-Black, Aissatou Diack, Moulay El Idrissi,
     Gyorge Fritsche, Inaam ul Haq, Maria Gracheva, Tawab Hashemi, Mohini Kak, Jakub Kakietek,
     Silvia Kauffman, Kees Kostermans, Rousselle Lavado, Yi-Kyoung Lee, Benjamin Loevinsohn,
     Alessandra Marini, Nkosinathi Mbuya, Carol Medlin, Menno Mulder-Sibanda, Michel Muvudi,
     Emre Ozaltin, Christine Lao Pena, Sangeeta Pinto, Anne Marie Provo, Jumana Qamruddin, GNV
     Ramana, Laura Rawlings, Paul Jacob Robin, Claudia Rokx, Hadia Samaha, Aparnaa Somanathan,
     Andrea Spray, Ajay Tandon, Jean-Claude Taptue, Maurizia Tovo, Petronella Vergeer, Andrea Ver-
     merhen, Albertus Voetberg, Damien de Walque, Ali Wintoro Subandoro, and Robert Wrobel.
       This work would not have been possible without the generous financial support from the Mi-
     cronutrient Initiative.
       Timothy Evans, Senior Director, Olusoji Adeyi, Director, Trina Haque, Practice Manager and
     Michele Gragnolati, Practice Manager—all from the Health, Nutrition and Population Global
     Practice—were unstinting in their support of this work. Special thanks are due to Meera Shekar,
     Global Solutions Lead for Nutrition, for her guidance at all stages of the process. They each pro-
     vided strategic guidance at various stages of the report’s development and will assist in dissemi-
     nating the results. We appreciate their steadfast support and encouragement.
       The authors are very grateful to the peer reviewers, Rifat Hasan, Dinesh Nair, and Meera
     Shekar, who provided technical guidance from the conceptualization to the final quality review
     of the work.
       Finally, we want to acknowledge the operational support provided to us by World Bank staff,
     Ana Besarabic, Sybille Crystal, Stella Gonzalez, Jocelyn Haye, Sariette Jippe, Max Jira, Shienny
     Lie, and Ira Marina.



6	                            Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
Acronyms and Abbreviations




CDD	     Community Driven Development     MICS	    Multiple Cluster Surveys
CBP	     Community-Based Performance      MOF	     Ministry of Finance
CCT	     Conditional Cash Transfer        MOH	     Ministry of Health
CHW	     Community Health Worker          MOU	     Memorandum of Understanding
EmONC	   Emergency Obstetric              MSP	     Multi-stakeholder Platform
	        and Neonatal Care                NIPN 	   National Information Platforms
CT	      Cash Transfers                   	        for Nutrition
CCT	     Conditional Cash Transfers       NGO	     Nongovernmental Organization
CPR	     Contraceptive Prevalence Rate    PECS	    Post-Event Coverage Surveys
DHS	     Demographic and Health Surveys   PBB	     Performance-Based Budgeting
DLI	     Disbursement-Linked Indicators   PBC	     Program-Based Contracting
DPF	     Development Policy Financing     PBCC	Performance-Based
GMP	     Growth Monitoring                	    Community Contracts
	        and Promotion                    PBF	     Performance-Based Financing
GNR	     Global Nutrition Report          PforR	   Program for Results
HIV	     Human Immunodeficiency Virus     PWP	     Public Works Program
HR	      Human Resources                  RBF	     Results-Based Financing
HRH	     Human Resources for Health       SBA	     Skilled Birth Attendant
IBRD	International Bank for Recon-       SDG	     Sustainable Development Goals
         struction and Development        SMS	     Short Message Service
 International Development
IDA	                                      SUN	     Scaling Up Nutrition
	Association
                                          SWAp	    Sector Wide Approach
IPF	     Investment Project Financing
                                          UCT	     Unconditional Cash Transfer
 Integrated Child Development
ICDS	
                                          UHC	     Universal Health Coverage
	Services
                                          WB	      World Bank
ITN	     Insecticide Treated Nets
                                          WBG	     World Bank Group
MCH	     Mother Child Health
                                          WHA	     World Health Assembly
M&E	     Monitoring and Evaluation
                                          WHO	     World Health Organization


ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 	                                                        7
Executive Summary




Scaling up Nutrition through Incentives
Good nutrition reduces mortality and poverty, improves children’s school
readiness and performance, and increases a country’s shared prosperity and
                                                                                         Good nutrition
sustainable economic growth. Poor nutrition leads to reduced immunity, in-            reduces mortality
creased susceptibility to disease, impaired physical and mental development,
and decreased productivity. Intergenerational undernutrition reinforces the
                                                                                           and poverty,
cycle of poverty and obstructs development.                                                   improves
  Reducing maternal and child malnutrition has become a global development
priority driven by the multinational Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement.              children’s school
Increasingly, the international community recognizes nutrition as a vital as-
pect of health policies. Integrating nutrition within a country’s universal health
                                                                                         readiness and
care (UHC) policy is paramount to achieving the right to health for all.                  performance,
  The evidence indicates that a set of highly cost-effective nutrition-specific
interventions need to be urgently scaled up to maximize reductions in mal-              and increases a
nutrition. A sustainable and comprehensive reduction in malnutrition also              country’s shared
requires nutrition-sensitive interventions implemented through diverse sec-
tors, including agriculture, education, water and sanitation, the private sector,        prosperity and
and social protection. Successful multisectoral nutrition interventions require
strong coordination and accountability mechanisms at various levels of gover-
                                                                                            sustainable
nance. An important ingredient for successfully scaling up a country’s multi-         economic growth.
sectoral nutrition plans are the right incentives.
  The right mix of incentives could increase the possibility that nutrition
interventions will be implemented to achieve targeted results, but the systematic use of
incentives to achieve nutrition results in World Bank operations remains limited. The World
Bank has extensive experience supporting the design, implementation, and evaluation of financial
incentive mechanisms, and it is well positioned to use that knowledge to support country clients
and collaborate with partners to enhance the efficiency of delivering nutrition interventions.
  This report provides operational guidance to World Bank project teams considering including
nutrition objectives in projects. It is intended for non-technical staff to support their clients’ ef-
forts to enhance the nutritional impact of World Bank country investments. The report provides
practical advice to design and implement nutrition interventions in future operations based on



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 	                                                                                        9
        a review of past successful and less successful attempts. The recommendations are organized by
        type of financial incentive mechanism, which correspond to the specific levels where the mech-
        anisms exert their influence, i.e., national, sub-national, facility, community, households, or indi-
        viduals, and also provides information on the use of non-financial incentives.


        Why invest in nutrition?
        Malnutrition is a driver of poverty. Reducing malnutrition is essential to achieving the World
        Bank’s goals of eliminating extreme poverty and enhancing shared prosperity. Evidence-based
        nutrition interventions are consistently a high investment priority in economic analyses. Every
        dollar invested in proven nutrition interventions in developing countries yields about $18 dollars
        in economic returns.
                              A relatively small “window of opportunity” exists during which most of
A relatively                the damage from malnutrition occurs—damage that is mostly irreversible and
                            detrimental throughout a person’s life. This golden window is referred to as
small “window               the first thousand days—from conception to the end of the first two years of a
                            child’s life. To prevent irreversible developmental damage, good nutrition is
of opportunity”             critical for prospective mothers well before pregnancy and conception. A set of
                            cost-effective nutrition-specific interventions have proven highly successful
exists during               in improving nutrition.

which most
                           What are incentive mechanisms?
of the                     Incentives motivate individuals to perform an action. Incentives can be classi-
                           fied as financial, moral, coercive or natural / intrinsic. Incentive structures are
damage from                a central feature of economics and are described as the interaction between a

malnutrition               principal, who applies the incentive, and an agent, who receives the incentive.
                           Greater incentives are assumed to lead to more effort and better performance.
occurs—                    Financial incentives can have two kinds of effects: a direct price effect, which
                           makes the incentivized behavior more attractive, and an indirect psycholog-
damage that                ical effect. The psychological effect can reinforce the price effect, but it can
                           sometimes work in opposition to the price effect by crowding out the incen-
is mostly                  tivized behavior.

irreversible and
                           How to select nutrition incentive mechanisms?
detrimental               Nutrition programs and interventions can be implemented at different levels
                          of the system. When planning a country’s nutrition program, the first step is
throughout a              to identify the key nutrition challenges and the different system levels affected
                          to define a theory of change to inform where to focus the effort and what ap-
person’s life.            proach or instrument might be most effective. At each level, it is useful to an-
                          alyze how financial and non-financial incentives are aligned (or not) to either
                          encourage or block actions. Financial and non-financial incentives can have
        unintended consequences. Their introduction into operations needs to be carefully considered in
        each context—when a decision is made to use them.
          The World Bank’s main instruments and approaches, and the levels at which they are typically
        used to improve nutrition, are depicted in the figure below. Because the instruments and ap-
        proaches are results-based and have associated financing, they are effectively financial incentive
        mechanisms. This report also discusses the importance of non-financial incentives and provides
        some examples that could be used in nutrition operations.


10	                               Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
               Financial Incentive Mechanisms Applied at Different Levels




Source: Authors.




Choosing the right nutrition incentives for the right level
Successfully scaling up a country’s multisectoral nutrition plans requires the right incentives,
including facilitating effective inter-sectoral collaboration and coordination. The financial and
non-financial incentive instruments used effectively in health, education, and social protection
programs can be equally effective in achieving behavior change to improve nutrition either as
part of broader World Bank operations or as stand-alone nutrition projects or programs.
  The use of incentives in World Bank-financed operations to achieve nutrition objectives has
been modest to date and deserves more attention. This document explains the various financial
and non-financial incentives and at which level they could be used. Explicit indicators should be
included to measure nutrition results within the health, agriculture, education, social protection,
water and sanitation, and other relevant sector operations. An essential element for the success
of incentivized nutrition operations is to identify appropriate indicators and to establish robust
systems to monitor and verify results in order to reward good performance promptly.
  To assist task-teams and leaders in developing, implementing, and monitoring incentivized
programs for nutrition, as well as in incorporating nutrition results in other relevant operations,
a Practitioner’s Compendium compliments this report. The compendium offers practical infor-
mation on how to plan incentivized operations for improving nutrition results for World Bank
client countries, along with country examples and nutrition indicators for monitoring progress.




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 	                                                                                   11
Introduction




Why nutrition?
Good nutrition reduces mortality and poverty, improves children’s Nutrition-specific:
school readiness and performance, and increases a country’s shared Interventions that have an immediate
prosperity and sustainable economic growth.1 Poor nutrition leads to and direct impact on maternal, fetal,
reduced immunity, increased susceptibility to disease, impaired physi- and child nutrition and development,
cal and mental development, and decreased productivity. Malnourished including adequate food and nutrient
mothers give birth to sickly and cognitively deficient children. Irre- intake, feeding, caregiving and
versibly damaged children bear the burden of their malnourishment parenting practices, and low burden of
                                                                             infectious diseases.
throughout their lifetimes—unable to contribute their full potential to
national development.
  Intergenerational undernutrition reinforces the cycle of poverty and Nutrition-sensitive:
                                                                             Interventions that address the
obstructs development.2 Even though the cycle is not irreversible, a
                                                                             underlying and basic determinants of
special focus on malnourished mothers is required because they have
                                                                             maternal, fetal, and child nutrition and
a higher likelihood of giving birth to malnourished children. Reduc-
                                                                             development
ing maternal and child malnutrition has become a global development
priority driven by the multinational Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) move-
ment.3 Increasingly, the international community recognizes nutrition as a vital aspect of health
policies, requiring multisectoral coordination. Integrating nutrition within a country’s universal
health care (UHC) policy is paramount to achieving the right to health for all.
  A set of cost-effective nutrition-specific interventions have proven highly successful in improv-
ing nutrition.4 Nutrition-sensitive interventions are typically delivered through health systems




1
    Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large Scale Action. 2006. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
2
 H.F. Delisle. 2008. Poverty: the double burden of malnutrition in mothers and the intergenerational impact. Annals of the
New York Academy of Science 1136: 172–84.
3
    See www.scalingupnutrition.org.
4
 Z.A. Bhutta et al. 2013. Evidence-based interventions for improvement of maternal and child nutrition: what can be done and
at what cost? The Lancet Maternal and Child Nutrition Series 382: 452–77.



INTRODUCTION 	                                                                                                                    13
            and other programs such as cash transfer programs and community-based approaches. However,
            a sustainable and comprehensive reduction in malnutrition requires nutrition-sensitive interven-
            tions implemented through diverse sectors, such as agriculture, education, water and sanitation,
            the private sector, and social protection. Successful multisectoral nutrition interventions require
            strong coordination and accountability mechanisms at various levels of governance countrywide.
               An important ingredient to successfully scaling up a country’s multisectoral nutrition plans
            are the right incentives—including effective inter-sectoral collaboration and coordination. The
            focus on incentives is relatively new in the nutrition field. Even though the international com-
            munity is clear on what needs to be done to reduce malnutrition, how to ensure targeted in-
            terventions to achieve the intended nutrition impact remains only partially evident. The right
            incentives could increase the possibility that nutrition interventions will be implemented to
            achieve targeted results.
               Most nutrition research has focused on the basic science or the efficacy of interventions in rel-
            atively smaller and more controlled projects. Evaluations of larger-scale programs often demon-
            strate a gap between the nutrition impact of interventions—tested through efficacy studies in
                                   controlled settings—and the impact of interventions at the large-scale and
                                   programmatic level. Meanwhile, the focus on financial and non-financial
      An important                 incentives has grown considerably in related fields, such as public health
                                   and social protection.
      ingredient to                  The World Bank has an important role to play in support of country cli-
                                   ents and in collaboration with partners to enhance the efficiency of deliver-
      successfully                 ing nutrition interventions. The World Bank has extensive experience sup-
                                   porting the design, implementation, and evaluation of financial incentive
      scaling up                   mechanisms. In some cases, incentivizing nutrition outcomes has been a
                                   specific focus, but generally, the potential for using incentive mechanisms
      a country’s                  for nutrition remains underutilized.

      multisectoral
                                          Operational guidance for nutrition incentives
      nutrition plans              This document provides specific operational guidance to World Bank proj-
      are the right                ect teams that are considering including nutrition objectives in projects. It
                                   is intended for non-nutrition specialist World Bank staff to support their
      incentives.                  clients’ efforts to enhance the nutritional impact of World Bank country
                                   investments. This document and the related Practitioner’s Compendium
                                   offer practical advice to design and implement nutrition interventions in
                                   future operations based on a review of past successful and less successful
            attempts. The review is organized by type of financial incentive mechanism, which corresponds
            to the specific levels where the mechanisms exert their influence, i.e., national, sub-national, fa-
            cility, community, households, or individuals.
              The operational guidance for utilizing financial incentive mechanisms to improve nutrition
            answers the following questions.
              •	 What has been the World Bank’s experience using financial and non-financial incentive
                    mechanisms to achieve nutrition results?
                 •	   What types of financial and non-financial incentive mechanisms have proven successful,
                      and what features have led to success?
                 •	   What are the challenges and limitations of using incentive mechanisms to achieve nutri-
                      tion results?

            5
                See also Improving Nutrition Through Multisectoral Approaches. 2013. Washington, DC: The World Bank.



14	                                           Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
  •	   What specific lessons would inform the potential greater use of these mechanisms for nu-
       trition impact?
  The document has two parts and annexes. Part I presents the main forms of malnutrition and
their determinants, high impact evidence-based interventions to reduce malnutrition, and the
cost benefit and effectiveness of the interventions.
  Part II defines incentive mechanisms and presents the main financial incentive mechanisms
the World Bank employs to structure its financing to support nutrition. The analysis of the mech-
anisms is based on a review of World Bank grey literature, e.g., project appraisal documents, aide
memoires, implementation status reports, and implementation completion reports, as well as
semi-structured interviews with a range of World Bank staff with direct experience designing or
supporting the implementation of operations with a nutrition focus. A May 2016 workshop with
practitioners provided additional specificity.
  Annex 1 contains a summary analysis of peer-reviewed published evidence on financial incen-
tive mechanisms to achieve nutritional impact. The review draws mainly from the literature on
incentives in public health, which most closely resembles the challenge of incentivizing nutri-
tion. Annex 2 contains a nutrition glossary, and Annex 3 contains references for additional nutri-
tion resources.




INTRODUCTION 	                                                                                       15
PART I.
Investing in Nutrition:
What, Why, and How?




What is malnutrition?
Malnutrition encompasses all categories of poor nutrition caused by insufficiency, deficiency
and/or excess. Malnutrition includes undernutrition and over-nutrition, each with specific defi-
nitions and indicators.6 One or more types of malnutrition can coexist in one household and even
in one single individual. The main forms of undernutrition are stunting or chronic malnutrition,
wasting or acute malnutrition, underweight, low birth weight, low body mass index, and micronu-
trient deficiencies. Overweight and obesity is a condition characterized by excess body fat.



Why does malnutrition matter?
Malnutrition is a driver of poverty. Reducing malnutrition is essential to achieving the World
Bank’s goals of eliminating extreme poverty and enhancing shared prosperity. Malnutrition
drives poverty in three main ways.7
1.	 Direct losses—Malnutrition causes poor physical status resulting in enormous direct
    productivity losses.8
2.	 Indirect losses—Indirect losses in productivity are caused by poor cognitive develop-
    ment due to malnutrition, which results in poor school performance and drop-outs.9
3.	 Increase in costs—Malnourished children and adults are more likely to be chronically
    sick and have a higher risk of hospitalization and longer hospital stays. Their households be-
    come impoverished due to higher health costs.


6
    Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large Scale Action. 2006. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
7
    Ibid.
8
    J. Hoddinott et al. 2008. Effect of a nutrition intervention during early child. The Lancet 371: 411–16.
9
 S. Grantham-McGregor et al. 2007. Developmental potential in the first 5 years for children in developing countries. The
Lancet 369: 60–70.



PART I. INVESTING IN NUTRITION: WHAT, WHY, AND HOW? 	                                                                             17
                                    Figure 1. Cycle of Poverty and Malnutrition




      Source: World Bank. Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale Action. 2006.


        Malnutrition is a driver of disparities. While malnutrition levels in developing countries are
      often high even in the households from the highest income quintiles — highlighting the role of
      knowledge and behaviors — households from the lowest income quintiles often have rates of mal-
      nutrition that are twice as high as those from the highest income quintiles.10


                           Figure 2. Stunting Disproportionately Affects the Poor




      Source: Data Source: Most recent nationally representative nutrition survey as reported in WHO, UNICEF, and World Bank 2015


      10
        C. Bredenkamp et al. 2014. Persistent inequalities in child undernutrition: Evidence from 80 countries, from 1990 to today.
      International Journal of Epidemiology 1–8.



18	                                    Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
How does malnutrition affect sectoral objectives?
Malnutrition is a barrier to achieving a range of sectoral development objectives.11 The following
sectors, among others, are directly affected by malnutrition.

           Health. Stunted and / or wasted children are at a much greater risk of dying than
           well-nourished children.12 Malnutrition is estimated to be an underlying cause of 45
           percent of child mortality. The health sector’s objective of reducing child mortality
           is dependent on reducing malnutrition. In addition, reducing undernutrition in early
           life, the development of overweight/obesity and noncommunicable diseases in adult-
           hood will slow escalating health care costs.

           Agriculture. Lost physical productivity due to malnutrition is a barrier to in-
           creasing agricultural productivity, particularly in agriculture systems heavily reliant
           on physical labor.

           Education. Malnutrition is a barrier to generating high learning outcomes. Chil-
           dren may suffer up to a 25 IQ point loss due to malnutrition.13 They are unlikely to
           perform as well in school as their better nourished contemporaries, even if the condi-
           tions for learning in the education system exist, e.g., effective teachers, well-equipped
           schools, etc.	

           Social Protection. Because well-nourished individuals have stronger physical
           immunity, they are more resilient and able to cope with shocks. They are also less
           likely to be poor, and those who are poor are better equipped to transform a cash
           transfer and accompanying measures into an opportunity to become more produc-
           tive economically.

           Water and sanitation. Communities affected by undernutrition often have
           limited access to safe water and sanitation, reinforcing the causes of undernutrition
           and emphasizing the need for multifaceted solutions. Effective water and sanitation
           interventions include improved household toilets or latrines, improved water supply,
           safe household water management, including treatment and storage, and handwash-
           ing with soap. The safe handling, preparation and storage of food are also important.



Is nutrition a good investment?
Evidence-based nutrition interventions consistently appear as a high investment priority in eco-
nomic analyses. Every dollar invested in proven nutrition interventions in developing countries
yields approximately $18 dollars in economic returns.14
  In 2012, the 176 members of the World Health Assembly endorsed a Comprehensive Imple-



11
     Improving Nutrition through Multisectoral Approaches. 2013. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
 A.L. Rice et al. 2000. Malnutrition as an underlying cause of childhood deaths associated with infectious diseases in devel-
12

oping countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 78 (2000).
 B. Lozoff, E. Jimenez, and J.B. Smith. 2006. Double Burden of Iron Deficiency in Infancy and Low Socio-economic Status: A
13

Longitudinal Analysis of Cognitive Test Scores to 19 Years. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 160 (11): 1108–1113.
14
   J. Hoddinott, H. Alderman, J.R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton 2013. The economic rationale for investing in nutri-
tion. Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82. Median estimate for a sample of 17 high burden countries used by the
authors.



PART I. INVESTING IN NUTRITION: WHAT, WHY, AND HOW? 	                                                                            19
      mentation Plan on Maternal, Infant, and Young Child Nutrition.15 The plan included global tar-
      gets focused on six areas: stunting, exclusive breastfeeding, wasting, anemia, low birth weight,
      and overweight. The targets aim to boost investment in cost-effective interventions. Some of the
      targets have been included by world leaders in the second Sustainable Development Goal, which
      is to end malnutrition in all forms by the year 2030.16 Despite the ambition of the targets, it is
      possible to achieve the World Health Assembly goals with the right actions, rapid scale up, and
      adequate financing. Building on previous analysis,17 the World Bank and partners have recently
      estimated that the world will need approximately $50 billion to reach the stunting target and
      $70 billion to realize the four key targets, including reducing stunting, over ten years.18 While
      this amount may seem daunting, it represents $5–7 billion per year across official development
      assistance, domestic (public and households), and innovative financing sources across the globe.
      The incentives described in this report will contribute to accelerating the scale up of the effective
      actions.19
         Table 1 demonstrates the results of detailed costing developed by the World Bank for nutri-
      tion interventions in four countries. The methodology focused on well-proven cost-effective in-
      terventions—a package of 10 nutrition-specific and some nutrition-sensitive interventions—for
      these particular contexts. Scaling up a set of ten critical nutrition-specific interventions is highly
      cost-effective when considered as a package. The analysis also modeled the cost-effectiveness
      of different scale up scenarios, offering insights into ways in which the impact of investing in
      nutrition interventions can be maximized under budget constraints. The methodology used to
      estimate the costs and benefits of nutrition investments is being replicated in other countries and
      is an important first step to drive political commitment and action, and to enhance the allocative
      efficiency of nutrition resources.20


               Table 1. Costs and Benefits of Investing in a Package of 10 Nutrition-Specific
                                            Interventions (US$)

           COUNTRY          ANNUAL             ANNUAL ESTIMATED BENEFITS                 COST-EFFECTIVENESS ESTIMATES
           REGION           PUBLIC            DALYS         Lives       Cases of     Cost per     Cost      Cost per       WTP
           (YEAR)           INVESTMENT        Averted       Saved       stunting      DALY       per life    case of     threshold
                            REQUIRED                                    averted      averted     saved      stunting     (GDP per
                                                                                                            averted       capita)



           DRC (2015)            371 M         2.6 M       77,000            1M        143        4,929       226           454
           Mali (2015)           64 M        509,302       14,000       260,000        178        6,276       344            715
           Nigeria (2014)       837 M          6.3 M       180,000           3M         141       4,865       292          3,010
           Togo (2015)           13 M         115,295       3,000        60,000        127        4,635       238           636

      Source: M. Shekar et al., 2016.




      15
           WHO. 2012. Report of the Sixty-Fifth World Health Assembly, 12.
      16
           See Sustainable Development Goal 2.2 targets. http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E.
       S. Horton, M. Shekar, C. McDonald, A. Mahal, and J.K. Brooks. 2010. Scaling Up Nutrition; What Will it Cost? Washington,
      17

      DC: The World Bank.
      18
           M. Shekar, J. Kakietek, J. Dayton-Eberwein, and D. Walters. Washington, DC: The World Bank Forthcoming 2016.
      19
           Ibid.
       M. Shekar, J. Dayton Eberwein, and J. Kakietek, 2016. The costs of stunting in South Asia and the benefits of public invest-
      20

      ments in nutrition. Maternal and Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl. 1): 186–195.



20	                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
What are the causes and determinants of malnutrition?
Good nutrition is the result of a combination of factors and dependent on multiple sectors.21 Good
nutrition is essential for healthy development at various stages of the life cycle and critical for nor-
mal infant development during the first 1,000 days—from conception to a child’s second birthday.
Malnutrition is due to immediate, underlying, and basic causes, which are briefly described.
Immediate Causes. Malnutrition is the result of a combination of immediate causes related
to food and nutrient intake and health. To be well nourished, young children must have sufficient
quantities of a balanced and nutritious diet at regular intervals; adequate feeding and caring prac-
tices, including parental stimulation; and a low burden of infectious diseases. Nutrition-specific
interventions aim to improve the immediate causes of malnutrition.
Underlying Causes. More distal underlying causes of malnutrition are embedded at the house-
hold and community levels. These include factors such as food security—which includes physical
and economic access to food and nutrient diversity, and the use of food, including intra-household
cultural norms related to food distribution, which often disadvantage women. Underlying causes
related to feeding and caring resources include intra-household distribution of tasks, e.g., men’s par-
ticipation in child care, availability of time and financial resources to ensure children are properly
stimulated, etc. Equally important is access to quality health services to protect especially women
and children against infection and to offer treatment when required. The role of a hygienic environ-
ment—including safe water and good sanitation—is a critical underlying cause of good nutrition.
Behaviors and gender norms are important factors for each of these underlying causes. A range of
nutrition-sensitive interventions address the underlying causes of malnutrition.
Basic Causes. Institutional, political, and economic issues such as poverty reduction and econom-
ic growth, governance and stewardship capacities, environmental safeguards, and trade and patents
issues, including the role of the private sector, are at the roots of the basic causes of malnutrition.

                             Figure 3. Interventions to Reduce Malnutrition




Source: The Lancet Series. 2013.


21
     The Lancet Series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. 2013. http://www.thelancet.com/series/maternal-and-child-nutrition.



PART I. INVESTING IN NUTRITION: WHAT, WHY, AND HOW? 	                                                                         21
      What nutrition-specific interventions work?
      There exist well proven nutrition interventions and these should be scaled up.22 In 2008 and
      2013, The Lancet, a leading medical journal, published two groundbreaking nutrition-focused
      issues reviewing the current evidence for effective interventions to reduce child and maternal
      malnutrition in developing countries. The analysis indicated that the total number of deaths in
      children younger than five years could be reduced by 15 percent if the affected populations had
      access to ten evidence-based nutrition interventions delivered at 90 percent coverage to the tar-
      get population. Also, access to and uptake of iodized salt could alleviate iodine deficiency and
      improve health outcomes. Implementing the interventions at scale would avert about a fifth of
      the existing burden of stunting. The list of recommended high-impact interventions is included
      in Table 2. They are all nutrition-specific interventions focused on the proximate causes of mal-
      nutrition.

                          Table 2. High-Impact Nutrition-Specific Interventions

       NUTRITION INTERVENTION                WHAT DOES IT INVOLVE?                     WHY DOES IT MATTER?
                                                                                       Early breastfeeding reduces
       PROMOTION OF                          •	 Community-based education
                                                                                       all-cause and infection related
       BREASTFEEDING                            and behavior change
                                                                                       neonatal mortality by 44–45%
                                             •	 Community-based education
                                                                                       Complementary feeding results in
       COMPLEMENTARY FEEDING                    and behavior change
                                                                                       increased height and weight
                                             •	 Provision of complementary foods
                                                                                       Provision of ready-to-use-foods
       MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE                  •	 Community-based therapeutic
                                                                                       leads to faster weight gain, improved
       ACUTE MALNUTRITION                       feeding using ready-to-use-foods
                                                                                       recovery, and reduced mortality
                                             •	 Provision of supplements
       VITAMIN A                                                                       Vitamin A supplementation reduces
                                             •	 Delivery through existing healthcare
       SUPPLEMENTATION                                                                 all-cause and diarrhea related mortality
                                                platform e.g., child health days
                                             •	 Iodization of salt at                  Salt iodization increases birth
       SALT IODIZATION                          point of processing                    weight and leads to 10–20%
                                             •	 Targeted to pregnant women             higher developmental scores
                                             •	 Community education
       HANDWASHING                                                                     Handwashing with soap reduces
                                                and behavior change
       WITH SOAP                                                                       the risk of diarrhea
                                             •	 Communications e.g., mass media
                                             •	 Access to zinc supplements
       THERAPEUTIC ZINC                         for children                           Zinc treatment for diarrhea leads to a
       FOR DIARRHEA                          •	 Delivery through existing              46% reduction in all-cause mortality
                                                antenatal care platforms
                                             •	 Provision of supplement
                                                                                       Iron and folic acid supplementation
                                                to pregnant women
       IRON AND FOLIC ACID                                                             for pregnant women leads
                                             •	 Delivery through existing
                                                                                       to higher birth weight
                                                antenatal care platforms
                                             •	 Provision of micronutrient
       MULTIPLE MICRONUTRIENT                   powders to children
                                                                                       Significant reductions in anemia
       POWDERS                               •	 Demand generation including
                                                strategic communication
                                             •	 Delivery of deworming drugs
                                                                                       Treating children infected with
       DEWORMING                             •	 School-based or through
                                                                                       worms increases weight
                                                healthcare system
                                             •	 Product fortification at point of      Iron fortification results in 41%
       IRON FORTIFICATION OF STAPLES
                                                processing e.g., flours                reduction in the risks of anemia

      Source: Children’s Investment Fund Foundation.


      22
           Ibid.



22	                                   Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
What nutrition-sensitive interventions work?
The Lancet nutrition series also reviewed evidence concerning the nutritional effects of nutri-
tion-sensitive programs in four sectors: agriculture, social safety nets, early child development,
and schooling.23 While the need for nutrition investments in agriculture is clear, the available
evidence of the nutritional effect on agricultural programs is inconclusive—except for increased
intake of vitamin A from the biofortification of orange sweet potatoes.
  The same review also reported that individual safety net studies show some effects from nu-
trition interventions on younger children exposed to the interventions for longer durations, but
the nutritional effects have been weak. This probably has been due to inadequate nutrition goals,
insufficient actions, and poor service quality. However, combined early child development and
nutrition interventions show promising effects on child development, and in some cases, on im-
proved nutrition, although not yet tested at scale. Parental schooling is strongly associated with
better child nutrition. The effectiveness of emerging school nutrition education programs needs
to be tested, however. The Lancet review noted that even though many of the programs reviewed
were not originally designed to improve nutrition, they nevertheless have great potential to do so.



When in the life cycle is nutrition critical?
A relatively small “window of opportunity” exists during which most of the damage from mal-
nutrition occurs—damage that is mostly irreversible and detrimental throughout a person’s life. 24
This golden window is referred to as the first thousand days—from conception to the end of the
first two years of a child’s life.


                           Figure 4. Stages in Human Brain Development




Source: C. Nelson, in From Neurons to Neighborhoods, 2000.

23
     Ibid.
 National Research Council and Institute of Medicine.2000. From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood
24

Development. Committee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood Development. Jack P. Shonkoff and Deborah A. Phillips,
eds. Board on Children, Youth and Families, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
National Academy of Press.



PART I. INVESTING IN NUTRITION: WHAT, WHY, AND HOW? 	                                                                         23
         To prevent irreversible developmental damage, good nutrition is critical for prospective moth-
      ers well before pregnancy and conception. Interventions targeting adolescent girls and their fam-
      ilies, including male members, are particularly important to encourage delaying early marriages
      and pregnancies, which result in the fetus and the young growing woman competing for available
      nutrients. Also required are knowledge and services to prepare them physiologically for an even-
      tual pregnancy, i.e., adequate weight, good micronutrient status.



      How has nutrition evolved as a global development priority?
      Nutrition is increasingly considered a foundation for sustainable and inclusive development. The
      evidence base regarding what works is robust. Table 3 outlines how key international actors have
      gradually galvanized around the challenge. The Scaling Up Nutrition movement has been in-
      strumental in coalescing a wide range of partners from key sectors globally—but also in the more
      than fifty SUN countries—around clear nutrition objectives supported by financing, processes,
      and tools to support a scaled up nutrition response. Countries are mobilizing domestic financing
      and international donors and other development partners are renewing their commitment to the
      issue.25

                    Table 3. Key Developments in the Global Fight against Malnutrition
      	            DATE	EVENT
      	            2000	 Launch of the Millennium Development Goals
      	            2006	 World Bank publishes Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development
           The Lancet launches first series on Maternal and Child Undernutrition
      	2008	
      	             2010	The World Bank in partnership with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, USAID, and the
                          governments of Japan and Canada launch the Scaling up Nutrition (SUN) movement26
      	             2012	World Health Assembly endorses the Comprehensive Implementation
                          Plan on Maternal, Infant, and Young Child Nutrition
      	             2013	Nutrition For Growth pledging conference and raise US$ 4 billion
                          in commitments for nutrition-specific interventions
           The Lancet launches the second series on Maternal and Child
      	2013	
            Nutrition (undernutrition and overweight)
      	             2014	FAO / WHO Second International Conference on Nutrition Rome
                          Declaration on Nutrition and Framework for Action
      	                    UN summit on the post-2015 agenda adopts the Sustainable Development Goals
                    2015	
                           SDG 2.2 focuses on nutrition (stunting, overweight, and anemia)
      	             2016	 UN launches Decade of Action on Nutrition
      	             2016	African Development Bank launch African Leaders for Nutrition to sustain
                          African political will and leadership on nutrition investment
      	      April 2016	 World Bank hosts high level event on Early Childhood Development / Stunting
      	October 2016	World Bank hosts Heads of State / Finance Ministers Summit on Investing in Young Lives

      Source: Shekar et al., 2016.




      25
           Shekar et al., 2016.
      26
           World Bank. Scaling Up Nutrition: A Framework for Action, 2010.



24	                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
  The World Bank has been a major contributor in recent months to the high level dialogue on
scaling up actions to prevent stunting, led by President Jim Yong Kim. Although the momentum
in support of nutrition is building fast within the institution, great effort has been expended over
time to generate greater awareness of the multisectoral importance of nutrition. In the early to
mid-2000s, very few countries had nutrition on their development agendas, and nutrition was
not a priority for most donors or the World Bank. In 2004–2005, the World Bank had very few
staff working on the issue, very little analysis of what works, low institutional and senior man-
agement commitment, and minimal investments. The 2006 publication of the Bank report Re-
positioning Nutrition as Central to Development was a catalyst in reviving interest in nutrition
within the institution, as well as amongst key development partners and governments. A rapid
and significant scale up of staffing for nutrition within the World Bank followed in 2007–2008.
The seminal Lancet Nutrition Series was published in 2008, followed by the World Bank’s 2010
publication of Scaling Up Nutrition: What Will It Cost?—the first such global nutrition costing.27
  The global movement, Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN), was launched at the World Bank in April
2010, with support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, USAID, and the Governments of
Canada and Japan. In 2013, DfID and the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF) orga-
nized the “Nutrition for Growth” event on the margins of the Olympic Games, which generated
$4 billion in donor pledges for nutrition. A follow-on media event is planned on the margins of
the Rio Olympics in August 2016. The World Bank’s commitment to nutrition is growing fast—not
just in the health sector—but across the key sectors of agriculture, social protection, education,
water and sanitation. IDA and IBRD allocations to nutrition are increasing, supported by part-
ners such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Power of Nutrition, and the Global Fi-
nancing Facility for Every Woman Every Child.28




27
     M. Shekar et al., 2016.
28
     Ibid.



PART I. INVESTING IN NUTRITION: WHAT, WHY, AND HOW? 	                                                  25
PART II.
Financial and Non-Financial
Incentives to Enhance
Nutrition Results


This section is a review of the World Bank’s experience with various financial incentive mech-
anisms. They are used to enhance nutrition results by motivating change in behaviors at the na-
tional, sub-national, community, facility, household, and individual levels. This section draws
mainly from experience in World Bank-financed operations and includes World Bank-specific
incentive instruments and other instruments used more broadly by governments and develop-
ment partners. The section also contains a discussion of some of the non-financial incentives that
complement financial incentives at all levels of the system.
  This review documents past operational experience that used incentive mechanisms to encour-
age nutrition programming and abstracts the potential strengths and challenges for each mech-
anism. This report and the accompanying Practitioner’s Compendium will aid task teams and
their leaders to use the appropriate incentive mechanisms more effectively in future operations
to achieve better nutrition outcomes. The information is primarily derived from experiential evi-
dence from key informant interviews and a literature review, which is included in Annex 1.



What are incentive mechanisms?
In its simple form, an incentive is something that motivates an action. Incentive structures are a
central feature of economics and are described as the interaction between a principal, who applies
the incentive, and an agent, who receives the incentive. The basic tenet is that greater incentives
lead to greater effort and better performance.”29 Incentives can be classified into four categories:
     •	      Financial incentives: when an agent can expect some form of material reward, e.g., money,
             in exchange for a particular behavior.30
     •	      Moral incentives: when a choice is widely regarded as the “right thing to do,” or particu-
             larly respectable, or conversely, when the failure to act in a certain way is unacceptable.
             An individual acting on a moral incentive obtains in return a sense of self-esteem, approval
             or even admiration from his community, or guilt, condemnation or ostracism if s/he acts
             against a moral incentive.31


29
  U. Gneezy, S. Meier, and P. Rey-Biel. 2011. When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work to Modify Behavior. J Econ Perspect 25
(4): 191.
30
     K. Dalkir. 2013. Knowledge management in theory and practice. New York: Routledge.
31
     Ibid.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                              29
              •	     Coercive incentives: when failure to act a particular way results in physical force being
                     used against the agent by others in the community.32
              •	     Natural of intrinsic incentives: this is a category of incentives that are driven from the
                     personality of the agent, such as curiosity, fear, the pursuit of truth, wanting to contribute
                     to society, etc.33

           Financial incentives can have two kinds of effects: a direct price effect, which make the incen-
        tivized behavior more attractive, and an indirect psychological effect. The psychological effect can
        reinforce the price effect but can sometimes also work in opposition to the price effect crowding
        out the incentivized behavior.34
                               The World Development Report 2015 argues that much of economic policy re-

Financial                   lies on a model of human behavior that takes little account of human sociality.
                            Yet the fact that humans think socially “has enormous implications for decision
incentives can              making and behavior, and thus for development.”35 This report outlines the fol-
                            lowing four implications of human sociality on development interventions.
have two kinds                 First, economic incentives are not necessarily the best or the only way to
                            motivate individuals. The drive for status and social recognition means that
of effects: a               in many situations, social incentives can be used alongside, or even instead of
                            economic incentives, to elicit desired behaviors. Moreover, economic incen-
direct price                tives can both “crowd out” intrinsic motivations and “crowd in” social prefer-
                            ences. The role for incentives in policy is more complicated than is generally
effect, which               recognized.
                               Second, humans act as members of groups. Interventions that increase in-
make the                    teractions or create groups among individuals who have a common interest in
                            goals, such as breastfeeding, may facilitate the achievement of these objectives.
incentivized                   Third, there is a widespread willingness of individuals to cooperate in the
                            pursuit of shared goals. Most people prefer to cooperate as long as others are
behavior more               cooperating. This implies that making behavior more visible and “marketing”
                            adherence to norms, such as having men play an important role in child feed-
attractive, and             ing practices, may be a cost-effective means of increasing contributions to col-
                            lective goods.
an indirect                    Finally, human societies develop social norms as a means of coordinating
                            and regulating behavior. Societies can get stuck in collective patterns of be-
psychological               havior that do not serve their interest. Since social norms are often taken for

effect.                     granted, socially appropriate behaviors by individuals can lead to suboptimal
                            social outcomes. Norm change may sometimes be a necessary component of
                            social change.36
           Incentives vary across cultures and over time because social incentive structures are estab-
        lished by different forms of social interactions that take place within cultural norms and expec-
        tations that vary geographically and over time. What is valued or is deemed unacceptable in one
        culture may not be perceived the same way in other cultures or within the same culture over
        time. We tend to perceive the world around us through mental models that reflect the shared
        understandings of our community.37 For example, volunteerism by community health workers to

        32
             Ibid.
        33
             D.C. McClelland. 1987. Human Motivation. Cambridge University Press Archive.
        34
             Gneezy et al., 2011. 192.
        35
             World Bank. 2015. World Development Report 2015. Mind, Society, and Behavior. Washington, DC. 54.
        36
             Ibid. 55.
        37
             Ibid. 62.



30	                                        Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
improve nutrition may be valued, and thus boost the worker’s self-esteem in a country that recog-
nizes that nutrition is a national development priority. In another setting, where volunteerism is
not as valued, or where wealth accumulation confers social status, and where malnutrition is not
considered a social priority, financial incentives may be more effective or even necessary. Even
for an individual, such as a community health worker, the relative importance of a certain type
of incentive may change over the course of a lifetime, e.g., starting with the self-esteem related
to the prestige of having been selected, supplemented by intrinsic motivation and, over time, a
potential gradual movement towards greater attention to financial incentives.
  In this report and the Practitioner’s Compendium, we focus primarily on financial incentive
mechanisms, but we recommend that due attention also be given to non-financial incentives, i.e.,
moral, coercive, and natural / intrinsic incentives. Depending on the core constraints that are de-
fined in the theory of change analysis,38 a mix of financial and non-financial incentives will need
to be used to achieve results. Part II of this report includes a discussion of
some of the non-financial incentives that may be considered to scale up nu-
trition programs. That section is not meant to be a comprehensive review.
Rather, it serves to remind the reader that a balance between financial and                               The Bank’s
non-financial incentives is required. We recommend consulting the World
Development Report 2015, which contains a rich discussion on this topic.39
                                                                                                          experience
  Because a range of incentives act on an individual concurrently, and be-
cause human behavior is complex, it is very difficult to predict the effect
                                                                                                          using these
that a specific incentive will have over the short, medium, and long terms.
This risk highlights the importance of establishing strong monitoring sys-
                                                                                                        mechanisms
tems to track the results to be achieved, as well as the potential unintended
consequences of certain incentives, e.g., their effect on the motivation and
                                                                                                      for the specific
self-esteem of workers.                                                                                   objective of
                                                                                                            achieving
What has been the World Bank’s experience using
financial incentive mechanisms for nutrition?                                                              nutritional
Despite the World Bank’s longstanding and wide geographic experience us-
ing the financial incentive mechanisms reviewed in this report, the Bank’s
                                                                                                          impact has
experience using these mechanisms for the specific objective of achieving
nutritional impact has been limited. A rapid review of the Health Results
                                                                                                        been limited.
Innovations Trust Fund portfolio—which was instrumental in introducing
performance-based financing in several World Bank health sector operations—revealed that
only eight projects included nutrition indicators. The indicators almost exclusively focused on
only two nutrition interventions: the treatment of severe acute malnutrition and growth mon-
itoring. This probably reflects the low priority that was accorded to nutrition in the early to
mid-2000s, but also demonstrates the need for the World Bank to become more creative in using
financial incentive mechanisms to scale up its operations to meet the global stunting targets. For
each mechanism, there have been a few cases—and for cash transfers, more than a few cases—of
using mechanisms to achieve nutrition results, which have generated rich lessons for this re-
port. However, the relatively thin experience does indicate the need to continue measuring and
documenting lessons from implementation.



 See C. Valters. Theories of Change; Time for a Radical Approach to Learning in Development. London, UK: Overseas Develop-
38

ment Institute, 2015.
39
     World Bank, 2015.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                               31
            What is the evidence on the use of financial incentive mechanisms
            for nutrition?
            We conducted a literature review to assess the impact of eight mechanisms, all of which the
            World Bank has incorporated into projects and initiatives to incentivize results for various nu-
            trition-related outcomes. The mechanisms include: development policy lending (DPL), pro-
            gram-for-results (PforR), performance based budgeting (PBB), performance based financing
            (PBF), performance based contracting (PBC), conditional cash transfers (CCT), unconditional
            cash transfers (UCT), and public works programs (PWP). In the review, we considered evidence
            from experimental and quasi-experimental studies. Refer to Annex 1 and the full review for more
            information about the methods and results.
                                     There is evidence that the financial incentive mechanisms reviewed can
                                  positively influence nutrition and related outcomes among children. How-
      There is                    ever, most of the evidence has focused on health outcomes and health care

      evidence that               utilization. Far less attention has been paid to nutrition, with the notable
                                  exception of cash transfers. Scant evidence exists about the impact of incen-
      the financial               tive mechanisms on nutrition-related health behavior, such as breastfeed-
                                  ing and complementary feeding practices. No studies were identified that
      incentive                   evaluated the impact of development policy loans, program-for-results or
                                  public works programs on any of the nutrition-related outcomes of interest.
      mechanisms                     In many of the studies reviewed, there was variation in the effects of treat-
                                  ment between subgroups, e.g., rural versus urban children, and children in
      reviewed can                different age groups, etc. Also, the results were not statistically significant
                                  for all nutrition outcomes or for all types of health care services.
      positively                     The design and implementation of the mechanisms often differs mark-
                                  edly across countries, which might explain some of the variations in study
      influence                   findings. The duration of follow-up also differed across studies. Therefore,
                                  it is difficult to draw general conclusions on the mechanisms’ impact.
      nutrition                      Not surprisingly, three of the four incentive mechanisms for which little
                                  or no evidence was found, i.e., DPLs, PfoR financing, and PBB, are mecha-
      and related                 nisms that aim to shape international, national, or sub-national priorities.
                                  It is difficult to evaluate such types of mechanisms using randomized con-
      outcomes                    trolled trials or other rigorous study designs.
                                     Important questions remain about each of the financial incentive mech-
      among children.             anisms. The sustainability and cost-effectiveness of these mechanisms is
                                  uncertain, particularly when it comes to scaling up nutrition programs. It
                                  is also difficult to disentangle the effects of individual mechanisms when
            multiple mechanisms are present in a country. Additional research is needed to shed light on the
            relative importance of supply-side and demand-side measures, although that is likely to be context
            specific.
              Finally, most of the studies reviewed have been unable to pinpoint the pathways by which
            the incentive mechanisms improve nutrition. In CCT programs, for instance, the dissemination of
            health, nutrition, and hygiene information to mothers and pregnant women—which is a compo-
            nent of most transfer programs—is probably a key factor driving improvement in child nutrition.
            Children are also required to take nutritional supplements as part of some CCT programs. More-
            over, the conditions attached to the cash transfers, as well as the size of the transfers, usually dif-
            fer across programs. Most studies have not been able determine which of these factors are most
            important in explaining any observed impact. In short, more research is needed to determine the
            usefulness of these mechanisms to improve nutrition in low- and middle-income countries.




32	                                    Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
How to select nutrition incentive mechanisms?
Nutrition programs and interventions should be implemented at different levels of the system.
When planning a country’s nutrition program, first identify the key nutrition challenges and the
different system levels affected to determine where to focus the effort and what approach or in-
strument might be most useful. To target the incentive mechanism to the right behaviors, a clear
theory of change needs to be formulated and borne in mind. The results chain should include
actions / behaviors at various levels, so that appropriate behaviors are incentivized at the relevant
levels. The theory of change would take account of policies and programs at the government lev-
els, supply-side readiness at the service delivery levels, the social mobilization and empowerment
at the community level, and the eating / feeding / caring behaviors at the household and individu-
al levels. The ability to verify the achievement of targets—and to counter verify independently as
necessary—is often a critical factor in selecting financial incentive indicators.
  The basic framework for the causation of malnutrition is the starting point for the theory of
change. Three broad sets of determinants are often cited as resulting in good or bad nutrition.
They are household food security, access to quality health care services, and behavioral factors—gen-
erally referred to as the triad of food, health, and care. Therefore, the policies, programs, services,
and behaviors that affect any of these three sets of determinants need to be clearly identified, and
the incentive instruments need to be applied at the appropriate levels where the instruments are
expected to be effective.
  At each level, it is useful to analyze how financial and non-financial incentives are aligned (or
not) to either encourage or block actions.
  The World Bank’s main instruments and approaches, and the levels at which they are typically
used to improve nutrition, are depicted in Figure 5. Because the instruments and approaches are
results-based and have associated financing, they are effectively financial incentive mechanisms.

         Figure 5. Financial Incentive Mechanisms Applied at Different Levels




Source: Authors.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                            33
      Which incentives should be used at what levels?

            National LeveL
      Nutrition must be considered a national policy and an investment priority. Incentives need to be
      shifted to key ministries so they invest budgetary resources and the extra time and effort neces-
      sary to collaborate inter-sectorally. Each ministry will need to adjust its work program to become
      more nutrition-sensitive. Strong leadership will also create the enabling conditions required for
      the private sector to play its role in financing nutrition.
        In countries where nutrition is not sufficiently prioritized, international financial incentives
      such as investments from multilateral, bilateral, and nongovernmental institutions, as well as
      from innovative financing mechanisms—such as the Power of Nutrition trust fund and the Glob-
      al Financing Facility for Every Woman, Every Child trust fund—can serve as effective financial
      incentives to raise the profile of malnutrition as a development challenge and to encourage the
      mobilization of domestic public and private financing.
        In countries without a nutrition policy or with a policy that needs updating, a set of policy
      actions with specific triggers could be identified that act at the national level. The actions could
      form the basis for a Development Policy Financing (DPF) or a Program for Results (PforR)/ Dis-
      bursement Linked Indicator (DLI) operation. It is unlikely that a DPF would be developed spe-
      cifically for nutrition. Nonetheless, nutrition policy actions could be included in broader DPF
      operations. Even though most PforR / DLI operations may not focus entirely on nutrition, nutri-
      tion results could be part of an agriculture or health sector PforR, for example. Entirely nutrition
      operations do exist, however. Performance Based Financing (PBF) can also be used at the national
      level to incentivize better performance by key governmental bodies that have been identified as
      constraints in the theory of change analysis, e.g., food safety and fortification regulatory bodies.

            Sub-National Level
      In countries with a federal system, it is important to consider how incentive mechanisms could
      sharpen the focus on nutrition results during the intergovernmental resource allocation process,
      including equalization measures. Nutrition programs need to be well financed within national
      to sub-national transfer schemes, and incentives need to be created to achieve nutrition results.
      Nutritional status data could also be considered as one dimension, affecting the relative size of
      transfers to the sub-national level. For example, provinces with higher stunting rates would re-
      ceive an additional budgetary allocation to reduce stunting.
        Performance Based Budgeting (PBB) is a financial instrument used in this case to incentivize
      at the nexus between the national and the sub-national levels. Nutrition policy measures, trig-
      gers, and targets need to be defined and financed according to their achievement. The approach
      can also be used to create competition between sub-national units. Sub-national units which
      achieve the greatest nutrition results or achieve their targets the fastest can be rewarded with
      higher levels of transfers. PforR / DLI operations can also include indicators that incentivize
      the achievement of nutrition results through national to sub-national financial flows. PBF can
      also be used at the sub-national level to incentivize the achievement of nutrition results, e.g.,
      performance contracts with Provincial Health Directorates should include nutrition-related
      performance indicators.

            Facility Level
      Several nutrition-specific interventions are provided to individuals through service delivery sys-
      tems. Interventions mainly have been delivered through the health system, e.g., health clinics,
      and hospitals. But some interventions could also be delivered through schools, agriculture ex-


34	                             Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
tension services, community-driven development platforms, etc. At the service delivery level,
workers must have the ability and motivation to include nutrition services in the basic package
of services offered.
  Performance Based Financing (PBF) is a mechanism that acts on the incentive structure main-
ly at the service delivery level, although it is increasingly used at other levels such as national
and sub-national levels within the health system. PBF could play a role in realigning incentives
to ensure that workers are motivated and well equipped to deliver nutrition interventions. PBF
could also be used to ensure that the medicine supply chain is incentivized to guarantee that the
nutrition products are available to health facilities at the right times and in the correct qualities,
e.g., zinc tablets, iron tablets, vitamin A capsules, and supplementary food for treatment of severe
acute malnutrition.
  Most importantly, because of its strategic purchasing through relative pricing, PBF can pow-
erfully signal which services should be prioritized. PBF pricing can also be designed to target
specific groups, e.g., the poorest households. It may also be a tool to target households with the
highest stunting. Through the quality checklist and the related supervision (a non-financial in-
centive), PBF can also be a powerful approach to improving the quality of nutritional services
provided, e.g., improving maternal counselling related to iron supple-
mentation during pregnancy to improve compliance. The involvement of
community-based organizations in the counter-verification of results—to
                                                                                            Almost all
complement verification by government entities—offers the potential to in-                    nutrition
crease community awareness of nutrition and social accountability of ser-
vice delivery.                                                                          interventions
  Performance Based Contracting (PBC) links payments to performance, as
measured by predetermined output indicators. Although all contracts are                  require some
expected to have a performance clause—and could be terminated in the case
of non-performance—PBC links payment to performance more explicitly                  level of behavior
and based on the delivery of specific services or outputs. PBC has tended
to be used to contract health services to non-state entities mainly in fragile              change by
states and tends to have less stringent verification mechanisms than PBF.
                                                                                            household
     Community Level                                                                   members or by
Almost all nutrition interventions require some level of behavior change by
household members or by service delivery workers. Incentives must first be            service delivery
in place to enable communities to recognize the problem of malnutrition
and its implications for their future and then prioritize actions to reduce the                workers.
problem. Given its widespread manifestation and relative invisibility, child
malnutrition often goes unnoticed in communities, i.e., it is “normal” for a high proportion of chil-
dren to be stunted. Community Driven Development (CDD) and Community-Based Performance
Based Financing (PBF) could be useful approaches to reducing malnutrition in communities.
  Community-driven development provides grants to communities to develop projects to address
problems prioritized by the community. The community grants are generally not results-based,
that is the financing is provided to communities on the basis of a plan, not on the basis of the
results achieved. Nevertheless, the fact that funds are provided to a community constitutes a
financial incentive. Because child malnutrition is often difficult to perceive by individuals, how
can its importance be raised to a high community priority? Education and sensitization about
malnutrition’s consequences can help CDD programs become effective tools for communities to
prioritize nutrition.
  Community-based PBF is a more recent approach and an extension of facility-based PBF. It
can be used to provide financial incentives to communities to achieve specific results, including


PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                           35
            a range of nutrition results that are best achieved at community level. However, verifying certain
            results remains a challenge.


                 Household Level
            Key decisions affecting the nutritional status of mothers and children are made at the household
            level. In many developing countries, households provide a very important share of the nutri-
            tion financing. Households pay for such inputs as food, micronutrient supplements, preven-
            tive and curative health care, schooling, etc. Intra-household gender dynamics—particularly the
            woman’s extent of control over the usage of household resources—often determines the nutri-
            tion-sensitivity of the intra-household resource allocations. Women’s time and energy expendi-
            ture have an important impact on maternal and child malnutrition and are critical for improved
                                   nutrition. Some nutrition-related health services can be provided at the
                                   household level.

      Key decisions                  Cash Transfers (CT) are powerful tools for nutrition improvement, wheth-
                                   er they have co-responsibilities or not. They provide additional resources
      affecting the                to poor households to procure essential nutrition inputs. The information
                                   that often accompanies the cash transfer can be a powerful non-financial
      nutritional                  incentive to enable the household members to make informed decisions
                                   on the use of their household resources. Conditional Cash Transfers (CCT)
      status of                    serve as a financial incentive to boost household demand for key services,
                                   many of which are essential inputs for improved nutrition, e.g., antenatal
      mothers and                  visits, child immunization, and school attendance by girls.
                                     Household Level Performance Based Financing (PBF) is a relatively new
      children are                 approach that could yield benefits for nutrition. This form of PBF usually
                                   involves incentivizing health workers to conduct household visits. Based
      made at the                  on a rapid assessment, the household and the worker agree on a house-
                                   hold “action plan,” which is tracked through subsequent household visits,
      household                    and its results are incentivized financially. Both the health worker and the
                                   household could be incentivized through the result-based action plans. If
      level.                       nutrition improvement is an objective of these visits and the assessment,
                                   this form of PBF could become a powerful tool for increasing the role of
                                   households in their own nutritional improvement.
               Public Works Programs, because they offer low wages, are good at attracting the poorest of the
            poor. They also provide great opportunities for inter-sectoral action as the benefits go beyond
            health or nutrition and could yield broader developmental impact. They enhance the sense of
            pride and self-respect among beneficiaries since they are paid in return for work performed.
            They provide a lot of flexibility to the households in terms of how the compensation is utilized.
               The newer generation of public works programs is experimenting with non-traditional em-
            ployment which can contribute to nutrition, such as child care, community kitchens, and school
            feeding. In Djibouti, for example, public works have partnered with the health system to iden-
            tify malnourished children in the families of the beneficiary workers, providing nutrition ser-
            vices if they exist. Public works agencies are accustomed to infrastructure work. It is a mindset
            change to have them work on social sector activities. When combined with appropriate educa-
            tional programs, the additional income could be put to good use and enhance food security, and
            household nutrition status.




36	                                   Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
Financial Incentive Mechanisms: Strengths and Challenges
The incentive mechanisms are categorized by the levels at which they operate, i.e., government:
national and sub-national, health facility, community, household, and individual levels (see Fig-
ure 5). For each level, we document the following: (1) a description of the mechanism; (2) the
mechanism’s potential strengths; (3) the potential challenges; and (4) examples of countries that
have tried the instruments.

      Government Level: National and Sub-National
     • Development Policy Financing (DPF)
        Definition
        •	   DPF combines the objective of reducing a government’s fiscal deficit with sectoral
             or macro-level developmental objectives by incentivising policy reforms. Disburse-
             ments are based on predetermined policy triggers which are linked to the govern-
             ment completing reform actions.
        •	   IDA / IBRD funds flow into the government budget and the country systems are
             used. The amount of IDA / IBRD financing is not necessarily linked to the cost of the
             reform.
        •	   DPFs cannot be used to impose reforms without sufficient country ownership and
             commitment—an important prerequisite for success.
        •	   The World Bank does not prescribe activities or inputs to be financed from the IDA
             / IBRD funds, which may be spent on anything as long as the agreed reforms are
             achieved—except a short negative list as may be agreed between the Word Bank and
             the government.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Can unblock policy constraints. DPFs could be useful to nutrition programs if the
             policy environment is the binding constraint to achieving nutrition outcomes, e.g.,
             agricultural policies, food subsidies, gender policies, etc., and if strong government
             commitment exists (or could be developed) for specific reform measures to remove
             the constraint. Agriculture policies are closely linked to nutrition, and so are social
             safety net programs. A national policy on ensuring universal health coverage could
             have a beneficial impact on nutrition, if nutrition services are included in the benefits
             package. Food safety legislation, regulation of baby formula foods, and food fortifica-
             tion with micronutrients are other relevant policy areas for nutrition. A DPF could
             facilitate moving such policies in the right direction.
        •	   May generate greater ownership and sustainability. DPFs entail no micromanage-
             ment by the World Bank in terms of activities carried out or expenditures incurred.
             The country’s own systems are used. Well-designed DPFs usually ensure that the
             incentivised reforms have strong national ownership and commitment. The benefits
             are therefore likely to be systemic and more sustainable. Sustainability is critical to
             nutrition, which is a long-term and continual objective.
        •	   Potential to raise the profile of nutrition. Adding nutrition into a DPF could help
             raise the importance of nutrition, positioning it as a national development priority at
             the same level as other policy reforms included in the DPF.
        •	   Attractive to governments. DPFs are quick disbursing and contribute to the coun-
             try’s fiscal health and sector-specific goals. A DPF is attractive to ministries of fi-



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                           37
                              nance, which typically are the World Bank’s counterparts in negotiating the World
                              Bank’s country assistance. Adding a nutrition-related policy trigger to a DPF could be
                              a smart strategy in an otherwise less than enthusiastic environment for stand-alone
                              nutrition operations.

                         Potential Challenges
                         •	   Does not address implementation challenges. DPFs are not the instrument of choice
                              when the main constraint to improved nutrition is implementation, rather than the
                              policy environment, which is often the case. In such contexts, an operational level
                              incentive instrument may be warranted, rather than a policy reform measure.
                         •	   Requires that malnutrition be recognised as a national priority. In order for a gov-
                              ernment to decide to include nutrition in a DPF, the country’s malnutrition challenge
                              and its economic implications will need to be understood by policy-makers (partic-
                              ularly in the central ministries such as finance and planning), which is often not the
                              case.
                         •	   Does not address socio-cultural or behavioral challenges. In many countries, the
                              core challenge to improving nutritional status may be socio-cultural or behavioral
                              at the household or community level. A DPF alone would not be suitable instrument
                              to address these constraints.
                         •	   Reforms may be reversed. Changes in the government or policymakers may result
                              in the reversal of reforms if it was merely a high-level decision. The DPF must be
                              designed carefully to ensure that the disbursement triggers fully institutionalize the
                              reform and render a reversal difficult. Monitoring the trigger actions closely is an
                              essential prerequisite for success.
                         •	   No guarantee of increased allocations to nutrition. There is no guarantee that IDA
                              funds will be spent on nutrition services or programs since the World Bank does not


      PERU P116264
      RESULTS & ACCOUNTABILITY (REACT) PROGRAMMATIC DPL
      Project development objective (PDO).            (iii) reduced maternal and neonatal          with a low level of CRED spending
      Nutrition-specific objectives are to            mortality; and (iv) better nutrition         relative to their malnutrition levels.
      (i) increase demand for nutrition               outcomes. The government set a
      services by strengthening the                   target of reducing undernutrition            Operational modality. Activities to
      operational effectiveness of the                by 5 percent in five years.                  support both objectives include a
      Juntos Conditional Cash Transfer                                                             strong emphasis on promoting good
      (CCT) program; and (ii) improve                 Indicators. As a DPL, this operation does    governance to monitor the impact
      coverage and quality of the supply of           not have “indicators” in the conventional    of the government programs such
      basic preventive health and nutrition           sense of the term. However, it included      as Juntos. A manual and supporting
      services in the communities covered             the following “prior actions” specific       communication materials were
      under the Articulated Nutritional               to nutrition: MINSA has changed SIS          developed for Community Nutrition
      Program (PAN), including Juntos.                norms to include the CRED (child             Promoters, and the expected height
                                                      growth and development) protocol;            gain in the first two years of life
      Results of interest. REACT DPL series           Goals for CRED production are agreed         was popularized. The operation is
      supports policies that are expected             between the health sector and the            adapted to respond to the country’s
      to lead to (i) improved parental                PBB system for each health executing         results-based financing strategy and
      understanding of expected outcomes              unit; Ministry of Finance increased the      provides direct support to PAN.
      in education, health, and nutrition; (ii)       2010 budget for CRED by 330 percent,         Evaluation: After 10 years, the results
      improved outcomes in second grade               compared to the 2009 budget, and             are remarkable—stunting decreased
      literacy, especially in rural schools;          allocated the additional funds to regions    from 28 percent to 14 percent.




38	                                               Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
             track its funds separately under a DPF. The funds are comingled in the government
             budget. Therefore, unless the policy reform pertains directly to providing more nu-
             trition resources, the DPF alone may not achieve an increased allocation.

        Examples of Country Experience
        India, Mozambique, Palestine, Peru

     •
      Program for Results (PforR) and Investment Project Financing
      with Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)
     	 Definition
        •	   PforR is a relatively new lending instrument which links IDA / IBRD development
             financing to results and moves from the “project approach” towards a “program ap-
             proach”, whereby the World Bank is financing a “slice” of a government program.
             Prior to the PforR, to financially incentivise certain results, teams used Disbursement
             Linked Indicators (DLIs) within Investment Lending—currently called Investment
             Project Financing (IPF). Although many operations still use DLIs under IPFs, as a
             proxy for PforR, both instruments essentially adopt the same incentivising principle
             that seeks to finance outputs rather than inputs. Therefore, we treat PforR and DLI
             operations together.
        •	   Under PforR and DLI, disbursements from the World Bank to the country are based
             on achieving predetermined targets or results, rather than inputs purchased. Results
             could be outputs or outcomes, but are usually defined in terms of outputs—some-
             times called intermediate outcomes. In practice, many DLI operations use process
             milestones as “results” or “proxy results.”
        •	   The World Bank does not prescribe the activities and expenditures for a PforR or
             DLI operation. The funds go to the treasury and may finance a specific program, e.g.,
             the budget of the Ministry of Health or the HIV/AIDS or the maternal and child
             (MCH) programs. As long as the results are achieved, the money can be spent on any-
             thing within the program. In the case of an IPF with DLIs, disbursements are made
             against a list of pre-agreed “eligible expenditures.”
        •	   Disbursements are based on achieving specific targets which are usually confirmed
             through independent verification. Within that framework, some prorate the dis-
             bursement proportionately to how much of the target is met, while others disburse
             on an all-or-none basis, i.e., partial achievement or underachievement of targets mer-
             its zero disbursement. A delayed achievement of targets can result in delayed dis-
             bursement or disqualification of the amount linked to the delayed result.
        •	   Although PforR and DLI operations tend to incentivize the national level, they can
             also be used directly at the sub-national level, e.g., in a province / state in a large
             country, or to incentivize national to sub-national transfers in a manner similar to
             performance-based budgeting.

        Potential Strengths
        •	   May lead to greater ownership and sustainability. PforR / DLI operations entail
             no micromanagement by the World Bank, like the DPF. In the case of the PforR, the
             country’s own systems are used. Therefore, the results are likely to be more systemic
             and sustainable.
        •	   Provides flexibility in implementation. PforR / DLI operations place less focus on
             inputs and process. Although some level of attention is necessary at these stages


PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                         39
                              of the development cycle to understand any problems in case the results are not
                              achieved. This approach empowers managers, and provides flexibility on ways to
                              achieve the results. Nutrition programs could particularly benefit from such delega-
                              tion of authority, since they often require innovation at the grassroots level.
                         •	   Enhances accountability for achieving results. With the strong focus on results,
                              the responsibility for achieving them is placed squarely on the government. If re-
                              sults are not achieved, the government does not receive the funds. If results are
                              delayed, disbursements are also delayed or cancelled. The PforR / DLI instrument
                              directly incentivises performance and enhances accountability by shifting the fo-
                              cus from project administration processes (e.g., volume of procurement transac-
                              tions) to results.
                         •	   Can increase the visibility of nutrition programs. The focus on results (and on the
                              resources that get released when the results are achieved) can provide additional
                              visibility to nutrition within the wide range of priorities faced by governments in
                              program implementation.
                         •	   Can incentivise healthy competition. It is possible to design these operations to
                              introduce competition between sub-units of government (e.g. provinces, states or
                              districts) on the timing for the achievement of results, such that the first few sub-
                              units to achieve a particular result would get an additional financial incentive.
                         •	   Greater likelihood of achieving results. If the operation is well designed, i.e., appro-
                              priate indicators with realistic targets are selected, a clear verification protocol is
                              agreed upon, and the necessary monitoring systems are established, the likelihood
                              of successfully achieving the agreed upon results is high.


      INDIA P121731
      ICDS SYSTEM STRENGTHENING NUTRITION IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (ISSNIP)
      Project development objective (PDO).         child feeding (IYCF) practices; and proj-   the state level. The center has $7 mil-
      To (i) strengthen the Integrated Child       ect states in which pilots of “convergent   lion for its six DLIs. Additional incentive:
      Development Services (ICDS) policy           nutrition action” have been implement-      Flexifund / Challenge Fund ($5 million)
      framework, systems and capacities,           ed and evaluated in at least one dis-       for the first three states that meet
      and facilitate community engagement,         trict. Thirteen DLI milestones were set;    each of the DLIs. The seven that belong
      to ensure greater focus on children          all of them are system improvement          at the state level, $25,000 per DLI,
      under three years of age; and (ii)           indicators, e.g., real-time ICT-based       could be used for CCT or PBF or such
      strengthen convergent actions for            M&E system with standardized oper-          approaches. The first three states to
      improved nutrition outcomes.                 ating procedures and specifications         achieve each DLI get an additional in-
                                                   for hardware; people trained in the         centive amount. Under the restructured
      Results of interest. Improved sys-           system or on specific nutrition mod-        design, interventions are focused on
      tems in terms of planning, record-           ules, outreach and community-based          behavior change for nutrition primarily
      ing, reporting and monitoring of             processes such as monthly events held.      by building worker capacities to counsel
      information, improved delivery of            Service delivery outputs are monitored      for behavior change, through better
      services, capacity-building of the           as non-DLI, e.g., pregnant and lactat-      outreach, and to focus on children 0–3
      frontline workers to improve mater-          ing women, children (with proportion        years of age, e.g., improved breastfeed-
      nal, infant, and young child feeding         of female children amongst these),          ing / complementary feeding practices.
      behaviors among pregnant and                 and adolescents who have benefit-           Innovations include the introduction
      lactating women and their children.          ted from the services. No behavioral        of a mobile app that allows Anganwa-
                                                   outcomes are being measured.                di workers to enter data, generates
      Indicators. PDO indicators include: An-                                                  due lists, helps daily work-planning,
      ganwadi Centers (AWCs) implementing          Operational modality. Of the 13 DLI,        sends SMS alerts, promotes better
      the inter-personal communication (IPC)       six are under the responsibility of the     growth-monitoring, generates the
      activities focused on infant and young       central government and seven are at         growth chart, and has BCC videos.




40	                                             Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
        Potential Challenges
        •	   Capacity of the government to deliver. As the World Bank focuses more on outputs
             and outcomes and leaves it largely to the government to reach the results using its
             own processes and inputs, PforR / DLI operations adopt a hands-off approach, which
             assumes robust governance systems and the government’s capacity to plan and imple-
             ment its programs to achieve the agreed results. These assumptions may not always
             hold true, especially for ministries responsible for nutrition which are often weaker. It
             is sometimes necessary to design “hybrid” operations in which the focus is mainly on
             incentivising results but which also contain a more traditional input-driven form of
             technical assistance to enhance capacity to deliver.
        •	   Reluctance by governments to accept the risk of non-performance. Governments of-
             ten may be reluctant to accept the risk of incurring expenditures without guaranteed
             financing. Often their systems are not very flexible to manage that risk. Even though
             the first year’s disbursement are made as an advance, the subsequent year’s financing
             depends on concrete targets being met, which means that there is a real risk of funds
             not flowing. In nutrition programs involving regular service delivery or cash distri-
             bution, such stoppage of fund-flow could be seriously detrimental to the population.
        •	   Complex operations. PforR/DLI instrument may not be suited for very complex oper-
             ations with too many monitored results. The more indicators, the less their monetary
             value since the total envelope is fixed and numerous indicators would be more diffi-
             cult to monitor.
        •	   Selecting the right indicators. Certain service-oriented indicators are easier to mea-
             sure, report, and pay against, e.g., vitamin A supplementation, and growth monitoring.
             Certain others, especially community level indicators, like exclusive breastfeeding are
             difficult to measure, forcing us to settle for knowledge indicators rather than actual
             behaviors. More creativity is needed.
        •	   Limiting the number of indicators. Typically, health and nutrition operations have
             numerous results of interest. To make the operation manageable, the list of indicators
             must be kept short, usually less than 10. Some indicators of interest must be omitted
             from being linked to financing, which is feasible if a robust set of tracer indicators is
             sufficient for the absence of others. The omitted indicators can be included in the re-
             sults framework and monitored without being linked to disbursement. This position-
             ing, however, would affect the level of priority of those indicators.
        •	   Results must be achieved in a short timeframe. The PforR / DLI approach cannot di-
             rectly incentivise results that take longer than a year to manifest, e.g., behavior change
             or nutritional status improvements, because disbursements cannot wait for those re-
             sults to be demonstrated. Therefore, establishing measurable intermediate results is
             critical and could serve as a good proxy for the ultimate outcome of interest. This
             challenge can be mitigated by “breaking down” results with longer gestation periods
             into specific intermediate results which can each be incentivised.
        •	   Potential to miss some important results. Due to the necessary selectivity of indicators
             linked to financing, other important results could be neglected. This risk is particularly
             challenging for a complex area like nutrition, with a wide spectrum of results of interest.

        Examples of Country Experience	
        Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India (national nutrition project as well as projects in the states
        of Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh), Indonesia, Laos, Morocco, Myanmar,
        Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Tanzania



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                             41
      • Performance Based Budgeting (PBB)
       Definition	
       •	   PBB is a mechanism by which a higher level of government allocates resources to a
            lower level of government, based on the latter’s performance measured by agreed in-
            dicators and targets. For example, the Ministry of Finance might allocate the budget
            for the Ministry of Health based on the past year’s performance. Or in a federal sys-
            tem, the central government might allocate the state, provincial or district budgets
            on the basis of past performance. PBB usually involves a MOU or similar arrange-
            ment between the financing entity and implementing entity.
       •	   PBB is not the usual way of budgeting in most developing countries. Budgets are gen-
            erally developed using historical data of allocations and expenditures and based on
            inputs rather than outputs. A reformist and forward looking government and leader-
            ship is critical for PBB to work.

       Potential Strengths	
       •	   Budgets reflect priorities and reforms. If nutrition results are included in the perfor-
            mance measures that influence the budgetary allocation, sub-national priorities are
            likely to move in a direction favorable to nutrition programs.
       •	   Closer to service delivery and the needs of people. PBB moves the incentives and
            risks to the sub-national levels, which are closer to the action. PBB empowers sub-na-
            tional level managers and provides flexibility on ways to achieve the results. This
            devolved accountability and the related flexibility is important for nutrition given
            that the approaches may vary based on the specific determinants and the socio-eco-
            nomic composition of the populations.
       •	   Enhances accountability. PBB is likely to be attractive to the ministries of finance
            (MOFs) because an enhanced level of accountability exists prior to budgetary allo-
            cation. PBB allows the MOF the flexibility to allocate resources to the ministries and
            departments that have demonstrated a record of producing better results. This may
            be particularly useful for nutrition programs, some of which have a legacy of poor
            performance, which has discouraged central ministries from further allocations.
       •	   Can incentivise healthy competition. It is possible to design these operations to
            introduce competition between sub-units of government, e.g., provinces, states or
            districts.
       •	   Alignment with the policy framework. PBB is suitable for achieving program re-
            sults when the national policy environment is already conducive to program im-
            plementation at sub-national levels, and robust monitoring systems are available,
            along with the necessary information base. PBB can be used to incentivize shifts in
            delivery that are introduced in recent policy reforms.
       •	   May increase financial allocations to nutrition. Nutrition could benefit from PBB
            because often, a constraint is the insufficient resource allocation—a problem at the
            operational level rather than the policy level.

       Potential Challenges	
       •	   Requires a change in mindset and strong leadership. PBB entails an entirely new
            way of planning, budgeting, and financial management, as most governments use
            historical budgeting. Even though PBB has strong potential, it may be difficult to
            implement in some contexts since it involves a fundamental change in mindset and
            the way of doing business.


42	                      Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
        •	   Requires strong capacity for implementation. Implementation is not guaranteed
             and it may not affect behaviors at the service delivery or household levels, which are
             critical to nutrition results. On the other hand, if the incentive is sufficiently strong
             and there is sufficient autonomy, the receiving entities may be able to organize
             themselves to deliver, or a complementary technical assistance component could
             be designed into the World Bank operation to address specific implementation
             weaknesses.
        •	   Requires devolution of authority. PBB requires a strong degree of authority to be
             devolved to the operational levels and the necessary capacity to be built, without
             which the incentives won’t be empowering. PBB may not be suitable in countries
             where sub-national capacities or governance systems are weak or in which the nec-
             essary autonomy for delivery is not provided.
        •	   PBB could increase inequities since it rewards better performers. Where sub-na-
             tional capacities vary across states or districts, PBB could benefit the already better
             resourced states and districts, which may be the better performers. This could re-
             sult in denying the low-performers the very resources that they need to build their
             capacities to perform better, thus perpetuating a vicious cycle of low resources •
             low capacity • low performance • further low resources. This scenario needs to be
             avoided by allocating a minimum level of resources based on need and by adding a
             bonus allocation for performance, rather than making the whole budget dependent
             on performance. Often the lowest performing provinces or districts are also where
             the highest proportions of malnourished people live. Another way to avoid this sce-
             nario is to allocate resources based on the rate of change, i.e., whereby sub-national
             units with the greatest improvements from the baseline would receive the largest
             allocations.
        •	   Risk of focusing on only a subset of results of interest. PBB could skew program at-
             tention to selected results at the expense of other important ones, which is the case
             of PforR or any other incentivized financing system. This is a particular challenge
             for nutrition, which has a complex range of determinants requiring several results
             to be tracked.
        •	   A disconnect may exists between budget and execution. If applied narrowly, this
             instrument’s potential benefits could be limited to priority setting, since it may only
             impact the budget and not necessarily the execution. However, approaches could be
             designed that not only focus on allocations but also on execution of budgets.

        Examples of Country Experience
        Argentina, Peru




PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                           43
      Health Facility Level

      • Performance Based Financing (PBF)
        Definition	
        •	   While results-based financing (RBF) is used as a broad term encompassing several
             different types of incentivising results, performance based financing (PBF) usually
             refers to an approach that specifically pays financial incentives to the individual or
             institutional service providers. The payments are based on the quantity and quality
             of outputs delivered. The terms such as “fee for service” or “pay-for-performance”
             are sometimes used to describe this instrument.
        •	   The additional funds from PBF can be used to improve the facility or services, and /
             or to pay “bonuses” to the personnel. How these funds are distributed at the health fa-
             cility level and what proportion could be paid as bonuses or salary supplements varies
             widely. In some countries, these decisions are left to the health facility level managers.
             Whereas in other countries, strict guidelines are sent from the central level.
        •	   PBF works best when the unit being contracted (e.g., the health facility) has a high
             degree of autonomy as to how it delivers services. In most countries, however, this
             autonomy is circumscribed by some rules such as public service rules on hiring and
             firing of staff.
        •	   PBF involves a separation of functions between the regulator, purchaser, and service
             provider. It involves contracting an external agency which is responsible for the verifi-
             cation and payment of services. A specific package of services is defined and rates are
             applied for each service. Both public and private health facilities can be contracted for
             service delivery, depending on the regulatory framework in the country and the avail-
             ability of these providers. Specific catchment areas are defined for each service provider.
        •	   Prior to payment, the quantity of services is verified, usually through the internal
             inspection service of the Ministry of Health. On a less frequent basis (e.g., quarterly)
             community-based organisations undertake counter-verification of the results. This
             counter-verification serves as a “check and balance” against collusion between ser-
             vice providers and the inspection services.
        •	   While PBF has been applied mainly at the health facility level to date, the basic te-
             nets of the approach are being increasingly applied at the community level as well as
             at all levels within a health system. The latter enables an alignment of incentives to
             improve service delivery. For example, World Bank projects that use a PBF approach
             in health are increasingly establishing performance contracts not only at the health
             facility level, but also at the other administrative levels of the system (e.g., district,
             provincial) all the way to the regulator at the national level.
        •	   Some PBF approaches also provide a higher payment to a health facility for having
             reached pre-identified members of the community (through community-based tar-
             geting) with free services. These could be the poorest members of the community or
             people with special needs, such as people living with disabilities. It is likely that this
             targeting is reaching households with a higher likelihood of malnutrition.
        •	   Increasingly, a quality checklist (some have approximately 200 indicators) is being
             used to assess the quality of services provided, and adjustments in payments (either
             negative or positive incentives) are applied based on the quality checklist score.




44	                        Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
         Potential Strengths	
         •	   Closer to the beneficiary. PBF moves the program resources, incentives, account-
              ability, and risks mainly to the health facility level, thus making it more likely to suc-
              ceed—if the binding constraints are at that level. In addition, in countries where elite
              capture is a challenge, PBF helps circumvent elite capture at the central level because
              the bulk of the financial resources are directed to frontline health facilities through
              payments directly to their bank accounts.
         •	   Greater social accountability. The counter-verification carried out by community
              organizations is a practical way to empower communities to have oversight over
              service delivery. When nutrition is part of the services being counter-verified, this
              enables communities to improve their understanding and sense of ownership of
              their malnutrition challenge.
         •	   Increased transparency. The management information system for PBF (web portal)
              makes data available publicly about the performance of the health system. This could
              be a valuable source of “real-time” information on some aspects of nutrition services,
              which can be used to review health facility performance more regularly. Data on nu-
              trition interventions in most countries is not collected often enough to provide regu-
              lar monitoring and accountability.
         •	   Potential to increase the focus on nutrition. By adding specific nutrition services
              to a PBF program, it is possible to enhance the focus and attention to those services,
              which could otherwise be neglected and subsumed under a broader package of ma-
              ternal and child health services.
         •	   Increased monitoring and feedback. While the verification of quality and quantity is
              primarily set up to confirm payments, the process also enables service providers to
              get regular feedback and to learn from their mistakes. This could be a useful means
              to increase capacity of service providers to deliver nutrition interventions, compen-


CAMEROON P104525
HEALTH SECTOR SUPPORT INVESTMENT PROJECT
Project development objective (PDO).         and (v) patients reporting satisfaction      primary health center and hospital level.
To increase utilization and improve          with health services. The following nu-      Also extended PBF to the community
the quality of health services with a        trition-specific indicators were included:   level. Approved in 2009, the operation
particular focus on child and maternal       under-five children with severe acute        took two years to get off the ground in
health and communicable diseases.            malnutrition (SAM) and moderate acute        earnest. Between 2011 and 2014, pilots
                                             malnutrition (MAM) treated respec-           were tested and in 2014, additional
Results of interest. Health (improved        tively at the hospital and the primary       financing enabled nationwide scale up.
utilization and quality of health ser-       health center (PHC) level; referrals and     Nutrition indicators were added to the
vices), with maternal and under-five         counter-referral for nutrition (teased       existing PBF program in one region. The
nutrition results added subsequently.        out from the total list of referrals). At    operation is now financing the nutri-
                                             the community level: patients of SAM         tion outputs throughout the country,
Indicators. The original PDO indicators      and MAM referred by the community            although the problem primarily affects
were (i) children immunized for DPT3         health workers (CHW) to the facility         the north and the east. UNICEF pays
(< 12 months); (ii) births attended by       (and confirmed); household visits by a       for the nutrition results for one region
skilled professional; (iii) children under   team (CHW + facility staff) according        and IDA finances for the other regions.
five sleeping under insecticide treated      to protocol. At the hospital level, the
bednets the night before the survey; (iv)    number of inpatient days for SAM.            Evaluation. The provision of ser-
tuberculosis treatment success rate                                                       vices increased, but it is too early
(percentage of those who are smear           Operational modality. Improving district     to evaluate nutrition outcomes.
positive who are successfully treated);      level health services through PBF at the




PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                                        45
           sating somewhat for the often low level of nutrition training which the personnel of
           health facilities receive.
      •	   Sharper focus on the highest priority services. The PBF package of services is a sub-
           set of the range of services offered by a facility. The services are chosen on the basis
           of their ability to address the highest burden of disease in the country. The sharper
           focus on the delivery of these interventions should increase the impact on the highest
           priority public health concerns.
      •	   Greater focus on quality. PBF may improve the impact of some of the key nutri-
           tion-specific interventions that could have a significant impact, if they are delivered
           with high quality. For example, growth monitoring and promotion (GMP) has had
           limited impact to date because the focus tends to be on weighing children and the
           quality of the accompanying counseling when a child’s growth is faltering is weak.
           Through the quality checklist, PBF may be able to correct this.
      •	   Tends to improve access to services. An important aspect of PBF is the initial busi-
           ness planning that takes place with health facilities to enable them to restructure
           their work so as to maximize their efficiency in service delivery. This can lead to a re-
           duction in fees, which in turn increases demand and often not only increases access
           but also improves overall revenue for the health facility.
      •	   May lead to efficiencies in the supply chain. Increasingly, PBF is used to improve the
           alignment of the functioning of the pharmaceutical supply chain with the needs of
           the service providers and clients. These efficiencies would be of benefit to nutrition
           services (independent of whether the service is one of those purchased through PBF
           or not) because breaks in the supply chain are often a major barrier for the delivery of
           nutrition programs. For this benefit to accrue to nutrition, all essential nutrition sup-
           plies must be included in the list that is assessed as part of the PBF quality checklist
           for the pharmaceutical system.
      •	   Encourages greater autonomy. PBF is expected to empower local level managers
           and provide flexibility in ways to achieve the results. The effectiveness of PBF de-
           pends largely on autonomy being genuinely granted to health facility level manag-
           ers. This autonomy is important for nutrition because different approaches may be
           needed to deliver effective services (especially those which require behavior change)
           depending on the socio-cultural composition of the community.
      •	   May encourage benchmarking and learning. PBF could instill an environment of
           healthy competition among health facilities, especially if financial incentives are
           complemented by non-financial ones. Increasingly, PBF programs are developing
           web portals that contain performance information about each participating unit. In
           addition to increasing transparency, the data enables positive deviance analysis and
           opportunities to learn from the better performers. Positive deviance is an approach
           that has worked well for nutrition, but mainly at a relatively limited scale so far. PBF
           data systems may enable a scaling up.

      Potential Challenges
      •	   Focus primarily on the supply of services. While PBF could contribute significantly
           to increasing the quality and quantity of some of the nutrition-specific interventions,
           it is insufficient by itself to address malnutrition. So far, PBF’s main limitation for nu-
           trition is that it primarily incentivizes service delivery, i.e., the supply side. Nutrition
           interventions also require strong action on the demand side—at the household and
           community levels.


46	                      Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
        •	   Possible resistance. PBF entails a new way of compensating providers and could face
             resistance from staff and bureaucratic hurdles. For example, current rules may not
             allow for payment of bonuses to health care providers. In most settings this chal-
             lenge has proven to be manageable, but has required important investments in time
             upfront to explain the benefits of the new approach.
        •	   Potential cost increase. PBF would increase the cost of service provision, since the
             performance pay is in addition to existing compensation and there are additional
             costs related to verification, etc. Generally such additional costs to the system are
             not significant and are considered well worth the results of improved quantity and
             quality of services. Nonetheless, these additional costs need to be assessed against
             the fiscal space for health and the overall cost-effectiveness of the interventions. In
             the case of some preventive nutrition services (and some curative services), which
             concern a large number of individuals in the catchment area (as opposed to disease
             curative services where only the sick come to facilities), the large numbers can result
             in cost escalations, which has been why some nutrition services have not been in-
             cluded in the PBF package in the past. This challenge may require further targeting
             of nutrition services.
        •	   Balancing nutrition with other interventions in the package of services. Only a lim-
             ited number of services can be included in a PBF system, which poses a challenge
             as to how many and which nutrition indicators to include. Until recently, the PBF
             package that was most often used had focused on two nutrition services: a growth
             monitoring session (without necessarily focusing on the availability or quality of ac-
             companying counseling) and treatment of severe acute malnutrition. Given the poor
             performance of growth monitoring globally and the small proportion of children that
             suffer from severe acute malnutrition (SAM) (compared to stunting), these two ser-
             vices are likely to have only limited direct impact on stunting. However, other basic
             health services such as antenatal care, treatment of malaria, treatment of diarrhea
             and child immunization, all of which are typically included in a standard PBF pack-
             age, will have an indirect positive impact on nutrition.
        •	   Verification of certain nutrition services is difficult. One of the strengths of PBF is
             the system of checks and balances through verification and counter-verification. Be-
             cause some of the nutrition services relate to behavior change (e.g., exclusive breast-
             feeding, complementary feeding, compliance with a regime of iron supplements),
             which are difficult to verify, these high-impact services have tended to be excluded
             from the PBF package. However, some of the newer World Bank operations are test-
             ing the limits of the verification challenge. The positive aspect of community count-
             er-verification of some of these services is that it could generate local involvement
             and the potential to change community norms related to certain behaviors.
        •	   Capacity to deliver nutrition services. The PBF approach provides health facilities a
             high degree of autonomy to organize themselves to deliver the services which are in-
             centivized. Most of these services are at the core of medical training, whereas nutri-
             tion often occupies a very limited space in the medical syllabus. It may be necessary
             initially to offer service providers technical assistance to ensure they have sufficient
             capacity to deliver nutrition services.
        •	   Potential bias against services that are not incentivized. As in any instrument in-
             centivizing specific services, other (non-incentivized) services may be neglected. As
             noted earlier, this may pose a problem for nutrition because the services that need to
             be delivered likely exceed the capacity for a PBF to absorb.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                          47
        •	   Ensuring equitable distribution of the incentive. To avoid conflict among staff, of-
             ten the additional funds are just equally shared rather than based on individual per-
             formance, even though the whole health facility receives the additional funds based
             on performance. It is much more difficult to institute performance-based rewards at
             the individual provider level without large-scale reform of the human resource (HR)
             systems.
        •	   Workload of community health workers. Some programs are exploring using PBF
             to incentivize community outreach through community health workers. While this
             approach holds promise for nutrition, the community health workers’ range of du-
             ties and work volume needs to be consider to assess the feasibility of assigning them
             more tasks.

        Examples of Country Experience	
        Armenia, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic Repub-
        lic of Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Gambia, Ghana, Haiti, Kenya, Lao Peoples
        Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Nigeria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Zimba-
        bwe, Zambia


      • Performance Based Contracting (PBC)
        Definition	
        •	   PBC takes place when service delivery is contracted out (or contracted in) often us-
             ing non-state actors, e.g., international or national nongovernmental organizations
             (NGOs) or community-based organizations or for-profit private sector providers, and
             the contracts are performance-based.
        •	   The contracts focus on the outputs, quality, or outcomes that tie at least a portion of
             the contractor’s payment, contract extensions, or contract renewals to achieving spe-
             cific, measureable performance standards. Although any contract would be expected
             to have a performance clause—and could be terminated in the case of non-perfor-
             mance—PBC links payment to performance more explicitly and based on specific
             services and outputs to be delivered.
        •	   A standard package of health services is defined in the contract, which could include
             nutrition services. Performance is usually assessed (and payment made) based on
             delivery of the full agreed package, as opposed to PBF where payments are tied to
             individual services. The verification is at a more macro level than PBF, such as inde-
             pendent coverage surveys.
        •	   PBC is usually focused mainly on health facility based services, although it typically
             also includes community activities (e.g., screening for severe acute malnutrition) to
             create demand for facility-based services.

        Potential Strengths
        •	   Competitive selection. Contracted entities have to compete to be selected, and again to
             have their contracts renewed at regular intervals. This competition brings to the fore
             available capacity, which the government may not have been able to tap into previously.
        •	   Alignment. Often the selected entities were already delivering similar services in the
             area (perhaps at a smaller scale) but with relative autonomy from government and with
             direct financing from donors. PBC can serve to align the work of these entities with
             government priorities.



48	                       Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
        •	   More rigorous than traditional contracts. By linking payment to the quantity and qual-
             ity of services delivered, as per agreed checklists, PBC is a better remedy for non-per-
             formance than traditional contracts, which usually have only a blunt remedy: the early
             termination of the contract.
        •	   Rapid increase in provision of services. Particularly in fragile settings where health
             service delivery is compromised and services reduced, PBC usually translates into a
             rapid increase in the availability of services.
        •	   Flexibility in service delivery. Because the contracted NGOs use their own manage-
             ment policies and procedures, they have more flexibility than a government entity to
             organize themselves for the particular challenges of service delivery, including hiring
             and firing staff according to needs and offering salaries aligned with market rates to
             attract qualified staff. This flexibility is potentially a significant advantage to deliver
             nutrition services because these often need to be adapted to the local context.
        •	   Multisectoral convergence for results. Because PBC can be geographically based (i.e.,
             a given geographical area is assigned to a particular contracted entity) and the enti-
             ty is more flexible than traditional government ministries, the approach can facilitate
             multisectoral convergence to achieve certain results. This multisectoral convergence
             is particularly important for nutrition and has been a challenge when working through
             traditional ministries.
        •	   Local acceptability. In areas of conflict, if the selection of the contracted entities places
             a strong emphasis on proof of having worked effectively in the particular context, it is
             likely that the entity will be better accepted by the local communities, as well as the
             parties in conflict. Often, an NGO with a long history of operating successfully in an
             area is selected and brings to the contract not only its technical and managerial capaci-
             ty but also its positioning and knowledge of the local political economy.
        •	   Prioritization of services. PBC involves defining a package of services (sometimes in
             tiers, such as a “basic package” an “enhanced package,” etc.), which is to be delivered
             under the contract. The process of defining the package (and adjusting it as needed)
             provides an opportunity to ensure that the health services offered are aligned with the
             burden of disease in the targeted area and with the latest evidence of what works to
             address that burden.

        Potential Challenges	
        •	   Government capacity to enforce contracts. The PBC requires significant capacity
             for contract monitoring and enforcement, which can be lacking in some ministries
             of health. Technical assistance on contract management may be required as part of a
             World Bank operation using PBC.
        •	   Availability of providers. In some settings where PBC has been used (e.g., fragile
             environments), a limited number of national organizations exist with the capacity
             to deliver good quality health services. The competitive selection process needs to
             include international entities, but also ensure that their knowledge and capacity to
             operate in the local environment is a key part of the selection process.
        •	   Challenging to terminate contracts. Termination could be difficult to enforce be-
             cause the government will need to find an alternative to continue service delivery
             and PBC can adjust for under-performance or higher performance. Termination re-
             quires unequivocal information.




PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                               49
      AFGHANISTAN P112445 / P129663
      TWO BACK-TO-BACK OPERATIONS INCORPORATED PBC AND PBF
      P112446—STRENGTHENING                          P129663—SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT FOR HEALTH ACTION IN TRANSITION (SEHAT).
      HEALTH ACTIVITIES FOR THE RURAL                The PDO is to expand the scope, qual-     but performance payments are also
      POOR (SHARP) Included contract-                ity, and coverage of health services      made at the NGO level. Thus perfor-
      ing of NGOs with some performance              provided to the population, particularly  mance bonuses are paid not only to the
      based incentives complemented by               for the poor, in the project areas, and   individual providers but also to the NGOs
      PBF at the health facility level.              to enhance the stewardship functions      (20 percent based on performance). The
                                                     of the Ministry of Public Health.         implementation of NGO contracting is
      The project development objective
                                                                                               through performance based partnership
      (PDO) was to contribute to improv-
                                                     Indicators. Almost the same indica-       agreements. Significantly, in addition to
      ing the health and nutritional status
                                                     tors are used for PBC and RBF, mainly     financing the service delivery contracts,
      of the people of Afghanistan, with a
                                                     for maternal and child health, such as    the operation has considerable amounts
      greater focus on women and children
                                                     skilled birth attendance and immuni-      of resources allocated to capacity build-
      and undeserved areas of the country.
                                                     zation coverage. But specific nutrition   ing and system strengthening at the
                                                     indicators have also been included, e.g., central and provincial levels.
      Results of interest. Improved service de-
                                                     pregnant and lactating women receiving
      livery coverage, including quality of care.
                                                     a package of infant and young child nu-   Evaluation. Afghanistan has possibly
      Nutrition was part of the maternal and
                                                     trition services; and under-five children the largest PBC operation in health /
      child health package. Health workers
                                                     with severe acute malnutrition who are    nutrition. Evaluation shows that cover-
      sent a report to the Ministry of Health,
                                                     receiving the requisite treatment. There  age of health services has improved, and
      through NGOs, claiming payment for
                                                     is also one indicator on quality of care. child / infant mortality has decreased.
      the delivery of health services. The
                                                     Operational modality and the incen-       Maternal mortality has also decreased
      request is now electronically submitted.
                                                     tives remain the same as in SHARP         significantly.




                            •	   Perceptions of government about beneficiary expectations. In some settings, the
                                 government is uncomfortable not being seen by the population as the direct deliverer
                                 of services. It may be possible to alleviate this apprehension with an effective com-
                                 munication strategy explaining to the public the role of government is to regulate and
                                 purchase services.
                            •	   Prioritizing nutrition. In some settings, nutrition was not well defined in the pack-
                                 age of services and was limited to a few interventions. For example, because some
                                 NGOs’ recent experience in implementing humanitarian assistance projects focused
                                 on the treatment of severe acute malnutrition, there can be a tendency to assume that
                                 this nutrition intervention is sufficient. It may be necessary to review the package
                                 to define a clear set of nutrition interventions along with indicators to track in the
                                 information system to determine performance.
                            •	   Timing of measurement. In some cases, measurement of PBC performance has been
                                 done less frequently (i.e., every six or twelve months) than in PBF. Because the avail-
                                 ability of data drives the performance reviews, the less frequent reviews results into
                                 slower corrections of bad performance and potentially weaker accountability.
                            •	   Cost of measurement. The surveys required to track performance, while useful be-
                                 yond managing PBC contracts, can be costly. These surveys need to include a range
                                 of nutrition indicators and be well integrated into an overall national health manage-
                                 ment information system and nutrition surveillance system.

                            Examples of Country Experience	
                            Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Pakistan, South Sudan




50	                                                 Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
     Community Level

     •
      Performance Based Community Contracts (PBCC) / Community PBF
        Definition	
        •	   More recently, in combination with Community Driven Development (CDD) plat-
             forms—or sometimes riding on other community mobilization efforts—some coun-
             tries have started using performance based community contracts (PBCC) to incentiv-
             ize nutrition results. That is a type of PBF at the community level.
        •	   Performance based contracts are signed with community groups and payments are
             made on the basis of results achieved.
        •	   As for PPF, the results are verified before the payment is made and the results can
             include both quantitative and qualitative dimensions.
        •	   Community-PBF can be either stand-alone or linked to operations that also establish
             performance contracts at other levels, e.g., facility, sub-national, and national.
        •	   Unlike CDD, where the starting point is the community-expressed needs, with PBCC
             / community-based PBF, the starting point is a specific development objective (e.g.,
             reducing child stunting). Intermediate results are selected based on a clear theory of
             change.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Collective action. Community-based projects can facilitate collective action that
             would enable the removal of community-wide barriers that are creating nutrition
             problems. Some of these barriers can be social (e.g., social norms related to the role
             of men in caring for young children and / or about open defecation) or physical (e.g.,
             building a bridge to ensure easier access to a health facility, or removing conditions
             that enable mosquitos to breed and transmit malaria). Nutrition programs have had
             success in using positive deviance (e.g., identifying which households have less mal-
             nutrition in a community and pinpointing which factors have led to that result) to
             identify priority key community barriers to better nutrition.
        •	   Multisectoral convergence. Community-based projects, if well designed, can en-
             courage communities to seek services from various ministries and enable the conver-
             gence to take place. This is important for nutrition, which requires a mix of sectoral
             interventions.
        •	   Flexibility of design. The determinants of malnutrition and the socio-cultural barri-
             ers to change will vary by community. Community approaches enable communities
             to adapt global knowledge to their particular situations. However, that adaptation
             may require some external facilitation, e.g., through coaches.
        •	   Flexible definition of community. Communities can be defined geographically, but
             particularly in countries where social exclusion is a challenge, communities can or-
             ganize themselves and carry out projects on the basis of characteristics such as eth-
             nicity, social class, caste, etc.
        •	   Quality checklists. Quality checklists, which are generally associated with facili-
             ty-level PBF, can also be used in PBCC or community-level PBF. The focus on quality,
             as seen earlier, is critical for the achievement of nutritional outcomes.
        •	   Can promote utilization of services. Community-based contracts can be used to en-
             gage community groups to promote the use of health and nutrition services and even



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                        51
      THE GAMBIA P143650
      MATERNAL AND CHILD NUTRITION AND HEALTH RESULTS PROJECT
      Project development objective (PDO).          children reached by basic nutrition          Indicators. PDO-level indicators were
      To increase the utilization of community      services; children between 6–59 months       children 0–6 months who are exclusively
      nutrition and primary maternal and            receiving vitamin A supplementation;         breastfed; deliveries attended by certi-
      child health services in selected regions     pregnant women receiving iron and            fied midwives in the preceding year; chil-
      in the country. The results of interest       folic acid supplement; children under        dren aged 6–59 months who received a
      include both improved nutrition and           24 months benefiting from improved           dose of vitamin A within the past twelve
      health among women and children.              IYCF practices; and under-five children      months; women using modern methods
                                                    treated for moderate or severe acute         of family planning in the preceding year.
      Results of interest. Improved knowl-          malnutrition. Under the additional           Under the additional financing, the fol-
      edge about exclusive breastfeeding,           financing, the following nutrition-spe-      lowing PDO-level indicator was added:
      postnatal care, etc., some indicators         cific results were added: Baby-Friendly      children age 6–23 months consuming
      on hygiene, e.g., cleaning up the village,    Community Initiative villages in the         at least four out of six food groups.
      etc., and sanitation, such as building of     region; vulnerable households sup-
      latrines, etc. Nutrition-specific results     ported in gardening; and communities
      included: pregnant / lactating women,         supported in establishing food banks.
      adolescent girls and / or under-five



                                 do referrals. One such nutrition approach is community screening to identify severe
                                 acutely malnourished children, an approach which significantly increases the use
                                 of free nutrition rehabilitation sessions. Some nutrition services, e.g., treatment of
                                 diarrhea with zinc supplements and oral rehydration solution can be effectively de-
                                 livered in the communities themselves, thus reducing the need to consult a facility
                                 and addressing the financial barriers that limit access for the poor.
                            •	   Social accountability. Community involvement can create greater accountability at
                                 the local level, which can lead to a higher degree of transparency and consequently
                                 greater trust and program acceptance.

                            Potential Challenges	
                            •	   Communities do not always recognize nutrition as a problem. Malnutrition may not
                                 be seen as a priority problem by communities partly because other pressing needs
                                 compete for attention, and partly because of lack of awareness about the magnitude
                                 of the malnutrition problem within the community, its causation, and available solu-
                                 tions. In communities where childhood undernutrition is widely prevalent, people
                                 may not recognize malnutrition as a critical problem since malnourished child are
                                 the norm. It may be beneficial to couple community-based PBF with awareness cre-
                                 ation communications campaigns.
                            •	   Challenge of verifying certain nutrition results. The nutrition results that require
                                 community mobilization often include behaviors that are difficult to verify, e.g., ex-
                                 clusive breastfeeding or child complementary feeding behaviors. Because payments
                                 are linked to results, there is a risk that communities will learn to report the right re-
                                 sults without the behaviors changing or changing behaviors but not to the extent re-
                                 ported. This challenge is not insurmountable, but it will require creativity of design.
                            •	   Potential conflict of interest and capacity constraints for verification. Community
                                 groups can also play a role in supervision and monitoring the PBCC operation—a
                                 watch-dog function. But this requires intensive technical assistance, facilitation or
                                 coaching.



52	                                                Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
        •	   Role / presence of the state. Community-based RBF programs need to have an ef-
             fective accompanying communications strategy to ensure that communities are
             aware when a program is part of a government strategy to enhance service deliv-
             ery. Otherwise, some governments may resist using the approach and risk being
             perceived as having been replaced by community-based organizations “to do the
             government’s job.”
        •	   Capacity for nutrition. Even when community organizations and their members
             recognize nutrition as a priority, they do not always have the required knowledge to
             analyze the causes of malnutrition in their community or to select evidence-based
             interventions to reduce it. For example, communities sometimes decide to carry
             out growth monitoring, but this is insufficient to improve childhood malnutrition.
             It must be complemented by appropriate nutrition counseling and / or supplemen-
             tary feeding interventions demonstrated to caretakers, which is usually referred
             to as growth monitoring and promotion (GMP). This capacity challenge has been
             remedied in some World Bank operations by using tools (e.g., menus of options /
             decision trees) and coaches to facilitate community participation processes, specif-
             ically on nutrition.
        •	   Need local institutional capacity. Though in principle, PBCC (PBF at the com-
             munity level) could be used in the absence of a CDD operation, e.g., Cameroon, it
             is critically important to have some sort of community organization with which
             PBCC could operate. Often CDD operations provide the platform on which PBCC
             could be built, by establishing the requisite organizational framework through
             community mobilization efforts. In Djibouti, the existing CDD program provided
             a ready organizational platform. Without such preparatory efforts—either as part
             of CDD or not—or an existing community group such as women’s groups, a health
             promotion committee or a CBO, there would be no locus for PBCC.
        •	   Communities are not always cohesive. Mobilizing communities could be a chal-
             lenge, especially with governments that are reluctant to partner with NGOs and
             CBOs. Governments typically are not strong in community mobilization and need
             the help of NGOs or CBOs to accomplish it. Some geographic communities are not
             cohesive socially. In those cases, targeting by socially defined communities may be
             helpful or by introducing additional measures to improve social cohesion such as
             conflict prevention coaching in conflict-affected areas.
        Examples of Country Experience	
        Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, the Gambia, Ghana, India (state of Andhra Pradesh),
        Indonesia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Senegal, Nepal


     •
      Community Driven Development (CDD)
        Definition	
        •	   Community Driven Development (CDD) has been practiced for several decades,
             with a view to ensuring that development assistance is not just dictated from the
             top, but that the people’s voices are heard, and development efforts are responsive to
             their expressed needs. Through participatory rural appraisals and other such tech-
             niques, CDD increases the involvement and participation of the beneficiaries in the
             planning, implementation, and oversight.
        •	   Financing is provided to communities based on their own plans, addressing their
             own priorities and local approaches. The funds are spent on programs implement-


PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                        53
           ed through community-based organizations with oversight by community leaders or
           committees.
      •	   CDD requires strong community mobilization and capacity building, along with par-
           ticipatory planning and implementation. Most governments require technical sup-
           port, and the involvement of community-based organizations.

      Potential Strengths	
      •	   Ownership and local relevance. Community interventions in CDD programs are
           more likely to be locally relevant, socially acceptable, and successful due to strong
           community involvement and consequently heightened empowerment compared to
           other development programs. These aspects of CDD approaches are valuable in nu-
           trition programs, which are highly dependent on behavior change to succeed, and
           those behaviors are anchored in local norms and traditions.
      •	   Social accountability. Community involvement can create greater accountability at
           the local level, which can lead to a higher degree of transparency and consequently
           greater trust and program acceptance.
      •	   Community contribution. Often communities provide a financial contribution as their
           “share” in the project. This helps build ownership and should enhance sustainability.
      •	   Collective action. Community-based projects can facilitate collective action that
           would enable the removal of community-wide barriers that are creating nutrition
           problems. Some of these barriers can be social (e.g., social norms related to the role
           of men in caring for young children and / or about open defecation) or physical (e.g.,
           building a bridge to ensure easier access to a health facility, removing conditions
           that enable mosquitos to breed and transmit malaria). Nutrition programs have had
           success in using positive deviance (e.g., identifying which households have less mal-
           nutrition in a community and pinpointing which factors have led to that result) to
           identify priority key community barriers to better nutrition.
      •	   Multisectoral convergence. Community-based projects, if well designed, can en-
           courage communities to seek services from various ministries and enable the conver-
           gence to take place. This is important for nutrition, which requires a mix of sectoral
           interventions.
      •	   Flexibility of design. The determinants of malnutrition and the socio-cultural barri-
           ers to change will vary by community. CDD approaches enable communities to adapt
           global knowledge to their particular situations. However, that adaptation usually re-
           quires some external facilitation, e.g., through coaches.
      •	   Flexible definition of community. Communities can be defined geographically, but
           particularly in countries where social exclusion is a challenge, communities can or-
           ganize themselves and carry out projects on the basis of characteristics such as eth-
           nicity, social class, caste, etc. Because some nutrition-related behaviors and barriers
           are specific to some communities, the flexibility inherent in CDD approaches should
           lead to better nutritional outcomes. CDD might be particularly effective in nutri-
           tion because several factors affecting nutrition-related behaviors are socio-cultural.
           Those factors include gender discrimination, household resource distribution, wom-
           en’s health-seeking behavior, and the feeding and eating practices during pregnancy
           and infancy.




54	                     Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
NEPAL P125359
COMMUNITY ACTION FOR NUTRITION PROJECT
Project development objective (PDO).     Indicators. PDO level indicators,         Implementation modalities. At the
The original PDO was “to improve         revised during restructuring and          ward level, there is a multisectoral
attitudes and practices known to         dropping the indicators that sought       committee to approve plans and
improve nutritional outcomes of          to measure attitudes and refining         account for results. Communities get
women of reproductive age and            others, include practices of pregnant     financing which could include awards
children under the age of two.” The      women regarding iron and folic acid       for households / individuals for their
revised PDO is “to improve practices     supplementation; breastfeeding            achievements, e.g., for households
that contribute to reduced undernu-      practices of mothers with children 0–6    using the pit latrine most consistently.
trition of women of reproductive age     months of age; child feeding practic-     The Rapid Results Approach, i.e., re-
and children under the age of two        es of households with children 6–24       sults in 100 days, is being used. There is
and to provide emergency nutrition       months of age; households reporting       a social mobilizer / coach hired through
and sanitation response to vulnerable    no smoke in the room while cooking;       the NGO and contracted by the govern-
populations in earthquake affected       pregnant women reporting consuming        ment through the project in every vil-
areas.” The project was restructured     animal-sourced protein in the previ-      lage development council (VDC). Most
in 2015 to match the project’s results   ous day; households reporting using       of the coaches are from the local com-
framework with community choices.        improved toilet facilities; mothers (of   munity and most of them are women.
                                         children aged 0–2) reporting always       The coach guides the communities,
Results of interest. This project was    washing hands at critical times.          assisting them in devising a proposal to
developed specifically to address                                                  reduce malnutrition in the community.
malnutrition in women of reproductive
age and children under the age of two.




         Potential Challenges	
         •	   Communities do not always recognize nutrition as a problem. CDD programs sup-
              port what communities select as priorities and this may not prioritize malnutrition
              as the most urgent community problem. Malnutrition may not be seen as a priority
              challenge partly because other pressing needs compete for attention, and partly be-
              cause of lack of awareness about the magnitude of the malnutrition problem within
              the community, its causation, and available solutions. In communities where child-
              hood undernutrition is widely prevalent, people may not recognize malnutrition as a
              critical problem since malnourished children are the norm.
         •	   Risk of elite capture. CDD may not be suitable for communities where a feudal cul-
              ture of leadership exists. In such communities, even so-called community engage-
              ment may be captured by the most powerful members, defeating the idea of giving
              voice to the poor and vulnerable sections of the society. While a consultative process
              may occur during participatory planning, the process may not be truly inclusive.
         •	   Alignment with national plans. Often communities will request support to build
              physical infrastructure such as health centers and schools. Unless the programs are
              strongly anchored in coordination mechanisms (which are often weak in developing
              countries), there is a risk of building infrastructures when a better solution might
              have been to address transportation problems (e.g., a bridge) to increase access to the
              infrastructures in neighboring communities. Increasingly, countries are developing
              GIS-enabled infrastructure maps (e.g., national health map) that should help CDD
              programs align with national infrastructure plans. This is not a particular risk for
              nutrition programs because community actions for nutrition do not require physical
              infrastructure.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                                  55
      •	   Alignment with national systems. Similar to the infrastructure point made above, a CDD
           project may finance a school, but may not have the necessary linkages with the national
           system to ensure that teachers and a regular budget is assigned to operate the school.
      •	   Role / presence of the state. CDD programs need to have an effective accompanying
           communications strategy to ensure that communities are aware when a CDD pro-
           gram is part of a government strategy to enhance service delivery. Otherwise, some
           governments may resist using the approach and risk being perceived as having been
           replaced by community-based organizations “to do the government’s job.”
      •	   Community contribution. As noted above, the community’s financial contribution
           should help enhance ownership and sustainability, but when criteria are strictly ap-
           plied (e.g., insisting on a financial contribution instead of in-kind contribution) the
           poorest communities or the poorest members of communities may be excluded. This
           potential exclusion is highly relevant for nutrition because the poorest households
           tend to be the most affected by malnutrition.
      •	   Capacity for nutrition. Even when community organizations and their members rec-
           ognize nutrition as a priority, they do not always have the required knowledge to ana-
           lyze the causes of malnutrition in their community or to select evidence-based inter-
           ventions to reduce it. For example, communities sometimes decide to carry out growth
           monitoring, but this is insufficient to improve childhood malnutrition. It must be com-
           plemented by appropriate nutrition counseling and / or supplementary feeding inter-
           ventions demonstrated to caretakers, which is usually referred to as growth monitor-
           ing and promotion (GMP). This capacity challenge has been remedied in some World
           Bank operations by using tools (e.g., menus of options / decision trees) and coaches to
           facilitate community participation processes, specifically on nutrition.
      •	   Communities are not always cohesive. Mobilizing communities could be a chal-
           lenge, especially with governments that are reluctant to partner with NGOs and
           CBOs. Governments typically are not strong in community mobilization and need
           the help of NGOs or CBOs to accomplish it. Some geographic communities are not
           cohesive socially. In those cases, targeting by socially defined communities may be
           helpful or by introducing additional measures to improve social cohesion such as
           conflict prevention coaching in conflict-affected areas.
      •	   CDD programs are typically dispersed in thousands of small communities. Many of
           them may not have the necessary institutional arrangements, such as a development
           committee or a women’s group to mobilize and articulate their priorities or the ca-
           pacity to develop plans and manage programs. This often requires strong technical
           support, usually through NGOs or CBOs. Monitoring the expenditures and results
           could become difficult to manage when the program is dispersed. Information and
           communication technologies are increasingly used to address this challenge.

      Examples of Country Experience	
      Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, the Gambia, Ghana, India (state of Andhra Pradesh),
      Indonesia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Senegal, Nepal




56	                     Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
     Household / Individual Level

     •
      Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) and Unconditional Cash
      Transfers (UCT)
        Definition	
        •	   Cash transfers are provided directly to targeted (poor) individuals and households
             to reduce their vulnerability through consumption smoothing. When used for nutri-
             tion, a secondary objective is to encourage behavioral changes that should result in
             improved nutritional outcomes. Such behavioral changes generally revolve around
             feeding and eating practices, girls’ education, caring for infants and children, hy-
             giene, and accessing health and nutrition services.
        •	   Cash transfers can be conditional or unconditional, though the recent trend is toward
             the middle ground of soft conditions—behaviors are encouraged but compliance is
             not verified or enforced. When a nutritional objective is present, the transfers are
             combined with accompanying measures, such as communication campaigns and par-
             enting classes, and the cash can be an effective “anchor” for nutrition messages.
             •	   Conditional cash transfers (CCT) involve disbursements based on verified com-
                  pliance to the prescribed behavior, e.g., accessing institutional delivery, or bring-
                  ing the baby in for growth monitoring or immunization, or nutrition counselling
                  sessions.
             •	   Unconditional cash transfers (UCT) involve disbursements without a strict re-
                  quirement for a specific behavior. This approach is more suitable for behaviors
                  that are difficult to verify, e.g., exclusive breastfeeding, or increased food intake
                  during pregnancy.
        •	   Soft conditionalities. Even in operations designed as CCT, the conditionality is
             seldom strictly enforced. Beneficiaries are encouraged to attend parenting classes,
             growth monitoring and promotion sessions, cooking demonstrations and so on, but
             the payout is not conditioned upon their participation in such accompanying mea-
             sures. Program evaluations suggest that soft conditionalities are just as effective as
             strict conditionalities.
        •	   Cash transfers have evolved over time, going beyond risk management towards oth-
             er development goals, such as reducing malnutrition. If nutrition objectives are to be
             formally superimposed on CCT / UCT operations, it is vitally important to apply the
             relevant knowledge and skills in preparation, implementation, and monitoring, and
             to target the all-important first 1,000 days.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Incentivizes behavior change. Cash transfers move the incentive to the intended
             beneficiaries, i.e., the individuals in households whose behavior needs to change to
             improve nutrition (caretakers and those who influence them), and can be very effec-
             tive—if designed and implemented well.
        •	   Targeting the most vulnerable. Cash transfer programs rely on rigorous systems to
             target the most vulnerable, most often through a proxy means test that identifies the
             income poor. Household surveys have shown that these beneficiaries are more likely
             to be malnourished. Using the targeting system of cash transfer programs therefore
             could help to use more efficiently the scarce resources available for nutrition, espe-
             cially for preventing undernutrition.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                            57
      •	   Filling a resource gap. Cash transfers are an important part of a national nutrition
           strategy because— at least for the poorest and most vulnerable households—the avail-
           ability of financial resources is a determinant of malnutrition. The cash will enable
           these households to purchase a balanced and safe diet (which is more expensive than
           the typical diets consumed by the poor) and health services. The cash could also free
           up time for caretakers to ensure children received adequate breastfeeding and com-
           plementary feeding.
      •	   Anchoring behavior change messages. The cash transfer itself can serve as an “an-
           chor” for nutrition messages, i.e., to capture the attention of household members to
           key nutrition messages that they might otherwise not notice due to competing prior-
           ities in their complex lives.
      •	   Addressing gender dynamics. Cash transfer programs can be designed to correct
           household gender imbalances by empowering women. For example, the cash trans-
           fers are generally handed out to women rather than to the household head. This is
           likely to benefit nutrition (independent of whether or not nutrition messages are in-
           cluded with the cash transfer) because gender inequality is often a strong determinant
           of malnutrition.
      •	   Efficiency. Direct transfers to individuals through cash transfer programs avoid elite
           capture and other inefficiencies that diminish the proportion of resources that reach
           households. For example, it may be more efficient to provide a household with a cash
           transfer and information encouraging them to purchase a product such as micronutri-
           ent powders or zinc tablets from the market rather than providing these same inputs
           for free through the public health system. The act of purchasing would create owner-
           ship for the effective use of the product.
      •	   Rapid response capability. Cash transfer programs provide a platform for rapidly de-
           ploying an emergency response to crises such as floods, earthquakes, etc. Rapid de-
           ployment could help prevent or reduce the severity of the malnutrition which typical-
           ly accompanies emergency situations.
      •	   Strong information systems. Cash transfer programs require strong information sys-
           tems to identify beneficiaries, track payments and, in the case of conditional transfers,
           to communicate the conditionalities or “co-responsibilities,” and to verify compliance.
           These same information systems can be used to communicate key nutrition messages.
      •	   Political visibility. Cash transfer programs tend to be highly visible and usually ben-
           efit from strong political support. Adding a nutrition objective to a cash transfer pro-
           gram could also raise the profile of nutrition with policy-makers.

      Potential Challenges	
      •	   Requires strong management capacity and good governance. Cash transfer programs
           require strong management arrangements to ensure effective administration of the
           cash transfer, mitigating moral hazard, preventing leakage of the cash, and monitoring
           actual compliance in the case of conditional cash transfers. This capacity requirement
           can be a challenge in some countries.
      •	   Limited feedback loops from UCTs. While UCTs are easier to administer, they do not
           have built-in mechanisms to determine whether the desired behavior change has been
           achieved. Separate surveys or other ways of collecting data may therefore be required.
      •	   For CCTs, insure the service which constitutes the condition is available. The supply
           of nutrition-related services is often a constraint in countries where malnutrition is
           highly prevalent. An incentive to the providers of the service in question may be help-


58	                     Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
MALI P127328
EMERGENCY SAFETY NETS PROJECT (JIGISÉMÉJIRI)
Project development objective (PDO).       Indicators. Nutrition-specific indica-     The operation is linked to the National
To provide targeted cash transfers to      tors include poor households / children    Health Insurance. The UCT targets the
the poor and food insecure households      receiving the nutritional package, i.e.,   poor, but non-poor households can
and to establish the building blocks       the powder + education; households         participate in the information session at
for a national safety net system.          participating in the nutritional infor-    the community level. A total of 62,000
                                           mation session; households improving       households have been identified to be
Results of interest. Poverty allevia-      food consumption score, i.e., weight-      reached by July 2016. Consideration is
tion; safety net for the poor and food     ed score of 20 categories of food.         being given to linking the beneficiaries
insecure; improving living conditions.                                                of the UCT with the health program
Increasing access to social services.      Operational modality. Unconditional        so that growth monitoring could be
Nutrition is seen as a side effect. A      cash transfer (UCT) combined with          added to the operation. On average, 70
nutrition program is being piloted as      behavior change communication (BCC)        percent of the transfer is spent on food.
part of this operation. Every under-five   in the five regions of the south—105
child and pregnant women will receive      to110 communities of 703 communities
a nutritional supplement (powdered         in the country. The cash transferred
milk + iron supplement + vitamin A),       to poor household is accompanied by
along with nutrition education.            services and education / information.




               ful. In effect, such cases could combine a demand-side incentive though the CCT with
               PBF to incentivize the supply side. This increases the complexity and potentially the
               cost of the intervention.
          •	   Potential negative impact on intrinsic motivation. When CCT is used to increase the
               utilization of predetermined services, the use of cash alone may affect what otherwise
               may have been an intrinsic motivation to seek a service. It may be possible that the
               prescribed services would not be highly valued by the community and that they may
               consider themselves to simply be paid to use the services, rather than fully valuing the
               usefulness of the service.
          •	   Sometimes financial incentives may not be enough to overcome entrenched beliefs
               and socio-cultural barriers. It is often the case that the barriers to behavior change
               lie at the community level where norms are set. Therefore, information, education,
               and communication campaigns need to accompany any type of transfers that seek to
               change behaviors, and perhaps also community-based incentives.
          •	   Risk that the behavior change attained by a cash transfer program may not be sus-
               tained after the incentive stops. In nutrition programs, if the cash was intended to
               finance food security and access to health services, it may be necessary to ensure con-
               tinued availability of resources over relatively long periods. However, in a cash trans-
               fer program, which targeted households with children during the first 1,000 days,
               households could enter the program for a relatively shorter time. Cash transfer pro-
               grams are increasingly focusing on concurrently building the capacity of households
               to become more productive so as to eventually “graduate” and become economically
               independent.

          Examples of Country Experience	
          Bangladesh, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guate-
          mala, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Madagas-
          car, Mali, Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Tanzania



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                                    59
      • Public Works Programs (PWP)
        Definition	
        •	   A public works program (PWP) involves the provision of temporary paid employ-
             ment by the creation of predominantly public goods for targeted beneficiaries. The
             works are generally labor intensive and require few or no skills.
        •	   PWP have traditionally financed the construction or rehabilitation of infrastructure
             (e.g., feeder roads, small dams, etc.) as well as works to preserve the environment
             (e.g., reforestation, terracing, etc.). However, these programs have started financing
             other forms of employment, which are more directly relevant for nutrition, such as
             agriculture and child care.
        •	   A PWP functions as a form of productive social safety net by providing an income
             to targeted households or individuals in exchange for their labor. Payments can be
             in-kind or, more frequently, in cash. Wages are set sufficiently low to avoid substitu-
             tion effects with other employment. Targeting is done either on the basis of income
             measures (e.g., proxy means test) or by self-targeting, by setting the wage sufficiently
             low to attract only poor people. Some programs intentionally target women, or have
             women quotas, and provide complementary services (e.g., child care) to enable their
             participation.
        •	   In light of the obvious limitations of temporary employment, PWP are increasingly pro-
             viding complementary services aimed at helping beneficiaries find sustainable liveli-
             hoods. They include various types of training, “forced” savings, and matching grants.
        •	   The programs can be used as part of an overall national social protection strategy and
             / or provided in response to a humanitarian crisis.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Target the poor. In addition to the poverty targeting (e.g., proxy means test), when the
             wages are set at the right level, PWPs create a self-targeting mechanism which tends
             to work well because only those poor enough to consider the low wages attractive will
             present themselves for work. Because of the link between poverty and nutrition, the
             participants of PWPs are more likely to belong to households with high levels of mal-
             nutrition.
        •	   Can provide a platform to transmit nutrition messages and build skills. Increasingly,
             PWPs have a longer-term vision and contain skills development training to enable the
             individuals to overcome the barriers that are keeping them trapped in poverty. The
             training sessions offer a platform to transmit information about nutrition.
        •	   Could have sustainable livelihoods component linked to nutrition-related microen-
             terprises. The training and savings component of a PWP could encourage participants
             to develop microenterprises to meet specific nutrition needs of the community. For
             example, participants could develop local low-cost vitamin fortified complementary
             food for children.
        •	   Works can build nutrition-related infrastructure. Even a more traditional PWP
             could apply a nutrition lens in the selection of the infrastructure that would be built or
             rehabilitated. Priorities could include, for example, latrines for girls at schools (to prolong
             school attendance for girls), infrastructure for irrigation, and storage of vitamin rich crops.
        •	   Good match with intrinsic motivation. Because they have worked for their wage, the
             incentive may have less negative impact on intrinsic motivation. Participants would




60	                         Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
ETHIOPIA P146883
PRODUCTIVE SAFETY NETS PROJECT 4 (PSNP-4)
Project development objective (PDO).        insecurity for program participants;         e-payment. 80 percent of the house-
To increase access to safety net and        increase in average value of household       holds are paid in return for working in
disaster risk management systems,           assets; and access of client households      the public works. But these public works
complementary livelihoods services          to community-based nutrition services,       programs include attending behavior
and nutrition support for food inse-        including behavioral change communi-         change sessions. Work requirements
cure households in rural Ethiopia.          cation provided under the national nutri-    are exempted for pregnant women and
                                            tion program. At the intermediate level,     those with young children. 20 percent
Results of interest. Improved house-        the project includes a few nutrition-spe-    of the households receive UCT (house-
hold food security, livelihoods and         cific indicators: clients reporting that     holds without able-bodied members).
nutrition, and enhanced household           they can provide adequate meals for          The incentives are “soft” (encouraging)
and community resilience to shocks.         their family for 12 months a year (male /    incentives / “nudges” not “hard” con-
                                            female); transfers that have a value of at   ditions. There has been an evolution
Indicators. At the PDO-level, the project   least 15 kg of cereals and 4 kg of pulses.   of increasing attention to nutrition
measures progress in transition to a so-                                                 under PSNP. In the first PSNP, the only
cial protection system; progress towards    Operational modality. Public works           conditionality was that Ethiopia should
developing improved early warning           program with cash or food is given. The      have a nutrition policy. In PSNP-4, there
triggers and agreed response mecha-         cash component is the equivalent of          is much more nutrition sensitivity.
nisms; the net number of months of food     2,100 calories worth of food, cash or




              feel they have earned their incentive, thus enhancing the sense of pride and self-re-
              spect among the beneficiaries.
         •	   Could provide a platform for community processes. Inasmuch as PWPs are opportu-
              nities for people to get together and work together, they could be used as a platform
              to start organizing the community for nutritionally minded collective action, e.g., re-
              moving conditions that enable mosquitos to breed and transmit malaria or improving
              access to water and the sanitary environment. The training provided by the program
              could provide a good starting point.
         •	   Potential for inter-sectoral convergence. PWPs provide a great opportunity for in-
              ter-sectoral action. The benefits go beyond health or nutrition and could yield broader
              developmental impact. If a PWP sets itself an objective to contribute to improving nu-
              trition, it can forge useful linkages with other relevant sectors. For example, the PWP
              can partner with the health system to identify malnourished kids in the families of the
              beneficiary workers, and provide nutrition services where required.
         •	   Flexibility for households. If payments are in cash, households will dispose of ad-
              ditional income to spend freely. When combined with appropriate educational pro-
              grams, the additional income could be put to good use and enhance food security and
              household nutrition status.
         •	   Non-controversial entry point for nutrition. In countries that may have sensitivities
              related to their malnutrition rates, combining nutrition interventions into an existing
              PWP may be a good way to start remedying the problem.

         Potential Challenges	
         •	   Does not reach those who cannot work. Those who are unable to work because of age,
              health status or family responsibilities are excluded from PWPs. So, complementary
              programs such as cash transfers should be available to reach those households.




PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                                       61
              •	   No guarantees that nutrition behaviors will improve. Payments are generally given to
                   the workers, which in most cases mean payments will go to men. While poor women
                   tend to prioritize investments in human capital when they obtain additional income—
                   including better quality food, education and health services (all critical inputs for good
                             —this is less true when the income is controlled by men, especially if the
                   nutrition)­
                   PWP does not include communication on nutrition as an accompanying measure.
              •	   Labor-intensive works can be energy intensive and could actually aggravate mal-
                   nutrition. Most PWPs require hard physical labor, and the additional food pur-
                   chased with the wages may not offset the caloric loss (or the worker may simply not
                   increase his / her food intake and use the extra money for something else). In this
                   situation, aggravating a low body mass index situation is a risk for participants. This
                   poses a problem especially for women of child bearing age and would lead to low
                   birth weight babies.
              •	   May be difficult to change the mindset. Some public works agencies are accus-
                   tomed to infrastructure work. It is a mindset change to have them work on social
                   sector activities.
              •	   Horizon tends to be short-term. In most cases, beneficiaries of PWP only work for a
                   few months (4–6). There is therefore a risk that beneficiaries will focus only on short-
                   term employment and the current earning needs of their households.
              •	   Nutrition may not be recognized as a priority. Many of these social safety net pro-
                   grams may not prioritize nutrition in their results monitoring. They therefore may
                   not result in nutritional improvements even if income poverty is alleviated.
              •	   Potential leakage and corruption. In some countries these PWPs are a source of
                   corruption through measures such as falsification of worker lists, etc. The problem
                   tends to be more acute when payment is in-kind rather than through cash payments
                   made directly to individual bank accounts.

              Examples of Country Experience	
              Argentina, Bangladesh, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Democratic Republic of Congo



      Non-Financial Incentives
      Effective interventions to achieve nutritional impact will require a mix of financial and non-fi-
      nancial incentives. This section provides examples of non-financial incentives that could be con-
      sidered at each level of the system. This is not a comprehensive list of non-financial incentives.
      An important first step in selecting non-financial incentives, as well as financial incentives, is to
      define a clear theory of change. It is also critical to understand the social environment in which
      the interventions will be introduced, including the norms and mental models of the stakeholders
      and beneficiaries. We recommend that readers consult the World Development Report 2015: Mind,
      Society, and Behavior for a more detailed discussion about this topic, which should inspire the
      selection of appropriate intervention design to best use non-financial incentives.

             National and Sub-National
        •	   Global SUN movement: Prestige of joining “Scaling Up Nutrition / SUN” movement and
             the personal satisfaction related to learning from the SUN tools and networks.
        •	   Costing data: Information on cost-effectiveness of nutrition interventions motivates
             decision-makers to invest for good social returns, e.g., World Bank costing studies.



62	                              Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
  •	   Social change campaigns: Visibility of behavior change campaigns can provide social
       capital for political leaders.
  •	   Bilateral dialogue: When international donors include nutrition as part of their overall
       bilateral political dialogue, high-level decision-makers may be motivated, or in some cases
       coerced, to take action.
  •	   Rankings: International rankings, e.g., Human Development Index, can serve as motivators.
  •	   Visits from leaders / summits: World leaders’ visits and international summits (e.g., World
       Bank meeting on stunting in October 2016) can draw attention to malnutrition and thus
       motivate policy-makers either to seek visibility or to avoid being shamed.
  •	   Campaigns and reports: International campaigns and reports, e.g., Global Nutrition
       Report, can cast attention on the issue. Related in-country media coverage and debates can
       motivate leaders and policy-makers to take action.
  •	   Global events: Events such as World Food Day and the related media coverage can motivate
       leaders and policy-makers to show what they have achieved in nutrition.
  •	   Regular use of data: Annual “nutrition report cards” can generate interest from a range
       of stakeholders and motivate action. These require more robust data systems for nutrition
       than those currently in place.
  •	   Brand recognition: Private companies can get motivated to take action on malnutrition
       because it will boost their brand.
  •	   Learning opportunities: Leaders, policy-makers and other stakeholders such as journalists
       can be motivated to take action on nutrition through learning events such as conferences
       and targeted training programs (e.g., programs targeted at parliamentarians and media
       leaders).
  •	   Supportive supervision: Program implementers at the national and sub-national level
       could be motivated by the feedback they receive through supervision.
  •	   Recognition: Awards, either to individual leaders or to countries, can be powerful motivators.

       health facility
  •	   Information tools: Having appealing information tools could motivate health workers to
       undertake good nutrition counseling.
  •	   Knowledge: Well-trained health workers will be more motivated to include nutrition as
       part of a medical consultation. Too often, nutrition is missing from pre-service or in-ser-
       vice training of health workers.
  •	   Mass media campaigns: While these campaigns are usually aimed primarily at households,
       they have been shown to also have a positive impact on the motivation of health workers.
  •	   Supportive supervision: Health workers could be motivated by the feedback they receive
       through regular supervision.
  •	   Visibility: A nutrition program could be designed to provide visibility for health facili-
       ty workers, conferring them status in the community and possibilities of promotion into
       higher levels of the health system.
  •	   Recognition: Awards are important motivators; these could be for individual workers or
       for entire health facilities.
  •	   Benchmarking: The use of data to establish performance standards and then using these
       standards to compare health facilities, as done in PBF, could be a motivator for health fa-
       cility workers.



PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                          63
      •	   Availability of supplies: Without specific supplies, e.g., zinc supplements, some nutrition
           services cannot be offered. Long periods of stock outs of these supplies could demotivate
           workers to provide these services. Conversely, the availability of the supply could serve as
           a reminder that the services should be offered.

           Community
      •	   Information tools: Having appealing information tools could motivate the community
           health worker or other community platforms to undertake good nutrition counseling. ICT
           tools appear to boost the status of the community health worker in communities where
           tools such as tablets and smart phone are still a novelty.
      •	   Knowledge: Community workers are more motivated when they feel they have knowledge
           they can bring to the community. For example, the community is motivated by knowledge
           that they can take collective action in areas such as removing the conditions required for
           the transmission of malaria.
      •	   Shame: Some social norms can be shifted through shaming, e.g., shifting the norms sur-
           rounding the role of men in child feeding practices, or the norms around open defecation.
      •	   Data: Communities could be motivated by a sense of accomplishment that would come
           from knowing that their children are growing better or have lower levels of anemia. This
           would require having data platforms that send this signal to communities on a regular basis.
      •	   Positive deviance: Positive deviance analysis, i.e., identifying households in the community
           where children are developing normally despite having access to similar resources, can be
           motivating to communities because it shows them that they have the ability to improve
           their situation with minimal need for external resources.
      •	   Visibility: Highly visible programs, e.g., vitamin A distributions, can be motivating both for
           caretakers and for workers and thus reach high levels of coverage.
      •	   Priority access to services: In some countries, community health workers may not receive
           a financial payment, but they have priority access to some free services such as health care
           and credit. This can serve as an important motivator, particularly if these services do not
           have the ability to cover the entire community.
      •	   Mass media campaigns: While these campaigns are usually aimed primarily at house-
           holds, they have been shown to also have a positive impact on the motivation of community
           workers.
      •	   Recognition: Awards and other forms of recognition, either to individual workers or to
           entire communities, can serve as important motivators. An example is conferring on a com-
           munity the status of being “open defecation free.”


           Households
      •	   Information: Parents who learn that well-nourished children perform better in school and
           earn more during their adult years are motivated to take action. Often caretakers are not
           performing certain behaviors because they do not know the benefits of the behavior.
      •	   Growth monitoring: If accompanied by appropriate counseling, growth monitoring can
           be a powerful tool to motivate parents to take action when their child is growth faltering.
      •	   Mass media campaigns: While these campaigns are usually aimed primarily at households,
           they have been shown to also have a positive impact on the motivation of health workers.
      •	   Nudges: Encouraging households that receive a cash payment either as part of a cash trans-
           fer program or as part of a public works program could motivate parents to modify their



64	                            Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
       consumption patterns in favor of services and food that improve the nutritional status of
       women and children in the household.
  •	   Availability of a product: When a product such as micronutrient powders to fortify a child’s
       food directly on the plate is available in the household, it can serve as a motivator to change
       certain behaviors, in this case, starting complementary feeding at six-months of age.
  •	   Recognition of status: Nutrition-related behaviors in a household involve several individ-
       uals, but in the past, most messages have been directed mainly at the mother. Recognizing
       that the grandmother and the father are important decision makers and directly involving
       them in interventions can serve as motivators for behavior change.
  •	   Gender: Actions to increase the agency of women within the household are important mo-
       tivators for these women, which can have an impact on malnutrition.




PART II: FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TO ENHANCE NUTRITION RESULTS 	                           65
66	   Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
Conclusions




The right nutrition incentives at the right level
Nutrition is a vital aspect of a country’s universal health coverage (UHC) policy. A well-nour-
ished population contributes to national development and decreases poverty. An undernour-
ished population—particularly malnourished mothers and children—contributes to the cycle of
poverty that prevents nations from reaching their full potential. Malnutrition is also a driver of
disparities and a serious impediment to achieving the objectives of key sectors, such as agricul-
ture, education, social protection, and health. The World Bank’s global experience and expertise
in a range of sectors positions it to assist countries in establishing effective national nutrition
programs and scaling up existing programs. An effective national nutrition program requires a
multisectoral approach.
  Successfully scaling up a country’s multisectoral nutrition plans require the right incentives,
including facilitating effective inter-sectoral collaboration and coordination. The financial and
non-financial incentive mechanisms used effectively in health, education, and social protection
programs can be equally effective in achieving behavior change to improve nutrition either as
part of broader World Bank operations or as stand-alone nutrition projects or programs.
  The systematic use of incentives in World Bank-financed operations to achieve nutrition ob-
jectives has been modest to date and deserves more attention. This document has explained
the various financial and some of the non-financial incentives and at which level they should be
used, i.e., national, sub-national, facility, community, household or individual. Explicit indicators
should be included to measure nutrition results within the health, agriculture, education, social
protection, water and sanitation, and other relevant sector operations.


CONCLUSIONS 	                                                                                           67
              An important element to the success of incentivized nutrition operations is identifying ap-
            propriate indicators and establishing robust systems to monitor and verify results in order
            to reward good performance promptly. This assumes, of course, the existence or the develop-
            ment of the necessary information systems and institutional mechanisms to monitor and evaluate
            nutrition interventions. Nutrition indicators are not always obvious. Most results-based, incen-
            tivized operations do not measure nutrition results directly—though many include results that
            indirectly contribute to nutrition, e.g., health status improvements, hygiene and sanitation, etc.
            The main constraint to including explicit nutrition indicators in results-based or incentivized op-
            erations appears to be the difficulty in identifying verifiable and easily measureable indicators to
            which payments can be linked. Nevertheless, this is possible, as demonstrated by the successful
            operations mentioned in this document.
              Nutrition programs need to identify the most suitable incentives according to context—which
            vary greatly by country and region, and even by community. The starting point in the choice of
            financial and non-financial incentives will be to assess the nutrition system in a given country
            and define a clear theory of change that addresses the most binding constraints. The various in-
                                      centives will be more effective at the different levels and usually, a com-
                                      bination of incentives will be required. Financial incentives need to be
                                      carefully calibrated with non-financial incentives to achieve a positive
                                      impact without a negative impact on intrinsic motivation.
      Successfully                       Incentivized approaches for nutrition are implemented within a
                                      wider political economy context. World Bank staff should seek op-
      scaling up                      portunities to generate windows of opportunities and to create them

      a country’s                     if necessary. Nutrition champions need to be identified and supported.
                                      This might also mean placing the oversight for an operation under the
      multisectoral                   Ministry of Health or the Ministry of Social Welfare or other ministries
                                      where champions could be found with a commitment to nutritional
      nutrition plans                 goals.
                                         Because of the very strong role of households and communities in
      require the right               determining nutrition status, household and community-based incen-
                                      tive mechanisms may become the more natural choice for nutrition
      incentives.                     operations, such as Community Driven Development (CDD) or Perfor-
                                      mance Based Community Contracts (PBCC), and beneficiary level in-
                                      centives, i.e., Cash Transfers (CT) and Public Works Programs (PWP),
                                      although Development Policy Financing (DPF), Program for Results
                                      (PforR), Performance Based Financing (PBF), and Performance Based
                                      Contracting (PBC) are also feasible, depending on the level at which the
                                      main constraints are faced.


            Supporting Task-Teams and Leaders to Incentivize Nutrition
            Programming
            To assist task-teams and leaders in developing, implementing, and monitoring incentivized
            programs for nutrition, as well as in incorporating nutrition results in other relevant operations,
            a Practitioner’s Compendium compliments this report. The compendium offers practical infor-
            mation on how plan incentivized operations for improving nutrition results for World Bank cli-
            ent countries, along with country examples and nutrition indicators for monitoring progress.
              A number of other resources are available to support task teams in scaling up nutrition,
            including:
              •	 Experienced staff: A group of World Bank staff have technical knowledge and expe-
                  rience in integrating nutrition into national policies and programs. This group operates as


68	                                   Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
       a community of practice and is one of the Global Solutions Groups within the Health, Nu-
       trition and Population Global Practice, under the leadership of the Global Solutions Lead,
       Meera Shekar (mshekar@worldbank.org). They can be integrated into World Bank task
       teams to support policy dialogue and operations.
  •	   SWAT team: The staff in the Global Solutions Group for nutrition and short-term consul-
       tants are available for rapid mobilization as part of the World Bank response to country re-
       quests for technical assistance in policy reform, program design, implementation support
       evaluation, etc.
  •	   Reference materials: A number of technical guidance notes and other reference
       materials are available to guide teams. See Annex 2 of the Practitioner’s Compendium.
  •	   Trust funds: A number of trust funds are available to support country teams in scaling
       up nutrition, including:
         •	   Japan Trust Fund
         •	   Power of Nutrition Trust Fund
         •	   Global Financing Facility (GFF) Trust Fund for Every Woman Every Child
         •	   Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund
         •	   Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF) Trust Fund
         •	   Rapid Social Response (SRS) Trust Fund
         •	   Early Learning Partnership
  •	   Additional support: Several donors and partners are discussing with the World Bank
       how they can best support the Bank in scaling up its financing of operations to prevent
       stunting.




CONCLUSIONS 	                                                                                         69
Annexes
ANNEX 1. Evidence Review of Financial Incentive Mechanisms




Background
This annex summarizes a literature review conducted to document the impact of financial in-
centive mechanisms on nutrition-related outcomes in low- and middle-income countries. Spe-
cifically, the review focused on eight mechanisms that the World Bank has incorporated into
projects and initiatives to incentivize results. The mechanisms include: development policy
lending, program-for-results, performance-based budgeting, performance-based financing, per-
formance-based contracting, conditional cash transfers, unconditional cash transfers, and public
works programs.



Methods
This review included studies from six electronic databases: Cochrane Library, EconLit, MED-
LINE, ScienceDirect, Scopus, and Web of Science. The names of each financial incentive mech-
anism, and common synonyms, were used as the search terms. The titles and abstracts of the
studies were screened for relevance. The full texts of potentially relevant articles were reviewed
to identify those that met the inclusion criteria. Finally, the reference lists of included articles
were searched for other relevant studies.
  The key inclusion criteria related to study design and outcomes. Included in the study were only
non-randomized and randomized controlled trials, interrupted-time series analyses, controlled
before-and-after studies, and pooled cross-sectional studies with matching. For outcomes, the
only studies included were those that examined anthropometric and nutrition outcomes, nutri-
tion-related health care utilization, and nutrition-related health behavior. For more details about
the methods and inclusion criteria, please refer to the full review.
  If a systematic review had already evaluated the impact of an incentive mechanism on the out-
comes of interest using similar inclusion criteria, we used that review as a starting point for our
own research. We then only looked for additional studies published after the search date in the
previous review of that particular incentive. We summarized the evidence in the form of a narra-
tive review. We did not conduct meta-analyses to combine the findings from independent studies,
given the differences in the study methods used, the designs of the incentive mechanisms, and
the country settings.


ANNEXES 	                                                                                              71
      Results

      1. Development policy loans
      No studies were identified that evaluated the impact of development policy loans (DPL) on any
      of the nutrition-related outcomes of interest. A 2015 World Bank report on DPLs found that such
      loans have generally met or exceeded expectations based on the Implementation Completion and
      Results reports. However, more rigorous analyses of such operations are needed to determine
      their effectiveness in meeting the stated aims, as well as DPLs’ suitability for incentivizing nutri-
      tion programs.

      2. Program-for-results financing and disbursement-linked indicators
      No studies were identified which evaluated the impact of program-for-results (PforR) financing
      or disbursement-linked indicators on any of the nutrition-related outcomes of interest. PforR
      financing is relatively new, with the World Bank first piloting it in 2012. In 2015, the Bank pub-
      lished a two-year review of the early experiences using the financing instrument. The review
      concluded that PforR financing has been used in a variety of countries and sectors, with im-
      plementation broadly on course for most of the operations. However, more rigorous evidence is
      needed to understand the impact of PforR financing on nutrition-related outcomes.

      3. Performance based budgeting
      For performance based budgeting (PBB), two studies met the inclusion criteria. One randomized
      controlled trial (RCT) was conducted in Indonesia; one controlled before and after (CBA) study
      was conducted in Argentina. Overall, more high-quality evidence is needed to understand the
      impact of this form of budgeting on nutrition-related outcomes.
        Two studies evaluated the impact of PBB on nutrition and / or anthropometric outcomes, with
      mixed results. Two studies evaluated the impact of PBB on nutrition-related health care utiliza-
      tion and immunization coverage, also with mixed results. No studies were identified that evalu-
      ated the impact of PBB on nutrition-related behavior change, such as rates of exclusive breast-
      feeding or handwashing.

      4. Performance based financing
      For performance based financing (PBF), 20 studies met the inclusion criteria. Most were con-
      trolled before-and-after studies conducted in Sub-Saharan African countries. A 2012 Cochrane
      review assessed the impact of PBF on health care outcomes and utilization in low- and mid-
      dle-income countries.
        Only three studies examined the impact of a PBF scheme on any nutrition or anthropometric
      outcomes—with mixed results. Sixteen studies examined the impact of PBF schemes on the use
      of various nutrition-related health care services. In general, the studies found that PBF schemes
      had no effect on the uptake of antenatal care, but raised the use of postnatal care among women.
      The studies also usually found that PBF increased the use of preventive care but not curative care
      among children. The evidence is mixed on the impact of PBF on the use of vitamin and mineral
      supplements.
        Ten studies investigated the impact of PBF on rates of vaccination against various diseases,
      mostly in Burundi and Rwanda. The results were mixed on whether PBF increases immunization
      coverage. Only one study examined the impact of PBF on nutrition-related healthy behavior. It
      found a PBF scheme in Rwanda had no impact on the proportion of women breastfeeding for at
      least six months after birth.



72	                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
5. Performance based contracting
For performance based contracting (PBC), seven studies met the inclusion criteria. Most of them
were controlled before-and-after studies conducted in fragile or post-conflict states. A 2009 Co-
chrane review evaluated the impact of contracting out health care delivery on health outcomes
and the use of health care services in low- and middle-income countries.
  No studies evaluated the impact of PBC on nutrition and / or anthropometric outcomes. Seven
studies examined the impact of contracting out and / or contracting in health services on health
care utilization rates. In general, these schemes improve the coverage of health care services—
with the exception of antenatal care.
  Four studies have investigated the impact of PBC on rates of vaccination against various
diseases. The results were mixed on whether such schemes improve immunization cover-
age. No studies were identified that evaluated the impact of PBC on nutrition-related be-
havior change—such as any increase in the rates of exclusive breastfeeding or handwashing.

6. Conditional cash transfers
For conditional cash transfers (CCT), 22 studies met the inclusion criteria. Most of the stud-
ies were randomized controlled trials in Latin America. Three systematic reviews, one of them
published by the Cochrane Collaboration, assessed the impact of CCTs on health outcomes and
health care use in low- and middle-income countries.
  Thirteen studies analyzed the impact of CCTs on nutrition and / or anthropometric outcomes
in children. These studies found that CCT programs can improve growth, weight, and height-for-
age in children, as well as reduce the probability of children being anemic, chronically malnour-
ished, stunted, and underweight. However, the results were not significant for all outcomes or for
all age groups of children. Nine studies examined the impact of CCTs on the use of nutrition-re-
lated health care services. They found that CCT programs increased the frequency of preventive
health visits by mothers and children, the proportion of women receiving antenatal care, and the
percentage of children having their nutritional status monitored.
  Six studies investigated the impact of CCTs on rates of childhood vaccinations. The results
were mixed as to whether CCTs improved immunization coverage. No studies were identified
that evaluated the impact of CCTs on nutrition-related behavior change, such as the rates of ex-
clusive breastfeeding or handwashing.

7. Unconditional cash transfers
For unconditional cash transfers (UCTs), 14 studies met the inclusion criteria. Most of the stud-
ies were randomized controlled trials. A 2015 Cochrane review evaluated the impact of UCTs
distributed during humanitarian crises in low- and middle-income countries on health outcomes
and the use of health services.
  Ten studies evaluated the impact of UCTs on nutrition and / or anthropometric outcomes, with
mixed results. Seven studies examined the impact of UCTs on the use of various nutrition-related
health care services—also with mixed results.
  Only three studies evaluated the impact of UCTs on vaccination rates. None of the studies
found that UCTs had a statistically significant impact on immunization coverage. No studies were
identified that evaluated the impact of UCTs on nutrition-related behavior change, such as rates
of exclusive breastfeeding or handwashing.

8. Public works programs
No studies were identified that evaluated the impact of public works programs (PWP), including
labor-intensive public works, on any of the nutrition-related outcomes of interest. Two reports



ANNEXES 	                                                                                            73
      published by the World Bank in 2009 and in 2013 documented country experiences with public
      works programs. The reviews pointed to the importance of clear objectives, careful design and
      implementation, and functioning monitoring and evaluation systems. However, more high-qual-
      ity evidence is needed to understand the impact of public works programs on nutrition-related
      outcomes.



      Discussion
      There is evidence that the financial incentive mechanisms reviewed can positively influence
      nutrition and related outcomes among children. However, most of the evidence has focused on
      health outcomes and health care utilization. Far less attention has been paid to nutrition, with the
      notable exception of cash transfers. Scant evidence exists about the impact of incentive mecha-
      nisms on nutrition-related health behavior, such as breastfeeding and complementary feeding
      practices.
        In many of the studies reviewed, there was variation in the effects of treatment between sub-
      groups, e.g., rural versus urban children, and children in different age groups, etc. Also, the results
      were not statistically significant for all nutrition outcomes or for all types of health care services.
        The design and implementation of the mechanisms often differs markedly across countries,
      which might explain some of the variations in study findings. The duration of follow-up also
      differed across studies. Therefore, it is difficult to draw general conclusions on the mechanisms’
      impact.
        Not surprisingly, three of the four incentive mechanisms for which little or no evidence was
      found, i.e., development policy loans, program-for-results financing, and performance based bud-
      geting, are mechanisms that aim to shape international, national, or sub-national priorities. It is
      difficult to evaluate such types of mechanisms using randomized controlled trials or other rigor-
      ous study designs.
        Important questions remain about each of the financial incentive mechanisms. The sustainabil-
      ity and cost-effectiveness of these mechanisms is uncertain, particularly when it comes to scal-
      ing up nutrition programs. It is also difficult to disentangle the effects of individual mechanisms
      when multiple mechanisms are present in a country. Additional research is needed to shed light
      on the relative importance of supply-side and demand-side measures, although that is likely to
      be context-specific.
        Finally, most of the studies reviewed have been unable to pinpoint the pathways by which the
      incentive mechanisms improve nutrition. In CCT programs, for instance, the dissemination of
      health, nutrition, and hygiene information to mothers and pregnant women—which is a compo-
      nent of most transfer programs—is probably a key factor driving improvement in child nutrition.
      Children are also required to take nutritional supplements as part of some CCT programs. More-
      over, the conditions attached to the cash transfers, as well as the size of the transfers, usually dif-
      fer across programs. Most studies have not been able determine which of these factors are most
      important in explaining any observed impact.




74	                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
References from the Evidence Review




Performance Based Budgeting (PBB)
1.	 Gertler, P., P. Giovagnoli, S. Martinez. 2014. Rewarding Provider Performance to Enable a
    Healthy Start to Life. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
2.	 Olken, B.A., J. Onishi, S. Wong. 2014. Should Aid Reward Performance? Evidence from a Field
    Experiment on Health and Education in Indonesia. Am Econ J-Appl Econ 6 (4): 1–34.


Performance Based Financing (PBF)
1.	 Basinga, P., P. Gertler, A. Binagwaho, A. Soucat, J. Sturdy, C. Vermeersch. 2010. Paying prima-
    ry health centres for performance in Rwanda. Washington, DC: World Bank.
2.	 Bonfrer, I., R. Soeters, E. Van de Poel et al. 2014. Introduction of performance-based financing
    in Burundi was associated with improvements in care and quality. Health Aff (Millwood) 33
    (12): 2179–87.
3.	 Bonfrer, I, E. Van de Poel, and E. Van Doorslaer. 2014. The effects of performance incentives
    on the utilization and quality of maternal and child care in Burundi. Soc Sci Med 123: 96–104.
4.	 Canavan, A., and G. Swai. 2008. Payment for Performance (P4P) Evaluation: Tanzania Coun-
    try Report for Cordaid Godfrey Swai, National Consultant Width 1. Amsterdam, the Nether-
    lands: Royal Tropical Institute (KIT).
5.	 Falisse, J.B., J. Ndayishimiye, V. Kamenyero, and M. Bossuyt. 2015. Performance-based fi-
    nancing in the context of selective free health-care: an evaluation of its effects on the use
    of primary health-care services in Burundi using routine data. Health Policy Plan 30 (10):
    1251–60.
6.	 Gertler, P., and C. Vermeersch. 2013. Using performance incentives to improve medical care
    productivity and health outcomes. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
7.	 Health Results Innovation Trust Fund. 2014. A smarter approach to delivering more and bet-
    ter reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health services. Washington, DC: The World
    Bank Group.
8.	 Lannes, L., B. Meessen, A. Soucat, and P. Basinga. 2015. Can performance-based financing
    help reaching the poor with maternal and child health services? The experience of rural
    Rwanda. Int J Health Plann Manage.



   ANNEXES 	                                                                                           75
      9.	 Peabody, J.W., R. Shimkhada, S. Quimbo, O. Solon, X. Javier, and C. McCulloch. 2014. The im-
          pact of performance incentives on child health outcomes: results from a cluster randomized
          controlled trial in the Philippines. Health Policy Plann 29 (5): 615–21.
      10.	 Priedeman Skiles, M., S.L. Curtis, P. Basinga, and G. Angeles. 2013. An equity analysis of per-
           formance-based financing in Rwanda: are services reaching the poorest women? Health Pol-
           icy Plan 28 (8): 825–37.
      11.	 Sherry, T.B., S. Bauhoff, and M. Mohanan. 2016. Multitasking and heterogeneous treatment
           effects in pay-for-performance in health care: evidence from Rwanda. Durham, North Caro-
           lina: Duke University.
      12.	 Skiles, M.P., S. L. Curtis, P. Basinga, G. Angeles, and H. Thirumurthy. 2015. The effect of per-
           formance-based financing on illness, care-seeking and treatment among children: an impact
           evaluation in Rwanda. BMC Health Serv Res 15: 375.
      13.	 Soeters, R., and Kimakuka C. 2008. Résultats de l’enquête ménage, l’enquête qualité, et l’en-
           quête infirmiers titulaires: Pour le Programme Achat de Performance dans les Zones de Santé
           du District Sanitaire Nord du Sud Kivu.
      14.	 Soeters, R., and C. Kiwanuka. 2009. Rapport de l’Etude d’Evaluation du programme Achat
           de Performance dans les Provinces Bubanza et Cankuzo basé sur les résultats des enquêtes
           ménages, qualité et infirmiers titulaires réalisées en 2006 et 2008 Cordaid.
      15.	 Soeters, R., and L. Musango, B. Meessen. 2005. Comparison of two output based schemes in
           Butare and Cyangugu provinces with two control provinces in Rwanda. Butare, Rwanda: Glob-
           al Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA), World Bank, Ministry of Health of Rwanda.
      16.	 Soeters, R., P.B. Peerenboom, P. Mushagalusa, and C. Kimanuka. 2011. Performance-based
           financing experiment improved health care in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Health Aff
           (Millwood) 30 (8): 1518–27.
      17.	 Vergeer, P., and C. Chansa. 2008. Payment for performance (P4P) evaluation: Zambia Coun-
           try Report for Cordaid. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Royal Tropical Institute (KIT).
      Note: The Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (ref #7) reports evidence from PBF schemes in the
      DRC, Nigeria, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Thus, in total, 20 studies met the inclusion criteria.


      Performance Based Contracting (PBC)
      1.	 Ali, M.S. 2005. Innovative health management -Rahimyar Khan District, Islamabad: Canadi-
          an International Development Agency.
      2.	 Arur, A., D. Peters, P. Hansen, M. A. Mashkoor, L.C. Steinhardt, G. Burnham. 2010. Contract-
          ing for health and curative care use in Afghanistan between 2004 and 2005. Health Policy
          Plann 25 (2): 135–44.
      3.	 Bloom, E., I. Bhushan, D. Clingingsmith et al. 2006. Contracting for health: evidence from
          Cambodia. Asian Development Bank, World Bank.
      4.	 Cristia, J., W.N. Evans, and B. Kim. 2015. Improving the Health Coverage of the Rural Poor:
          Does Contracting-Out Mobile Medical Teams Work? J Dev Stud 51 (3): 247–61.
      5.	 Cristia, J., A.G. Prado, and C. Peluffo. 2015. The Impact of Contracting in and Contracting out
          Basic Health Services: The Guatemalan Experience. World Dev 70: 215–27.
      6.	 Loevinsohn, B., I. ul Haq, A. Couffinhal, and A. Pande.2009. Contracting-in management to



76	                             Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
    strengthen publicly financed primary health services: The experience of Punjab, Pakistan.
    Health Policy 91 (1): 17–23.
7.	 Van de Poel, E., G. Flores, P. Ir, and O. O’Donnell. 2015. Impact of Performance-Based Financ-
    ing in a Low-Resource Setting: A Decade of Experience in Cambodia. Health Econ.


Conditional Cash Transfers (CCT)
1.	 Akresh, R., D. de Walque, and H. Kazianga. 2012. Alternative cash transfer delivery mecha-
    nisms: Impacts on routine preventative health clinic visits in Burkina Faso. Bonn, Germany:
    Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
2.	 Attanasio, O., L.C. Gomez, C. Murgueitio, P. Heredia, and M. Vera-Hernandez. 2004. Baseline
    report on the evaluation of Famlias en Accion. London, U.K.: The Institute of Fiscal Studies.
3.	 Attanasio, O., L.C. Gómez, P. Heredia, M. Vera-Hernandez. 2005. The short-term impact of a
    conditional cash subsidy on child health and nutrition in Colombia. London: The Institute of
    Fiscal Studies.
4.	 Barham, T., K. Macours, J.A. Maluccio, F. Regalia, V. Aguilera, and M.E. Moncada. 2014. As-
    sessing long-term impacts of conditional cash transfers on children and young adults in rural
    Nicaragua. New Delhi: International Initiative for Impact Evaluation.
5.	 Barham, T., K. Macours, and J.A. Maluccio. 2013. Boys’ Cognitive Skill Formation and Physi-
    cal Growth: Long-Term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood Inter-
    ventions. Am Econ Rev 103 (3): 467–71.
6.	 Barham, T., and J.A. Maluccio. 2009. Eradicating diseases: The effect of conditional cash
    transfers on vaccination coverage in rural Nicaragua. J Health Econ 28 (3): 611–21.
7.	 Barham, T. 2005. The Impact of the Mexican Conditional Cash Transfer on Immunization
    Rates. Berkeley, California: University of California, Berkeley.
8.	 Behrman, J.R., L. Fernald, P. Gertler, L.M. Neufeld, and S.W. Parker. 2008. Long-term effects
    of Oportunidades on rural infant and toddler development, education, and nutrition after
    almost a decade of exposure to the program. Mexico City: Secretaria de Desarrollo Social.
9.	 Behrman, J.R., and J. Hoddinott. 2005. Programme evaluation with unobserved heterogene-
    ity and selective implementation: The Mexican PROGRESA impact on child nutrition. Ox-
    ford B Econ Stat 67 (4): 547–69.
10.	 Fernald, L.C.H., P.J. Gertler, and L.M. Neufeld. 2008. Role of cash in conditional cash transfer
     programmes for child health, growth, and development: an analysis of Mexico’s Oportuni-
     dades. The Lancet 371 (9615): 828–37.
11.	 Galasso, E. 2011. Alleviating extreme poverty in Chile: the short term effects of Chile Solidar-
     io. Estud Economia 38 (1): 101–27.
12.	 Gertler, P. 2004. Do conditional cash transfers improve child health? Evidence from PRO-
     GRESA’s control randomized experiment. Am Econ Rev 94 (2): 336–41.
13.	 Gertler, P. 2000. Final Report: the Impact of PROGRESA on Health. Washington, DC: Inter-
     national Food Policy Research Institute.
14.	 Gitter, S.R., J. Manley, B.L. Barham. 2013. Early-Childhood Nutrition and Educational Condi-
     tional Cash Transfer Programmes. J Dev Stud 49 (10): 1397–411.




ANNEXES 	                                                                                               77
      15.	 Levy, D., and J. Ohls. 2007. Evaluation of Jamaica’s PATH Program: Final Report. Washing-
           ton, DC: Mathematica Policy Research.
      16.	 Lim, S.S., L. Dandona, J.A. Hoisington, S.L. James, M.C. Hogan, and E. Gakidou. 2010. India’s
           Janani Suraksha Yojana, a conditional cash transfer programme to increase births in health
           facilities: an impact evaluation. The Lancet 375 (9730): 2009–23.
      17.	 Maluccio, J., and R. Flores. 2004. Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer program:
           the Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Re-
           search Institute.
      18.	 Manley, J., L, Fernald, P. Gertler. 2015. Wealthy, healthy and wise: does money compensate for
           being born into difficult conditions? Appl Econ Lett 22 (2): 121–6.
      19.	 Morris, S.S., R. Flores, P. Olinto, and J.M. Medina. 2004. Monetary incentives in primary
           health care and effects on use and coverage of preventive health care interventions in rural
           Honduras: cluster randomised trial. The Lancet 364 (9450): 2030–7.
      20.	 Morris, S.S., P. Olinto, R. Flores, E.A.F. Nilson, A.C. Figueiro. 2004. Conditional cash trans-
           fers are associated with a small reduction in the rate of weight gain of preschool children in
           northeast Brazil. J Nutr 134 (9): 2336–41.
      21.	 Rivera, J.A., D. Sotres-Alvarez, J.P. Habicht, T. Shamah, and S. Villalpando. 2004. Impact of
           the Mexican Program for Education, Health, and Nutrition (Progresa) on rates of growth and
           anemia in infants and young children - A randomized effectiveness study. Jama-J Am Med
           Assoc. 291 (21): 2563–70.
      22.	 Robertson, L., P. Mushati, J.W. Eaton et al. 2013. Effects of unconditional and conditional cash
           transfers on child health and development in Zimbabwe: a cluster-randomised trial. The Lan-
           cet 381 (9874): 1283–92.


      Unconditional Cash Transfers (UCT)
      1.	 Agüero, J.M., M.R. Carter, and I. Woolard. 2007. The impact of unconditional cash transfers
          on nutrition: The South African Child Support Grant. Brasilia, Brazil: International Poverty
          Centre.
      2.	 Akresh, R., D. de Walque, and H. Kazianga. 2012. Alternative cash transfer delivery mecha-
          nisms: Impacts on routine preventative health clinic visits in Burkina Faso. Bonn, Germany:
          Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
      3.	 Amarante, V., M. Manacorda, E. Miguel, and A. Vigorito. 2011. Do cash transfers improve
          birth outcomes? Evidence from matched vital statistics, social security and program data.
          USA: The National Bureau of Economic Research.
      4.	 Beck, S., A.M. Pulkki-Brännström, and M. San Sebastián M. 2015. Basic income – healthy out-
          come? Effects on health of an Indian basic income pilot project: a cluster randomised trial. J
          Dev Effect 7 (1): 111–26.
      5.	 Cunha, J.M. 2014. Testing Paternalism: Cash versus In-Kind Transfers. Am Econ J-Appl Econ
          6 (2): 195–230.
      6.	 DSD (Department of Social Development), SASSA (South African Social Security Agency),
          UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2012. The South African Child Support Grant
          Impact Assessment: Evidence from a Survey of Children, Adolescents and Their Households.
          Pretoria: UNICEF South Africa.



78	                             Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
7.	 Fernald, L.C.H., and M. Hidrobo. 2011. Effect of Ecuador’s cash transfer program (Bono de
    Desarrollo Humano) on child development in infants and toddlers: A randomized effective-
    ness trial. Soc Sci Med 72 (9): 1437–46.
8.	 Handa, S., A. Peterman, D. Seidenfeld, G. Tembo. 2016. Income Transfers and Maternal
    Health: Evidence from a National Randomized Social Cash Transfer Program in Zambia.
    Health Econ 25 (2): 225–36.
9.	 Langendorf, C., T. Roederer, S. de Pee, et al. 2014. Preventing Acute Malnutrition among Young
    Children in Crises: A Prospective Intervention Study in Niger. Plos Med 11 (9).
10.	 Leroy, J.L., P. Gadsden, T.G. de Cossio, P. Gertler. 2013. Cash and in-Kind Transfers Lead to
     Excess Weight Gain in a Population of Women with a High Prevalence of Overweight in Ru-
     ral Mexico. J Nutr 143 (3): 378–83.
11.	 Macours, K., Schadyand, N., Vakis, R. 2012. Cash Transfers, Behavioral Changes, and Cogni-
     tive Development in Early Childhood: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. Am Econ
     J-Appl Econ 4 (2): 247–73.
12.	 Paxson, C., and N. Schady. 2007. Does Money Matter? The Effects of Cash Transfers on Child
     Health and Development in Rural Ecuador. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
13.	 Robertson, L., P. Mushati, J.W. Eaton et al. 2013. Effects of unconditional and conditional cash
     transfers on child health and development in Zimbabwe: a cluster-randomised trial. The Lan-
     cet 381 (9874): 1283–92.
14.	 Schady, N. 2012. Cash transfers and anemia among women of reproductive age. Econ Lett 117
     (3): 887–90.




ANNEXES 	                                                                                               79
      ANNEX 2. Glossary of Nutrition Terms


      TERM                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                              Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

      First 1,000 days        The period of time, or window of opportunity, from conception to 2 years old, in
                              which nutritional requirements are substantial and damage from malnutrition
                              is largely irreversible.

      Anthropometry           The study and techniques of measuring the human body. Anthropometric
                              measurements are often used to compare or classify individuals or population
                              groups.

      Community-based         The management of acute malnutrition through (1) inpatient care for children
      management of acute     with severe acute malnutrition with medical complications and infants under 6
      malnutrition            months old with visible signs of severe acute malnutrition; (2) outpatient care
                              for children with severe acute malnutrition; and (3) community outreach.
      Complementary feeding   The introduction of other foods and liquids when breast milk alone is no longer
                              sufficient to meet the nutritional requirements of infants. The transition from
                              exclusive breastfeeding to family foods typically covers the period from 6–24
                              months old, even though breastfeeding may continue beyond 2 years old. This
                              is a critical period of growth during which nutrient deficiencies and illnesses
                              contribute globally to higher rates of undernutrition among children under 5
                              years old. Complementary food is any food, whether manufactured or locally
                              prepared, given in addition to breast milk (or a breast milk substitute) to satisfy
                              the nutritional requirements of the child.
      Deworming               Periodic drug treatment with an anthelmintic to purge the body of
                              soil-transmitted helminths, such as roundworm, whipworm, and hook-
                              worm. Soil-transmitted helminths impair nutrition status through loss
                              of iron and protein, and malabsorption of and competition for nutrients.
                              WHO estimates that over 270 million preschool children and over 600 mil-
                              lion school-age children are living in areas where these parasites are inten-
                              sively transmitted and in need of treatment and preventive interventions.
      Dietary diversity       The number of food groups consumed over a given period of time used as an
                              indicator of household food security and diet quality.

      Double burden of        The simultaneous occurrence of undernutrition and overweight or obesity in
      malnutrition (DBM)      the same community, household, or individual. The DBM is linked to two simul-
                              taneous global transitions: (1) the nutrition transition, which refers to the shift-
                              ing dietary consumption and energy expenditures that coincide with economic,
                              demographic, and epidemiological changes, such as modernization, urbaniza-
                              tion, economic development, and increased wealth; and (2) the epidemiological
                              transition that accounts for the replacement of infectious diseases by chronic
                              diseases over time and refers to the pattern of increased population growth
                              rates, due to improved public health, sanitation and disease therapy and treat-
                              ment, followed by a releveling of population growth, due to subsequent declines
                              in fertility rates.



80	                             Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
 TERM                                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                                         Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 Food security                           When all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient,
                                         safe, and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an
                                         active and healthy life.

 Food system                             A collaborative network that integrates sustainable food production, processing,
                                         distribution, consumption, and waste management in order to enhance the envi-
                                         ronmental, economic, and social health of a particular place.

 Food fortification                      The addition of one or more micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) to a food
                                         during processing. Ideally, food fortification provides a public health benefit
                                         with minimal risks to health in the population.
 Growth monitoring                       Growth monitoring follows the growth rate of a child in comparison to a stan-
                                         dard by periodic, frequent, anthropometric measurements in order to assess
                                         growth adequacy and identify faltering early. Growth Monitoring & Promotion
                                         (GMP) consists of growth monitoring combined with counseling to increase
                                         awareness of child growth, improve caring practices, and increase demand for
                                         other nutrition-related services.
 Hunger                                  A feeling of discomfort, illness, weakness, or pain due to a prolonged lack of food.

 Infant and Young Child                  Refers to specific recommendations and guiding principles for feeding children
 Feeding (IYCF)                          between birth and 24 months old for optimal nutrition, health, and develop-
                                         ment. A set of eight core population-level indicators40 have been developed to
                                         assess feeding trends over time; improve targeting of interventions; and moni-
                                         tor progress in achieving goals and evaluating the impact of interventions. The
                                         principles include:
                                         •	 Early initiation of breastfeeding—initiation of breastfeeding within one
                                             hour of birth.
                                         •	 Exclusive breastfeeding for infants under 6 months old—the feeding of an
                                             infant only with breastmilk from his or her mother or a wet nurse, or ex-
                                             pressed breastmilk, and no other liquids or solids except vitamins, mineral
                                             supplements, or medicines in drop or syrup form.
                                         •	 Continued breastfeeding at 1 year—children 12–15 months old who received
                                             breast milk during the previous day.
                                         •	 Introduction of solid, semisolid or soft foods—infants 6–8 months old who
                                             receive solid, semisolid or soft foods.
                                         •	 Minimum acceptable diet—a composite indicator consisting of both mini-
                                             mum dietary diversity (children 6–23 months old receiving foods from four
                                             or more food groups) and minimum meal frequency (children 6–23 months
                                             old receiving solid, semisolid, or soft foods the minimum number of times
                                             per day or more).
                                         •	 Consumption of iron-rich or iron-fortified foods—children 6–23 months
                                             old who receive an iron-rich food or iron-fortified food that is specially de-
                                             signed for infants and young children or a food that is fortified in the home.

40
   WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. Indicators for Assessing Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices. Conclusions of a Consensus Meeting held
November 6–8, 2007. Washington, DC: WHO.



         ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                                     81
      TERM                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                              Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

      Intergenerational       Also referred to as the undernutrition cycle, a concept that describes how growth
      cycle of malnutrition   failure is transmitted across generations through the mother. The theory links un-
                              dernutrition in the various stages of development: Small adult women are more
                              likely to have low-birth-weight babies; children born with a low birth weight are
                              more likely to suffer from growth failure during childhood; girls born with a low
                              birth weight are more likely to become small adult women; and adolescent girls
                              who become pregnant are even more likely to have low-birth-weight babies.
                                 A child born weighing less than 2,500 grams is categorized as having a low birth
                              weight. At the population level, the proportion of infants with a low birth weight
                              often serves as an indicator of a multifaceted public health problem that includes
                              long-term maternal malnutrition, ill health, hard work, and poor health care in
                              pregnancy.
      Lean or hunger season   Refers to the period between planting and harvesting, when food supplies can be-
                              come scarce. Families may have to sell livestock, farming tools, and other assets to
                              pay for food. During this period, poor farmers are at increased risk for malnutrition.

      Malnutrition            Poor nutritional status caused by deficiency (undernutrition) or excess.
                                Commonly used anthropometric measures of nutrition status include:
                                •	 Stunting (chronic malnutrition)—low height for age, defined as more than
                                    2 standard deviations below the mean of the sex-specific reference data.
                                    Stunting is the cumulative effect of long-term deficits in food intake, poor
                                    caring practices, and illness.
                                •	 Wasting (acute malnutrition)—low weight for height, defined as more
                                    than 2 standard deviations below the mean of the sex-specific reference
                                    data. Wasting is usually the result of a recent shock, such as lack of calories
                                    and nutrients or illness, and is strongly linked to mortality.
                                •	 Underweight—low weight for age, defined as more than 2 standard devia-
                                    tions below the mean of the sex-specific reference data.
                                Other anthropometric indicators are commonly used for program purposes,
                              including:
                                •	 MAM (moderate wasting)—weight for height between 2 and 3 standard
                                    deviations below the mean of sex-specific reference data.
                                •	 AM (severe wasting)—weight for height more than 3 standard deviations
                                    below the mean of sex-specific reference data.
                                •	 Global acute malnutrition (moderate and severe wasting combined)—
                                    weight for height more than 2 standard deviations below the mean of
                                    sex-specific reference data.
                                •	 Moderate malnutrition (moderate underweight)—weight for age between
                                    2 and 3 z-scores below the mean of sex-specific reference data.
                                •	 BMI is a measure of body fat, calculated as weight in kilograms (kg) di-
                                    vided by the square of height in meters (m2). Other measures of nutrition
                                    status are calculated using BMI. Overweight is defined as a BMI between
                                    25 and 30 kg/m2. Obesity is defined as a BMI of 30 or more. Although BMI
                                    is a good measure for determining a range of acceptable weights, it does
                                    not take into consideration some important factors, such as body build,
                                    the relative contributions of fat, muscle, and bone to weight.


82	                              Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
TERM             DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through Mul-
                 tisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

Micronutrient    •	   Also referred to as hidden hunger, the lack of one or more micronutrients,
deficiency            often caused by disease or lack of access to or consumption of micronutrient-
                      rich foods such as fruit, vegetables, animal products, and fortified foods.
                      Micronutrients are vitamins and minerals that are needed by the body
                      in small amounts to produce enzymes, hormones, and other substances
                      essential for proper growth and development. Micronutrient deficiencies
                      increase the severity and risk of dying from infectious diseases such as
                      diarrhea, measles, malaria, and pneumonia. More than two billion people in
                      the world are estimated to be deficient in iodine, vitamin A, iron, or zinc.
                      Common micronutrient deficiencies include:
                 •	   Anemia—the condition of having a hemoglobin concentration below a
                      specified cut-off point, which changes according to age, gender, physiological
                      status, smoking habits, and the altitude at which the population being assessed
                      lives. WHO defines anemia in children under 5 years old and pregnant women
                      as a hemoglobin concentration of less than 110g/l at sea level. It is estimated
                      that 50 percent of anemia worldwide is due to iron deficiency. Other causes
                      of anemia include malaria and other parasitic infections; acute and chronic
                      infections that result in inflammation and hemorrhages; deficiencies in other
                      vitamins and minerals, especially folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin A; and
                      genetically inherited traits, such as thalassemia.
                 •	   Iron deficiency—the most common nutritional deficiency in the world,
                      resulting from insufficient iron in the body due to inadequate consumption
                      of bioavailable iron, blood loss, or unmet increased iron requirements due
                      to infection, pregnancy, rapid growth, dietary habits, or any combination of
                      these.
                 •	   Iron deficiency anemia—the condition in which a deficiency in iron causes an
                      insufficiency of healthy red blood cells. Iron deficiency and iron deficiency
                      anemia are associated with fetal and child-growth failure, compromised
                      cognitive development in young children, lowered physical activity and
                      labor productivity in adults, and increased maternal morbidity and mortality.
                      Women and young children are the most vulnerable to iron deficiency anemia,
                      which increases the risk of hemorrhage and sepsis during childbirth, and is
                      implicated in 20 percent of maternal deaths. Furthermore, children with
                      iron deficiency anemia suffer from infections, weakened immunity, learning
                      disabilities, impaired physical development, and in severe cases, death.
                 •	   Iodine deficiency—the condition resulting when iodine intake falls below
                      the recommended level of 100-199g/l, tested through median urinary iodine
                      concentraWtion.
                 •	   Iodine deficiency disorders—the consequences of iodine deficiency in a
                      population that can be prevented by ensuring that the population has an
                      adequate intake of iodine. Iodine deficiency disorders can affect children
                      at any stage of rapid growth, with the greatest negative effect on cognitive
                      development occurring during pregnancy. Symptoms range from mild
                      impairment of brain development and subtle degrees of brain damage, goiter,
                      hypothyroidism, reproductive disorders (spontaneous abortion, stillbirth,




     ANNEXES 	                                                                                          83
       TERM                                     DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                                                Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

       Micronutrient deficiency,                       hypothyroidism, reproductive disorders (spontaneous abortion, stillbirth,
       (continued)                                     congenital abnormalities, and perinatal mortality) to its most severe form,
                                                       cretinism. Iodine deficiency is the primary cause of preventable mental re-
                                                       tardation and brain damage in the world
                                                •	     Vitamin A deficiency—the condition resulting when vitamin A intake falls
                                                       below recommended levels. Vitamin A deficiency may be exacerbated by
                                                       high rates of infection and greatly increases the risk that a child may die from
                                                       diseases such as measles, diarrhea, and acute respiratory infections. It is the
                                                       leading cause of childhood blindness. Vitamin A deficiency compromises
                                                       the immune systems of approximately 40 percent of the developing world’s
                                                       children under 5 years old and leads to the deaths of as many as one million
                                                       young children each year.
                                                •	     Zinc deficiency—the condition resulting when zinc intake falls below rec-
                                                       ommended levels. Zinc deficiency is associated with growth retardation,
                                                       malabsorption syndromes, fetal loss, neonatal death, and congenital abnor-
                                                       malities. Zinc supplementation reduces the duration and intensity of diar-
                                                       rheal illnesses and reduces clinical disease caused by acute respiratory in-
                                                       fections and malaria.

       Nutrition education                      Encompasses a wide range of efforts to improve nutrition outcomes by chang-
                                                ing nutrition practices, including one-to-one counseling and BCC, and leverages
                                                available communications channels including IEC, social media, and communi-
                                                ty-level education and mobilization.

       Nutrition security                       The ongoing access to a balanced diet, adequate care and feeding practices, a
                                                safe and clean environment, clean water, and adequate health care (both pre-
                                                ventive and curative) for all people, and the knowledge needed to care for and
                                                ensure a healthy and active life for all household members.

       Nutrition-sensitive                      Interventions that address the underlying and basic determinants of maternal,
                                                fetal, and child nutrition and development, including food security; adequate
                                                caregiving resources at the maternal, household and community levels; and ac-
                                                cess to health services and a safe and hygienic environment, and incorporate
                                                specific nutrition goals and actions. Nutrition-sensitive programs can serve as
                                                delivery platforms for nutrition-specific interventions, potentially increasing
                                                their scale, coverage, and effectiveness. Examples include programs for agri-
                                                culture and food security; SSNs; early childhood development; maternal mental
                                                health; women’s empowerment; child protection; schooling; WASH; and health
                                                and family planning services.41




      41
        Ruel, M.T., Alderman, H., and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. The Lancet series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. Nutrition-sensitive
      interventions and programmes: how can they help to accelerate progress in improving maternal and child nutrition? Vol. 382: 536-551.



84	                                                  Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
 TERM                                     DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                                          Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 Nutrition-specific                       Interventions that have an immediate and direct impact on maternal, fetal,
                                          and child nutrition and development, including adequate food and nutrient
                                          intake, feeding, caregiving and parenting practices, and low burden of infectious
                                          diseases. Examples include adolescent, preconception, and maternal health
                                          and nutrition; maternal dietary or micronutrient supplementation; promotion
                                          of optimum breastfeeding; complementary feeding and responsive feeding
                                          practices and stimulation; dietary supplementation; diversification and
                                          micronutrient supplementation or fortification for children; treatment of SAM;
                                          disease prevention and management; and nutrition in emergencies.42

 Oral rehydration therapy                 A type of fluid replacement used to prevent or treat dehydration, especially that
                                          due to diarrhea, which is defined as the passage of three or more loose or liquid
                                          stools per day or more frequently than is normal for the individual. Diarrhea is
                                          usually a symptom of gastrointestinal infection, which can be caused by a variety
                                          of viral and parasitic organisms. Severe diarrhea leads to fluid loss and plays a
                                          particularly important role in nutrition and growth faltering, because it can lead
                                          to malabsorption of nutrients and appetite suppression. The adjusted odds of
                                          stunting at 24 months old increases by 5 percent with each episode of diarrhea
                                          in the first 24 months of life.
                                            An oral rehydration solution is a liquid electrolyte solution that is used for the
                                          management of diarrhea among children. It is typically distributed in ready-to-
                                          use sachets that are added to one liter of clean water.

 Psychosocial stimulation                 The maternal-infant bond formed at the beginning of life is essential for cog-
                                          nitive, emotional, and social development later in life. Feeding and other care
                                          practices provide opportunities for psychosocial stimulation and help to estab-
                                          lish a positive attachment between caregiver and child.

 School garden                            A small plot or plots within school grounds or nearby—typically managed by
                                          the schoolchildren with the help of parents, teachers and other community
                                          stakeholders—where a variety of crops are grown for the purpose of learning,
                                          recreation, and improving diets. Crops commonly include vegetables, fruits,
                                          legumes, tubers, and nonfood plants including medicinal herbs, spices, and fuel
                                          material that are grown throughout the year. Sometimes small livestock and fish
                                          are raised.

 Smallholder farmer                       Marginal and submarginal farm households that own or cultivate typically less
                                          than two hectares of land. Smallholder farmer households constitute a large
                                          proportion of the population in the developing world and of households living
                                          in poverty and hunger.




42
  Ruel, M.T., Alderman, H., and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. The Lancet series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. Nutrition-sen-
sitive interventions and programmes: how can they help to accelerate progress in improving maternal and child nutrition? Vol. 382: 536-551.



         ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                                      85
      TERM                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                              Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

      Specialized             A wide range of foods aimed at improving nutritional intake, including:
      nutritious foods        •	    Fortified blended foods, such as corn soya blend and wheat soya blend.
                              •	    Point-of-use or ready-to-eat foods, commonly lipid-based nutrient
                                    supplements, such as ready-to-use therapeutic food, which is a high-energy
                                    and protein-rich food with added electrolytes, vitamins and minerals,
                                    specifically designed to treat SAM in the rehabilitation phase, and ready-
                                    to-use supplementary food, which is a high-energy nutrition supplement
                                    particularly suited as a nutritional support in emergency situations or
                                    in the context of nutritional programs for the prevention or treatment of
                                    moderate malnutrition and deficiency-related illnesses. Typically oil- or
                                    peanut-based, ready-to-use foods do not have to be mixed with water and
                                    are microbiologically safe to enable outpatient use.
                              •	    Micronutrient powders (such as multiple micronutrient powder, multiple
                                    micronutrients, and micronutrient sprinkles) which are tasteless powders
                                    that come in individual sachets containing the recommended daily intake of
                                    16 vitamins and minerals for one person. The powders can be sprinkled into
                                    home-prepared food after cooking or just before eating.
                              •	    High-energy biscuits are wheat-based biscuits that are easy to distribute
                                    and can improve the level of nutrition in the first days of an emergency when
                                    cooking facilities are scarce.

      Supplementary feeding   A direct transfer of food to target households or individuals, most commonly
                              PLW and children. The food may be prepared and eaten onsite or given as a dry
                              ration to take home. Supplementary feeding is often provided as an incentive for
                              participation in public services such as primary health care and education.

      Undernourishment        When a person’s usual daily food consumption, expressed in terms of dietary
                              energy (kcal), is below the energy requirement norm. An undernourished per-
                              son is not able to acquire enough food to meet the daily minimum dietary energy
                              requirements.




86	                                Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
ANNEX 3. References




Acosta, M. and J. Fanzo. 2012. Fighting maternal and child malnutrition: analyzing the political
and institutional determinants of delivering a national multisectoral response in six countries. A
synthesis paper. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.
Balabanova, B., A. Mills, L. Conteh, et al. 2013. Good Health at Low Cost 25 years on: lessons for
the future of health systems strengthening. The Lancet 381 (9883): 2118–33.
Barrera-Osorio, F., M. Bertrand, L.L. Linden, and F. Perez-Calle. 2011. Improving the Design
of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Education Experiment in
Colombia. Am Econ J-Appl Econ 3 (2): 167–95.
Bhutta, Z.A. et al. 2013. Evidence-based interventions for improvement of maternal and child
nutrition: what can be done and at what cost? The Lancet Maternal and Child Nutrition Series
382: 452–77.
Black, R.E., H. Alderman, Z.A. Bhutta, et al. 2013. Maternal and child nutrition: building
momentum for impact. The Lancet 382 (9890): 372–5.
Bredenkamp, C. et al. 2014. Persistent inequalities in child undernutrition: Evidence from 80
countries, from 1990 to today. International Journal of Epidemiology 1–8.
Bryce, J. D. Coitinho, I. Darnton-Hill, et al. 2008. Maternal and child undernutrition: effective
action at national level. The Lancet 371 (9611): 510–26.
Copenhagen Consensus. http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/copenhagen-consensus-iii.
Dalkir, K. 2013. Knowledge management in theory and practice. New York: Routledge.
Delisl, H.F. 2008. Poverty: the double burden of malnutrition in mothers and the intergenerational
impact. Annals of the New York Academy of Science 1136: 172–84.
Galler, J.R., et al. 2010. Early childhood malnutrition predicts depressive symptoms at ages 11–17.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 51 (7): 789–798.
Gillespie, S. et al. 2015. Scaling Up Impact on Nutrition: What Will it Take? Advances in Nutrition
6: 440–451.
Gillespie, S. et al. 2013. The Lancet Maternal and Child Nutrition 4. The politics of reducing
malnutrition: building commitment and accelerating progress. 82–99.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                             87
      Gneezy, U., S. Meier, and P. Rey-Biel. 2011. When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work to Modify
      Behavior. J Econ Perspect 25 (4): 191–209.
      Grantham-McGregor, S. et al. 2007. Developmental potential in the first 5 years for children in
      developing countries. The Lancet 369: 60–70.
      Hill, R., W. Gonzalez, and D.L. Pelletier. 2011. The formulation of consensus on nutrition policy:
      policy actors’ perspectives on good process. Food Nutr Bull 32 (2 Suppl): S92–104.
      Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J.R. Behrman, L. Haddad, and S. Horton. 2013. The economic
      rationale for investing in nutrition. Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl 2): 69–82.
      Hoddinott, J. et al. 2008. Effect of a nutrition intervention during early child. The Lancet 371:
      411–16.
      Hoey, L., and D.L. Pelletier. 2011. Bolivia’s multisectoral Zero Malnutrition Program: insights on
      commitment, collaboration, and capacities. Food Nutr Bull 32 (2 Suppl): S70–81.
      Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–
      2000 and Projections to 2050. In The Economics of Human Challenges, edited by B. Lomborg,
      Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
      Horton, S., M. Shekar, C. McDonald, A. Mahal, and J.K. Brooks. 2010. Scaling Up Nutrition; What
      Will it Cost? Washington, DC: The World Bank.
      Improving Nutrition through Multisectoral Approaches. 2013. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
      International Food Policy Research Institute. 2016 Global Nutrition report 2016. From Promise to
      Impact; Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC. http://globalnutritionreport.org/
      International Food Policy Research Institute. 2015 Global Nutrition Report 2015 Actions and
      Accountability to Advance Nutrition and Sustainable Development. Washington, DC. http://
      globalnutritionreport.org/
      The Lancet Series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. 2013. http://www.thelancet.com/series/
      maternal-and-child-nutrition.
      Lemma, F. and J. Matji. 2013. Delivery platforms for sustained nutrition in Ethiopia. The Lancet
      382 (9891): 488–489.
      Levinson, F.J., B.L. Rogers, K.M. Hicks, T. Schaetzel, L. Troy, and C. Young. 1999. Monitoring and
      evaluation of nutrition programs in developing countries. Nutr Rev 57 (5 Pt. 1): 157–64.
      B. Lozoff, E. Jimenez, and J.B. Smith. 2006. Double Burden of Iron Deficiency in Infancy and Low
      Socio-economic Status: A Longitudinal Analysis of Cognitive Test Scores to 19 Years. Archives of
      Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 160 (11): 1108–1113.
      Mander, H. 2012. Food from the Courts: The Indian Experience. Ids Bull-I Dev Stud 43: 15–24.
      McClelland, D.C. 1987. Human Motivation. Cambridge University Press Archive.
      Morris, S.S., B. Cogill, and R. Uauy. 2008. Maternal, Child Undernutrition Study G. Effective
      international action against undernutrition: why has it proven so difficult and what can be done
      to accelerate progress? The Lancet 371 (9612): 608–21.
      Murray, C.J.L., et al. 2012. GBD 2010: a multi-investigator collaboration for global comparative
      descriptive epidemiology. The Lancet 380.9859: 2,055–2,058.
      National Development Planning Commission, Government of Ghana, UNDP Ghana. 2010. Ghana
      Millennium Development Goals report. Accra, Ghana: UNDP.



88	                            Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
Nisbett, N. et al. 2015. What drives and constrains effective leadership in tackling child
undernutrition? Findings from Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India and Kenya. Food Policy (53) 33–45.
Rawlings, L.B., and A. Vermehren.2016. Cash and Change: Financial Support and New Behaviors
for Madagascar’s Poorest. World Bank brown bag lunch, April 19. Washington, DC.
Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale Action. 2006.
Washington, DC: the World Bank.
Rice, A.L. et al. 2000. Malnutrition as an underlying cause of childhood deaths associated with
infectious diseases in developing countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 78.
Risnes, K.R., et al. 2011. Birthweight and mortality in adulthood: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. International Journal of Epidemiology 40.3: 647–661.
Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN). www.scalingupnutrition.org.
Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. Dayton-Eberwein, and D. Walters. The World Bank. Forthcoming 2016.
Shekar, M., J. Dayton Eberwein, and J. Kakietek, 2016. The costs of stunting in South Asia and the
benefits of public investments in nutrition. Maternal and Child Nutrition 12 (Suppl 1).
Sustainable Development Goal 2.2 targets. http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/70/1&Lang=E.
Swaminathan, M.S., 2009. Undernutrition in Infants and Young Children in India: A Leadership
Agenda for Action. Ids Bull-I Dev Stud 40 (4): 103–110.
Thompson, R.A., C.A. Nelson. 2011. Developmental science and the media: Early brain
development. American Psychologist 56 (1) 5–15.
UNICEF-WHO-World Bank Group joint child malnutrition estimates, 2015. http://www.who.int/
nutgrowthdb/estimates2014/en/.
Valters, C. 2015. Theories of Change: Time for a Radical Approach to Learning in Development.
London, UK: Overseas Development Institute.
Vegas, E., and I. Umansky. 2005. Improving Teaching and Learning through Effective Incentives:
What Can We Learn from Education Reforms in Latin America? Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Victora, C.G., L. Adair, C. Fall et al. 2008. Maternal and Child Malnutrition: Consequences for
Adult Health and Human Capital. The Lancet 371 (9609): 340.
WHO Nutrition Global Targets 2025. http://www.who.int/nutrition/global-target-2025/en/.
WHO 2012. Report of the Sixty-Fifth World Health Assembly.
World Bank. 2015. World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior. Washington, DC.




ANNEXES 	                                                                                            89
This document was produced with the financial support of the Micronutrient Initiative (www.micronutrient.org).

                         For more information: Luc Laviolette (llaviolette@worldbank.org)
