                       A Practitioner’s Compendium


INCENTIVIZING
NUTRITION
How to Apply Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate Improved Nutrition Outcomes
             LUC LAVIOLETTE, SUDARARAJAN GOPALAN, LESLIE ELDER, OLIVIER WOUTERS
                    © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
                    1818 H Street NW
                    Washington DC 20433
                    Telephone: 202-473-1000
                    Internet: www.worldbank.org

                    This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
                    conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
                    Directors, or the governments they represent.

                    The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
                    denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
                    The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

                    Rights and Permissions
                    The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
                    knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution
                    to this work is given.

                    Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications,
                    The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@
                    worldbank.org.


Cover photo: Laura Elizabeth Pohl/Bread for the World ©2012
Table of Contents




Acknowledgements .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
Acronyms and Abbreviations.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
Introduction and Purpose .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
  What are incentive mechanisms?
Financial incentive mechanisms applied at different levels.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
  1. Government level: national and sub-national
  2. Health facility level
  3. Community level
  4. Household / individual level
Non-financial incentives .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 41
  1. Government level: national and sub-national
  2. Health facility level
Gaps to consider when integrating nutrition in World Bank operations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 45
Indicators for incentive-based operations with nutrition results .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                   53
Landscape of nutrition partners working on nutrition .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 61
Additional support to task teams and leaders to incentivize nutrition programming .  .  . 65
Annexes
  Annex 1. The nutrition system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
  Annex 2. Useful references .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 76
  Annex 3. World Bank projects with nutrition objectives.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 79
  Annex 4. Glossary of nutrition terms .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 83
     Acknowledgements




     This report was developed in response to requests from World Bank staff for guidance
     on how to use financial and non-financial incentive mechanisms to enhance nutrition results
     in World Bank operations. The report was prepared by a core team led by Luc Laviolette, who
     is also the main author. Helle Alvesson contributed to the initial consultations to prepare the
     concept review. Sundararajan Gopalan led the research for and co-wrote the section on financial
     incentive mechanisms with Luc Laviolette. Leslie Elder wrote Annex 1. Olivier Wouters provid-
     ed research support. Maria Gracheva compiled the information in Annex 3 as part of a review
     of the World Bank nutrition portfolio. Rosemarie Esber contributed to the overall structure and
     led the editing. The graphic design was ensured by Nicole Hamam.
       We are grateful for the time that current and former World Bank staff dedicated to sharing their
     operational experience through interviews and / or participation in a quality review workshop.
     They include: Philippe Auffret, Anne Bakilana, Tekabe Belay, Manav Bhattarai, Benedicte de la
     Briere, Aaron Buchsbaum, Sadia Chowdhury, Sarah Coll-Black, Aissatou Diack, Moulay El Idrissi,
     Gyorge Fritsche, Inaam ul Haq, Maria Gracheva, Tawab Hashemi, Mohini Kak, Jakub Kakietek,
     Silvia Kauffman, Kees Kostermans, Rousselle Lavado, Yi-Kyoung Lee, Benjamin Loevinsohn,
     Alessandra Marini, Nkosinathi Mbuya, Carol Medlin, Menno Mulder-Sibanda, Michel Muvudi,
     Emre Ozaltin, Christine Lao Pena, Sangeeta Pinto, Anne Marie Provo, Jumana Qamruddin, GNV
     Ramana, Laura Rawlings, Paul Jacob Robin, Claudia Rokx, Hadia Samaha, Aparnaa Somanathan,
     Andrea Spray, Ajay Tandon, Jean-Claude Taptue, Maurizia Tovo, Petronella Vergeer, Andrea
     Vermerhen, Albertus Voetberg, Damien de Walque, Ali Wintoro Subandoro, and Robert Wrobel.
       This work would not have been possible without the generous financial support from the
     Micronutrient Initiative.
       Timothy Evans, Senior Director, Olusoji Adeyi, Director, Trina Haque, Practice Manager and
     Michele Gragnolati, Practice Manager—all from the Health, Nutrition and Population Global
     Practice—were unstinting in their support of this work. Special thanks are due to Meera Shekar,
     Global Solutions Lead for Nutrition, for her guidance at all stages of the process. They each
     provided strategic guidance at various stages of the report’s development and will assist in
     disseminating the results. We appreciate their steadfast support and encouragement.
       The authors are very grateful to the peer reviewers, Rifat Hasan, Dinesh Nair, and Meera
     Shekar, who provided technical guidance from the conceptualization to the final quality review
     of the work.
       Finally, we want to acknowledge the operational support provided to us by World Bank staff,
     Ana Besarabic, Sybille Crystal, Stella Gonzalez, Jocelyn Haye, Sariette Jippe, Max Jira, Shienny
     Lie, and Ira Marina.



4	                                                          Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Acronyms and Abbreviations




BMI	     Body Mass Index                     SUN	   Scaling Up Nutrition
CBO	     Community-Based Organization        TA	    Technical Assistance
CCT	     Conditional Cash Transfer           UCT	   Unconditional Cash Transfer	
CDD	     Community Driven Development        UHC	   Universal Health Care
DHS 	    Demographic and Health Surveys      WHA	   World Health Assembly
DLI	     Disbursement Linked Indicators
DPF	     Development Policy Financing
GIS 	    Geographical Information System
GMP	Growth Monitoring
         and Promotion
GNR	     Global Nutrition Report
HMIS	Health Management
         Information System
HR	      Human Resource
IYCF	    Infant and Young Child Feeding
MICS	    Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MOF	     Ministry of Finance
MOH	     Ministry of Health
MOU	     Memorandum of Understanding
PBB	     Performance Based Budgeting
PBC	     Performance Based Contracting
PBF	     Performance Based Financing
PBCC	Performance Based 	
         Community Contracting
PforR	   Program for Results
PWP	     Public Works Programs
RBF	     Results Based Financing
SDG	     Sustainable Development Goals



ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 	                                                       5
Introduction and Purpose




Malnutrition is a driver of poverty. Reducing malnutrition is essential to achieving the World
Bank’s goals of eliminating extreme poverty and enhancing shared prosperity. This compendium
offers practical information on how to plan, implement, and monitor incentivized operations for
improving nutrition results for World Bank client countries. For more detailed background in-
formation, see the World Bank report Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mechanisms to Accelerate
Improved Nutrition Outcomes.


                                         Why nutrition?
  •	   Good nutrition reduces mortality and breaks the intergenerational cycle of poverty
  •	   Malnutrition is a driver of disparities
  •	   Nutrition is a vital aspect of a country’s universal health coverage (UHC) policy
  •	   Good nutrition is the result of a combination of factors and dependent on multiple sectors
  •	   Malnutrition is a barrier to achieving a range of sectoral development objectives
  •	   Cost-effective nutrition-specific interventions are highly successful in improving nutrition
  •	   Evidence based nutrition interventions consistently appear in economic analyses as a
       high investment priority
  •	   The right incentives are an important ingredient to successfully scaling up a country’s
       multisectoral nutrition plans
  •	   World Bank has extensive experience designing, implementing, and evaluating incentives




INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 	                                                                            7
        Well proven nutrition interventions exist and should be scaled up. In 2008 and 2013, The Lan-
     cet, a leading medical journal, published two groundbreaking nutrition-focused issues reviewing
     the current evidence for effective interventions to reduce child and maternal malnutrition in
     developing countries. The list of recommended high impact interventions is included in Table
     1. They are all nutrition-specific interventions focused on the proximate causes of malnutrition.

                         Table 1. High-Impact Nutrition-Specific Interventions

       NUTRITION INTERVENTION                   WHAT DOES IT INVOLVE?                      WHY DOES IT MATTER?
                                                                                      Early breastfeeding reduces
      PROMOTION OF                          •	 Community-based education and
                                                                                      all-cause and infection related
      BREASTFEEDING                            behavior change
                                                                                      neonatal mortality by 44–45%

                                            •	 Community-based education and
                                                                                      Complementary feeding results in
      COMPLEMENTARY FEEDING                    behavior change
                                                                                      increased height and weight
                                            •	 Provision of complementary foods

                                                                                      Provision of ready-to-use-foods
      MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE                  •	 Community-based therapeutic
                                                                                      leads to faster weight gain, improved
      ACUTE MALNUTRITION                       feeding using ready-to-use-foods
                                                                                      recovery, and reduced mortality

                                            •	 Provision of supplements
      VITAMIN A                                                                       Vitamin A supplementation reduces
                                            •	 Delivery through existing healthcare
      SUPPLEMENTATION                                                                 all-cause and diarrhea related mortality
                                               platform e.g., child health days

                                            •	 Iodization of salt at point of         Salt iodization increases birth
      SALT IODIZATION                          processing                             weight and leads to 10–20%
                                            •	 Targeted to pregnant women             higher developmental scores

                                            •	 Community education and behavior
      HANDWASHING                                                                     Handwashing with soap reduces
                                               change
      WITH SOAP                                                                       the risk of diarrhea
                                            •	 Communications e.g., mass media

                                            •	 Access to zinc supplements for
      THERAPEUTIC ZINC                         children                               Zinc treatment for diarrhea leads to a
      FOR DIARRHEA                          •	 Delivery through existing antenatal    46% reduction in all-cause mortality
                                               care platforms

                                            •	 Provision of supplements to
                                                                                      Iron and folic acid supplementation
                                               pregnant women
      IRON AND FOLIC ACID                                                             for pregnant women leads
                                            •	 Delivery through existing antenatal
                                                                                      to higher birth weight
                                               care platforms

                                            •	 Provision of micronutrient powders
      MULTIPLE MICRONUTRIENT                   to children
                                                                                      Significant reductions in anemia
      POWDERS                               •	 Demand generation including
                                               strategic communication

                                            •	 Delivery of deworming drugs
                                                                                      Treating children infected with
      DEWORMING                             •	 School-based or through healthcare
                                                                                      worms increases weight
                                               system

                                            •	 Product fortification at point of      Iron fortification results in 41%
      IRON FORTIFICATION OF STAPLES
                                               processing e.g., flours                reduction in the risks of anemia

     Source: Children’s Investment Fund Foundation.


       Financial incentive mechanisms are used to enhance nutrition results by motivating change.
     The incentive mechanisms are categorized by the levels at which they operate, i.e., government:
     national and sub-national, health facility, community, household / individual levels—see Figure 1.
     For each level, we document the following: a description of the incentive mechanism; the mecha-
     nism’s potential strengths; the potential challenges; and examples of countries that have tried the
     instruments. Non-financial incentives to improve nutrition are also presented.


8	                                                                        Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
What are incentive mechanisms?
In its simple form, an incentive is something that motivates an action. Incentive structures are
a central feature of economics and are described as the interaction between a principal, who
applies the incentive, and an agent, who receives the incentive. The basic tenet is that “higher
incentives will lead to more effort and higher performance.”1
  Incentives can be classified into four categories:
  •	 Financial incentives: when an agent can expect some form of material reward,
       e.g., money, in exchange for a particular behavior;2
     •	     Moral incentives: when a choice is widely regarded as the “right thing to do,”
            or particularly respectable, or conversely, when the failure to act in a certain way is
            unacceptable. An individual acting on a moral incentive obtains in return a sense of
            self-esteem, approval or even admiration from his community, or guilt, condemnation or
            ostracism if s/he acts against a moral incentive.3
     •	     Coercive incentives: when failure to act a particular way results in physical force
            being used against the agent by others in the community.4
     •	     Natural of intrinsic incentives: this is a category of incen-
            tives that are driven from the personality of the agent, such as curiosity,
            fear, the pursuit of truth, wanting to contribute to society, etc.5
                                                                                                               Financial
  Financial incentives can have two kinds of effects: a direct price effect, which
make the incentivized behavior more attractive, and an indirect psychologi-                                     incentive
cal effect. The psychological effect can reinforce the price effect but can also
sometimes work in an opposite direction to the price effect and crowd out the                                mechanisms
incentivized behavior.6
  The World Development Report 2015 argues that much of economic policy                                          are used
relies on a model of human behavior that takes little account of human so-
ciality. Yet the fact that humans think socially “has enormous implications                                   to enhance
for decision making and behavior, and thus for development.”7 The report
outlines the following four implications of human sociality on development                                       nutrition
interventions.
  First, economic incentives are not necessarily the best or the only way to                                    results by
motivate individuals. The drive for status and social recognition means that
in many situations, social incentives can be used alongside or even instead of                                motivating
economic incentives to elicit desired behaviors. Moreover, economic incen-
tives can both “crowd out” intrinsic motivations and “crowd in” social prefer-
                                                                                                                  change.
ences. The role for incentives in policy is more complicated than is generally
recognized.




1
  U. Gneezy, S. Meier, and P. Rey-Biel. 2011. When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work to Modify Behavior. J Econ Perspect 25
(4): 191.
2
    K. Dalkir. 2013. Knowledge management in theory and practice. New York: Routledge.
3
    Ibid.
4
    Ibid.
5
    D.C. McClelland. 1987. Human Motivation. Cambridge University Press Archive.
6
    Gneezy et al., 2011. 192.
7
    World Bank. 2015. World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior. Washington, DC. 54.



INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 	                                                                                                   9
              Second, humans act as members of groups. Interventions that increase interactions or create
            groups among individuals who have a common interest in goals such as breastfeeding may fa-
            cilitate the achievement of these objectives.
              Third, there is a widespread willingness of individuals to cooperate in the pursuit of shared
            goals. Most people prefer to cooperate as long as others are cooperating. This implies that mak-
            ing behavior more visible and “marketing” adherence to norms such as having men play an im-
            portant role in child feeding practices may be a cost-effective means of increasing contributions
            to collective goods.
              Finally, human societies develop social norms as a means of coordinating and regulating be-
            havior. Societies can get stuck in collective patterns of behavior that do not serve their interest.
                                   Since social norms are often taken for granted, socially appropriate behav-
                                   iors by individuals can lead to suboptimal social outcomes. Norm change
                                   may sometimes be a necessary component of social change.8
                                     Incentives vary across cultures and over time because social incentive
                                   structures are established by different forms of social interactions that
                                   take place within cultural norms and expectations that vary geographi-
      Since social                 cally and over time. What is valued or is deemed unacceptable in one cul-
                                   ture may not be perceived the same way in other cultures or within the
      norms are                    same culture over time. We tend to perceive the world around us through
                                   mental models that reflect the shared understandings of our community.9
      often taken                  For example, volunteerism by community health workers to improve nu-
                                   trition may be valued—and therefore boost the worker’s self-esteem—in
      for granted,                 a country that recognizes that nutrition is a national development pri-
                                   ority. In another setting where volunteerism is not as valued, or where
      socially                     wealth accumulation confers social status, and where malnutrition is not

      appropriate                  considered a social priority, financial incentives may be more effective or
                                   even necessary. Even for an individual, such as a community health work-
      behaviors by                 er, the relative importance of a certain type of incentive may change over
                                   the course of a lifetime, e.g., starting with the self-esteem related to the
      individuals                  prestige of having been selected from the community, supplemented by
                                   intrinsic motivation and, over time, a potential gradual movement towards
      can lead to                  greater attention to financial incentives.
                                     In this compendium, we focus primarily on financial incentive mech-
      suboptimal                   anisms, but we recommend that due attention also be given to non-fi-
                                   nancial incentives, i.e., moral, coercive and natural / intrinsic incentives.
      social                       Depending on the core constraints that are defined in the theory of change
                                   analysis,10 a mix of financial and non-financial incentives will need to be
      outcomes.                    used to achieve results. Part II of this compendium includes a discussion
                                   of some of the non-financial incentives that may be considered in scaling
                                   up nutrition programs. That section is not meant to be a comprehensive
                                   review. It serves to remind the reader that a balance between financial and
                                   non-financial incentives is required. We recommend consulting the World
                                   Development Report 2015, which contains a rich discussion on this topic.11



            8
                Ibid. 55.
            9
                Ibid. 62.
             See C. Valters. 2015. Theories of Change; Time for a Radical Approach to Learning in Development. London, UK: Overseas
            10

            Development Institute.
            11
                 World Bank, 2015.



10	                                                                              Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
  Because a range of incentives act on an individual at the same time and because human be-
havior is complex, it is very difficult to predict the effect that a specific incentive will have over
the short, medium and long term. This risk highlights the importance of establishing strong
monitoring systems—which track the results to be achieved as well as potential unintended
consequences of certain incentives, e.g., its effect on motivation and self-esteem of workers.




INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE 	                                                                               11
Financial Incentive Mechanisms
Applied at Different Levels




The incentive mechanisms are categorized by the levels at which they operate, i.e., government:
national and sub-national, health facility, community, household, and individual levels (see Fig-
ure 1). For each level, we document the following: (1) a description of the mechanism; (2) the
mechanism’s potential strengths; (3) the potential challenges; and (4) examples of countries that
have tried the instruments.

         Figure 1. Financial Incentive Mechanisms Applied at Different Levels




Source: Authors.




FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                        13
       Government Level: National and Sub-National
      • Development Policy Financing (DPF)
        Definition
        •	   DPF combines the objective of reducing a government’s fiscal deficit with sectoral
             or macro-level developmental objectives by incentivising policy reforms. Disburse-
             ments are based on predetermined policy triggers which are linked to the govern-
             ment completing reform actions.
        •	   IDA / IBRD funds flow into the government budget and the country systems are
             used. The amount of IDA / IBRD financing is not necessarily linked to the cost of the
             reform.
        •	   DPFs cannot be used to impose reforms without sufficient country ownership and
             commitment—an important prerequisite for success.
        •	   The World Bank does not prescribe activities or inputs to be financed from the IDA
             / IBRD funds, which may be spent on anything as long as the agreed reforms are
             achieved—except a short negative list as may be agreed between the Word Bank and
             the government.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Can unblock policy constraints. DPFs could be useful to nutrition programs if the
             policy environment is the binding constraint to achieving nutrition outcomes, e.g.,
             agricultural policies, food subsidies, gender policies, etc., and if strong government
             commitment exists (or could be developed) for specific reform measures to remove
             the constraint. Agriculture policies are closely linked to nutrition, and so are social
             safety net programs. A national policy on ensuring universal health coverage could
             have a beneficial impact on nutrition, if nutrition services are included in the benefits
             package. Food safety legislation, regulation of baby formula foods, and food fortifica-
             tion with micronutrients are other relevant policy areas for nutrition. A DPF could
             facilitate moving such policies in the right direction.
        •	   May generate greater ownership and sustainability. DPFs entail no micromanage-
             ment by the World Bank in terms of activities carried out or expenditures incurred.
             The country’s own systems are used. Well-designed DPFs usually ensure that the
             incentivised reforms have strong national ownership and commitment. The benefits
             are therefore likely to be systemic and more sustainable. Sustainability is critical to
             nutrition, which is a long-term and continual objective.
        •	   Potential to raise the profile of nutrition. Adding nutrition into a DPF could help
             raise the importance of nutrition, positioning it as a national development priority at
             the same level as other policy reforms included in the DPF.
        •	   Attractive to governments. DPFs are quick disbursing and contribute to the coun-
             try’s fiscal health and sector-specific goals. A DPF is attractive to ministries of fi-
             nance, which typically are the World Bank’s counterparts in negotiating the World
             Bank’s country assistance. Adding a nutrition-related policy trigger to a DPF could be
             a smart strategy in an otherwise less than enthusiastic environment for stand-alone
             nutrition operations.




14	                                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
          Potential Challenges
          •	   Does not address implementation challenges. DPFs are not the instrument of choice
               when the main constraint to improved nutrition is implementation, rather than the
               policy environment, which is often the case. In such contexts, an operational level
               incentive instrument may be warranted, rather than a policy reform measure.
          •	   Requires that malnutrition be recognised as a national priority. In order for a govern-
               ment to decide to include nutrition in a DPF, the country’s malnutrition challenge and
               its economic implications will need to be understood by policy-makers (particularly in
               the central ministries such as finance and planning), which is often not the case.
          •	   Does not address socio-cultural or behavioral challenges. In many countries, the
               core challenge to improving nutritional status may be socio-cultural or behavioral
               at the household or community level. A DPF alone would not be suitable instrument
               to address these constraints.
          •	   Reforms may be reversed. Changes in the government or policymakers may result
               in the reversal of reforms if it was merely a high-level decision. The DPF must be
               designed carefully to ensure that the disbursement triggers fully institutionalize the
               reform and render a reversal difficult. Monitoring the trigger actions closely is an
               essential prerequisite for success.
          •	   No guarantee of increased allocations to nutrition. There is no guarantee that IDA
               funds will be spent on nutrition services or programs since the World Bank does not
               track its funds separately under a DPF. The funds are comingled in the government
               budget. Therefore, unless the policy reform pertains directly to providing more nu-
               trition resources, the DPF alone may not achieve an increased allocation.

          Examples of Country Experience
          India, Mozambique, Palestine, Peru



PERU P116264
RESULTS & ACCOUNTABILITY (REACT) PROGRAMMATIC DPL
Project development objective (PDO).        mortality; and (iv) better nutrition        relative to their malnutrition levels.
Nutrition-specific objectives are to (i)    outcomes. The government set a              Operational modality. Activities to
increase demand for nutrition services      target of reducing undernutrition           support both objectives include a
by strengthening the operational            by 5 percent in five years.                 strong emphasis on promoting good
effectiveness of the Juntos Conditional                                                 governance to monitor the impact of the
Cash Transfer (CCT) program; and (ii)       Indicators. As a DPL, this operation does   government programs such as Juntos. A
improve coverage and quality of the         not have “indicators” in the conventional   manual and supporting communication
supply of basic preventive health and       sense of the term. However, it included     materials were developed for Community
nutrition services in the communities       the following “prior actions” specific      Nutrition Promoters, and the expected
covered under the Articulated Nutritional   to nutrition: MINSA has changed SIS         height gain in the first two years of
Program (PAN), including Juntos.            norms to include the CRED (child            life was popularized. The operation is
                                            growth and development) protocol;           adapted to respond to the country’s
Results of interest. REACT DPL series       Goals for CRED production are agreed        results-based financing strategy and
supports policies that are expected         between the health sector and the           provides direct support to PAN.
to lead to (i) improved parental            PBB system for each health executing        Evaluation: After 10 years, the results
understanding of expected outcomes          unit; Ministry of Finance increased the     are remarkable—stunting decreased
in education, health, and nutrition; (ii)   2010 budget for CRED by 330 percent,        from 28 percent to 14 percent.
improved outcomes in second grade           compared to the 2009 budget, and
literacy, especially in rural schools;      allocated the additional funds to regions
(iii) reduced maternal and neonatal         with a low level of CRED spending




FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                                                      15
        rogram for Results (PforR) and Investment Project Financing
      •P
       with Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)
      	 Definition
        •	   PforR is a relatively new lending instrument which links IDA / IBRD development
             financing to results and moves from the “project approach” towards a “program ap-
             proach”, whereby the World Bank is financing a “slice” of a government program.
             Prior to the PforR, to financially incentivise certain results, teams used Disburse-
             ment Linked Indicators (DLIs) within Investment Lending—currently called In-
             vestment Project Financing (IPF). Although many operations still use DLIs under
             IPFs, as a proxy for PforR, both instruments essentially adopt the same incentivising
             principle that seeks to finance outputs rather than inputs. Therefore, we treat PforR
             and DLI operations together.
        •	   Under PforR and DLI, disbursements from the World Bank to the country are based
             on achieving predetermined targets or results, rather than inputs purchased. Results
             could be outputs or outcomes, but are usually defined in terms of outputs—some-
             times called intermediate outcomes. In practice, many DLI operations use process
             milestones as “results” or “proxy results.”
        •	   The World Bank does not prescribe the activities and expenditures for a PforR or
             DLI operation. The funds go to the treasury and may finance a specific program,
             e.g., the budget of the Ministry of Health or the HIV/AIDS or the maternal and child
             (MCH) programs. As long as the results are achieved, the money can be spent on
             anything within the program. In the case of an IPF with DLIs, disbursements are
             made against a list of pre-agreed “eligible expenditures.”
        •	   Disbursements are based on achieving specific targets which are usually confirmed
             through independent verification. Within that framework, some prorate the dis-
             bursement proportionately to how much of the target is met, while others disburse
             on an all-or-none basis, i.e., partial achievement or underachievement of targets
             merits zero disbursement. A delayed achievement of targets can result in delayed
             disbursement or disqualification of the amount linked to the delayed result.
        •	   PforR and DLI operations differ from DPF in that disbursements are results-based,
             rather than policy action based. They move the incentives beyond policy actions to
             program results.
        •	   Although PforR and DLI operations tend to incentivize the national level, they can
             also be used directly at the sub-national level, e.g., in a province / state in a large
             country, or to incentivize national to sub-national transfers in a manner similar to
             performance-based budgeting.

        Potential Strengths
        •	   May lead to greater ownership and sustainability. PforR / DLI operations entail
             no micromanagement by the World Bank, like the DPF. In the case of the PforR, the
             country’s own systems are used. Therefore, the results are likely to be more systemic
             and sustainable.
        •	   Provides flexibility in implementation. PforR / DLI operations place less focus on
             inputs and process. Although some level of attention is necessary at these stages
             of the development cycle to understand any problems in case the results are not
             achieved. This approach empowers managers, and provides flexibility on ways to
             achieve the results. Nutrition programs could particularly benefit from such delega-
             tion of authority, since they often require innovation at the grassroots level.


16	                                                     Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Enhances accountability for achieving results. With the strong focus on results, the
             responsibility for achieving them is placed squarely on the government. If results
             are not achieved, the government does not receive the funds. If results are delayed,
             disbursements are also delayed or cancelled. The PforR / DLI instrument directly in-
             centivises performance and enhances accountability by shifting the focus from proj-
             ect administration processes (e.g., volume of procurement transactions) to results.
        •	   Can increase the visibility of nutrition programs. The focus on results (and on the
             resources that get released when the results are achieved) can provide additional
             visibility to nutrition within the wide range of priorities faced by governments in
             program implementation.
        •	   Can incentivise healthy competition. It is possible to design these operations to
             introduce competition between sub-units of government (e.g. provinces, states or
             districts) on the timing for the achievement of results, such that the first few sub-
             units to achieve a particular result would get an additional financial incentive.
        •	   Greater likelihood of achieving results. If the operation is well designed, i.e., appro-
             priate indicators with realistic targets are selected, a clear verification protocol is
             agreed upon, and the necessary monitoring systems are established, the likelihood
             of successfully achieving the agreed upon results is high.

        Potential Challenges
        •	   Capacity of the government to deliver. As the World Bank focuses more on out-
             puts and outcomes and leaves it largely to the government to reach the results using
             its own processes and inputs, PforR / DLI operations adopt a hands-off approach,
             which assumes robust governance systems and the government’s capacity to plan
             and implement its programs to achieve the agreed results. These assumptions may
             not always hold true, especially for ministries responsible for nutrition which are
             often weaker. It is sometimes necessary to design “hybrid” operations in which the
             focus is mainly on incentivising results but which also contain a more traditional
             input-driven form of technical assistance to enhance capacity to deliver.
        •	   Reluctance by governments to accept the risk of non-performance. Governments
             often may be reluctant to accept the risk of incurring expenditures without guaran-
             teed financing. Often their systems are not very flexible to manage that risk. Even
             though the first year’s disbursement are made as an advance, the subsequent year’s
             financing depends on concrete targets being met, which means that there is a real
             risk of funds not flowing. In nutrition programs involving regular service delivery
             or cash distribution, such stoppage of fund-flow could be seriously detrimental to
             the population.
        •	   Complex operations. PforR/DLI instrument may not be suited for very complex op-
             erations with too many monitored results. The more indicators, the less their mon-
             etary value since the total envelope is fixed and numerous indicators would be more
             difficult to monitor.
        •	   Selecting the right indicators. Certain service-oriented indicators are easier to
             measure, report, and pay against, e.g., vitamin A supplementation, and growth mon-
             itoring. Certain others, especially community level indicators, like exclusive breast-
             feeding are difficult to measure, forcing us to settle for knowledge indicators rather
             than actual behaviors. More creativity is needed.
        •	   Limiting the number of indicators. Typically, health and nutrition operations have
             numerous results of interest. To make the operation manageable, the list of indi-



FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                            17
                              cators must be kept short, usually less than 10. Some indicators of interest must be
                              omitted from being linked to financing, which is feasible if a robust set of tracer indi-
                              cators is sufficient for the absence of others. The omitted indicators can be included
                              in the results framework and monitored without being linked to disbursement. This
                              positioning, however, would affect the level of priority of those indicators.
                         •	   Results must be achieved in a short timeframe. The PforR / DLI approach cannot di-
                              rectly incentivise results that take longer than a year to manifest, e.g., behavior change
                              or nutritional status improvements, because disbursements cannot wait for those re-
                              sults to be demonstrated. Therefore, establishing measurable intermediate results is
                              critical and could serve as a good proxy for the ultimate outcome of interest. This
                              challenge can be mitigated by “breaking down” results with longer gestation periods
                              into specific intermediate results which can each be incentivised.
                         •	   Potential to miss some important results. Due to the necessary selectivity of indicators
                              linked to financing, other important results could be neglected. This risk is particularly
                              challenging for a complex area like nutrition, with a wide spectrum of results of interest.

                         Examples of Country Experience	
                         Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India (national nutrition project as well as projects in the states
                         of Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh), Indonesia, Laos, Morocco, Myanmar,
                         Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Tanzania




      INDIA P121731
      ICDS SYSTEM STRENGTHENING NUTRITION IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (ISSNIP)
      Project development objective (PDO).      child feeding (IYCF) practices; and proj-    the state level. The center has $7 mil-
      To (i) strengthen the Integrated Child    ect states in which pilots of “convergent    lion for its six DLIs. Additional incentive:
      Development Services (ICDS) policy        nutrition action” have been implement-       Flexifund / Challenge Fund ($5 million)
      framework, systems and capacities,        ed and evaluated in at least one dis-        for the first three states that meet
      and facilitate community engagement,      trict. Thirteen DLI milestones were set;     each of the DLIs. The seven that belong
      to ensure greater focus on children       all of them are system improvement           at the state level, $25,000 per DLI,
      under three years of age; and (ii)        indicators, e.g., real-time ICT-based        could be used for CCT or PBF or such
      strengthen convergent actions for         M&E system with standardized oper-           approaches. The first three states to
      improved nutrition outcomes.              ating procedures and specifications          achieve each DLI get an additional in-
                                                for hardware; people trained in the          centive amount. Under the restructured
      Results of interest. Improved sys-        system or on specific nutrition mod-         design, interventions are focused on
      tems in terms of planning, record-        ules, outreach and community-based           behavior change for nutrition primarily
      ing, reporting and monitoring of          processes such as monthly events held.       by building worker capacities to counsel
      information, improved delivery of         Service delivery outputs are monitored       for behavior change, through better
      services, capacity-building of the        as non-DLI, e.g., pregnant and lactat-       outreach, and to focus on children 0–3
      frontline workers to improve mater-       ing women, children (with proportion         years of age, e.g., improved breastfeed-
      nal, infant, and young child feeding      of female children amongst these),           ing / complementary feeding practices.
      behaviors among pregnant and              and adolescents who have benefit-            Innovations include the introduction
      lactating women and their children.       ted from the services. No behavioral         of a mobile app that allows Anganwa-
                                                outcomes are being measured.                 di workers to enter data, generates
      Indicators. PDO indicators include: An-                                                due lists, helps daily work-planning,
      ganwadi Centers (AWCs) implementing       Operational modality. Of the 13 DLI,         sends SMS alerts, promotes better
      the inter-personal communication (IPC)    six are under the responsibility of the      growth-monitoring, generates the
      activities focused on infant and young    central government and seven are at          growth chart, and has BCC videos.




18	                                                                               Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
     • Performance Based Budgeting (PBB)
        Definition	
        •	   PBB is a mechanism by which a higher level of government allocates resources to a
             lower level of government, based on the latter’s performance measured by agreed in-
             dicators and targets. For example, the Ministry of Finance might allocate the budget
             for the Ministry of Health based on the past year’s performance. Or in a federal sys-
             tem, the central government might allocate the state, provincial or district budgets
             on the basis of past performance. PBB usually involves a MOU or similar arrange-
             ment between the financing entity and implementing entity.
        •	   PBB is not the usual way of budgeting in most developing countries. Budgets are gen-
             erally developed using historical data of allocations and expenditures and based on
             inputs rather than outputs. A reformist and forward looking government and leader-
             ship is critical for PBB to work.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Budgets reflect priorities and reforms. If nutrition results are included in the perfor-
             mance measures that influence the budgetary allocation, sub-national priorities are
             likely to move in a direction favorable to nutrition programs.
        •	   Closer to service delivery and the needs of people. PBB moves the incentives and
             risks to the sub-national levels, which are closer to the action. PBB empowers sub-na-
             tional level managers and provides flexibility on ways to achieve the results. This
             devolved accountability and the related flexibility is important for nutrition given
             that the approaches may vary based on the specific determinants and the socio-eco-
             nomic composition of the populations.
        •	   Enhances accountability. PBB is likely to be attractive to the ministries of finance
             (MOFs) because an enhanced level of accountability exists prior to budgetary allo-
             cation. PBB allows the MOF the flexibility to allocate resources to the ministries and
             departments that have demonstrated a record of producing better results. This may
             be particularly useful for nutrition programs, some of which have a legacy of poor
             performance, which has discouraged central ministries from further allocations.
        •	   Can incentivise healthy competition. It is possible to design these operations to intro-
             duce competition between sub-units of government, e.g., provinces, states or districts.
        •	   Alignment with the policy framework. PBB is suitable for achieving program re-
             sults when the national policy environment is already conducive to program im-
             plementation at sub-national levels, and robust monitoring systems are available,
             along with the necessary information base. PBB can be used to incentivize shifts in
             delivery that are introduced in recent policy reforms.
        •	   Confirms and enhances commitment to nutrition. Including nutrition results un-
             der PBB requires and indicates that the MOF and the MOH—and other implement-
             ing line ministries—have a higher level of commitment to nutrition results.
        •	   May increase financial allocations to nutrition. Nutrition could benefit from PBB
             because often, a constraint is the insufficient resource allocation—a problem at the
             operational level rather than the policy level.

        Potential Challenges	
        •	   Requires a change in mindset and strong leadership. PBB entails an entirely new
             way of planning, budgeting, and financial management, as most governments use



FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                            19
             historical budgeting. Even though PBB has strong potential, it may be difficult to im-
             plement in some contexts since it involves a fundamental change in mindset and the
             way of doing business.
        •	   Requires strong capacity for implementation. Implementation is not guaranteed
             and it may not affect behaviors at the service delivery or household levels, which are
             critical to nutrition results. On the other hand, if the incentive is sufficiently strong
             and there is sufficient autonomy, the receiving entities may be able to organize
             themselves to deliver, or a complementary technical assistance component could
             be designed into the World Bank operation to address specific implementation
             weaknesses.
        •	   Requires devolution of authority. PBB requires a strong degree of authority to be
             devolved to the operational levels and the necessary capacity to be built, without
             which the incentives won’t be empowering. PBB may not be suitable in countries
             where sub-national capacities or governance systems are weak or in which the nec-
             essary autonomy for delivery is not provided.
        •	   PBB could increase inequities since it rewards better performers. Where sub-nation-
             al capacities vary across states or districts, PBB could benefit the already better re-
             sourced states and districts, which may be the better performers. This could result in
             denying the low-performers the very resources that they need to build their capacities
             to perform better, thus perpetuating a vicious cycle of low resources • low capacity •
             low performance • further low resources. This scenario needs to be avoided by allo-
             cating a minimum level of resources based on need and by adding a bonus allocation
             for performance, rather than making the whole budget dependent on performance.
             Often the lowest performing provinces or districts are also where the highest propor-
             tions of malnourished people live. Another way to avoid this scenario is to allocate re-
             sources based on the rate of change, i.e., whereby sub-national units with the greatest
             improvements from the baseline would receive the largest allocations.
        •	   Risk of focusing on only a subset of results of interest. PBB could skew program at-
             tention to selected results at the expense of other important ones, which is the case
             of PforR or any other incentivized financing system. This is a particular challenge
             for nutrition, which has a complex range of determinants requiring several results
             to be tracked.
        •	   A disconnect may exists between budget and execution. If applied narrowly, this
             instrument’s potential benefits could be limited to priority setting, since it may only
             impact the budget and not necessarily the execution. However, approaches could be
             designed that not only focus on allocations but also on execution of budgets.

        Examples of Country Experience
        Argentina, Peru



      Health Facility Level
      • Performance Based Financing (PBF)
        Definition	
        •	   While results-based financing (RBF) is used as a broad term encompassing several
             different types of incentivising results, performance based financing (PBF) usually
             refers to an approach that specifically pays financial incentives to the individual or
             institutional service providers. The payments are based on the quantity and quality

20	                                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
             of outputs delivered. The terms such as “fee for service” or “pay-for-performance”
             are sometimes used to describe this instrument.
        •	   The additional funds from PBF can be used to improve the facility or services, and /
             or to pay “bonuses” to the personnel. How these funds are distributed at the health fa-
             cility level and what proportion could be paid as bonuses or salary supplements varies
             widely. In some countries, these decisions are left to the health facility level managers.
             Whereas in other countries, strict guidelines are sent from the central level.
        •	   PBF works best when the unit being contracted (e.g., the health facility) has a high
             degree of autonomy as to how it delivers services. In most countries, however, this
             autonomy is circumscribed by some rules such as public service rules on hiring and
             firing of staff.
        •	   PBF involves a separation of functions between the regulator, purchaser, and service
             provider. It involves contracting an external agency which is responsible for the verifi-
             cation and payment of services. A specific package of services is defined and rates are
             applied for each service. Both public and private health facilities can be contracted for
             service delivery, depending on the regulatory framework in the country and the avail-
             ability of these providers. Specific catchment areas are defined for each service provider.
        •	   Prior to payment, the quantity of services is verified, usually through the internal
             inspection service of the Ministry of Health. On a less frequent basis (e.g., quarterly)
             community-based organisations undertake counter-verification of the results. This
             counter-verification serves as a “check and balance” against collusion between ser-
             vice providers and the inspection services.
        •	   While PBF has been applied mainly at the health facility level to date, the basic te-
             nets of the approach are being increasingly applied at the community level as well as
             at all levels within a health system. The latter enables an alignment of incentives to
             improve service delivery. For example, World Bank projects that use a PBF approach
             in health are increasingly establishing performance contracts not only at the health
             facility level, but also at the other administrative levels of the system (e.g., district,
             provincial) all the way to the regulator at the national level.
        •	   Some PBF approaches also provide a higher payment to a health facility for having
             reached pre-identified members of the community (through community-based tar-
             geting) with free services. These could be the poorest members of the community or
             people with special needs, such as people living with disabilities. It is likely that this
             targeting is reaching households with a higher likelihood of malnutrition.
        •	   Increasingly, a quality checklist (some have approximately 200 indicators) is being
             used to assess the quality of services provided, and adjustments in payments (either
             negative or positive incentives) are applied based on the quality checklist score.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Closer to the beneficiary. PBF moves the program resources, incentives, account-
             ability, and risks mainly to the health facility level, thus making it more likely to suc-
             ceed—if the binding constraints are at that level. In addition, in countries where elite
             capture is a challenge, PBF helps circumvent elite capture at the central level because
             the bulk of the financial resources are directed to frontline health facilities through
             payments directly to their bank accounts.
        •	   Greater social accountability. The counter-verification carried out by community
             organizations is a practical way to empower communities to have oversight over
             service delivery. When nutrition is part of the services being counter-verified, this


FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                               21
           enables communities to improve their understanding and sense of ownership of
           their malnutrition challenge.
      •	   Increased transparency. The management information system for PBF (web portal)
           makes data available publicly about the performance of the health system. This could
           be a valuable source of “real-time” information on some aspects of nutrition services,
           which can be used to review health facility performance more regularly. Data on nu-
           trition interventions in most countries is not collected often enough to provide regu-
           lar monitoring and accountability.
      •	   Potential to increase the focus on nutrition. By adding specific nutrition services
           to a PBF program, it is possible to enhance the focus and attention to those services,
           which could otherwise be neglected and subsumed under a broader package of ma-
           ternal and child health services.
      •	   Increased monitoring and feedback. While the verification of quality and quantity is
           primarily set up to confirm payments, the process also enables service providers to
           get regular feedback and to learn from their mistakes. This could be a useful means
           to increase capacity of service providers to deliver nutrition interventions, compen-
           sating somewhat for the often low level of nutrition training which the personnel of
           health facilities receive.
      •	   Sharper focus on the highest priority services. The PBF package of services is a sub-
           set of the range of services offered by a facility. The services are chosen on the basis
           of their ability to address the highest burden of disease in the country. The sharper
           focus on the delivery of these interventions should increase the impact on the highest
           priority public health concerns.
      •	   Greater focus on quality. PBF may improve the impact of some of the key nutri-
           tion-specific interventions that could have a significant impact, if they are delivered
           with high quality. For example, growth monitoring and promotion (GMP) has had
           limited impact to date because the focus tends to be on weighing children and the
           quality of the accompanying counseling when a child’s growth is faltering is weak.
           Through the quality checklist, PBF may be able to correct this.
      •	   Tends to improve access to services. An important aspect of PBF is the initial busi-
           ness planning that takes place with health facilities to enable them to restructure
           their work so as to maximize their efficiency in service delivery. This can lead to a re-
           duction in fees, which in turn increases demand and often not only increases access
           but also improves overall revenue for the health facility.
      •	   May lead to efficiencies in the supply chain. Increasingly, PBF is used to improve the
           alignment of the functioning of the pharmaceutical supply chain with the needs of
           the service providers and clients. These efficiencies would be of benefit to nutrition
           services (independent of whether the service is one of those purchased through PBF
           or not) because breaks in the supply chain are often a major barrier for the delivery of
           nutrition programs. For this benefit to accrue to nutrition, all essential nutrition sup-
           plies must be included in the list that is assessed as part of the PBF quality checklist
           for the pharmaceutical system.
      •	   Encourages greater autonomy. PBF is expected to empower local level managers
           and provide flexibility in ways to achieve the results. The effectiveness of PBF de-
           pends largely on autonomy being genuinely granted to health facility level manag-
           ers. This autonomy is important for nutrition because different approaches may be
           needed to deliver effective services (especially those which require behavior change)
           depending on the socio-cultural composition of the community.


22	                                                    Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   May encourage benchmarking and learning. PBF could instill an environment of
             healthy competition among health facilities, especially if financial incentives are
             complemented by non-financial ones. Increasingly, PBF programs are developing
             web portals that contain performance information about each participating unit. In
             addition to increasing transparency, the data enables positive deviance analysis and
             opportunities to learn from the better performers. Positive deviance is an approach
             that has worked well for nutrition, but mainly at a relatively limited scale so far. PBF
             data systems may enable a scaling up.

        Potential Challenges
        •	   Focus primarily on the supply of services. While PBF could contribute significantly
             to increasing the quality and quantity of some of the nutrition-specific interventions,
             it is insufficient by itself to address malnutrition. So far, PBF’s main limitation for nu-
             trition is that it primarily incentivizes service delivery, i.e., the supply side. Nutrition
             interventions also require strong action on the demand side—at the household and
             community levels.
        •	   Possible resistance. PBF entails a new way of compensating providers and could face
             resistance from staff and bureaucratic hurdles. For example, current rules may not
             allow for payment of bonuses to health care providers. In most settings this chal-
             lenge has proven to be manageable, but has required important investments in time
             upfront to explain the benefits of the new approach.
        •	   Potential cost increase. PBF would increase the cost of service provision, since the
             performance pay is in addition to existing compensation and there are additional
             costs related to verification, etc. Generally such additional costs to the system are
             not significant and are considered well worth the results of improved quantity and
             quality of services. Nonetheless, these additional costs need to be assessed against
             the fiscal space for health and the overall cost-effectiveness of the interventions. In
             the case of some preventive nutrition services (and some curative services), which
             concern a large number of individuals in the catchment area (as opposed to disease
             curative services where only the sick come to facilities), the large numbers can result
             in cost escalations, which has been why some nutrition services have not been in-
             cluded in the PBF package in the past. This challenge may require further targeting
             of nutrition services.
        •	   Balancing nutrition with other interventions in the package of services. Only a lim-
             ited number of services can be included in a PBF system, which poses a challenge
             as to how many and which nutrition indicators to include. Until recently, the PBF
             package that was most often used had focused on two nutrition services: a growth
             monitoring session (without necessarily focusing on the availability or quality of ac-
             companying counseling) and treatment of severe acute malnutrition. Given the poor
             performance of growth monitoring globally and the small proportion of children that
             suffer from severe acute malnutrition (SAM) (compared to stunting), these two ser-
             vices are likely to have only limited direct impact on stunting. However, other basic
             health services such as antenatal care, treatment of malaria, treatment of diarrhea
             and child immunization, all of which are typically included in a standard PBF pack-
             age, will have an indirect positive impact on nutrition.
        •	   Verification of certain nutrition services is difficult. One of the strengths of PBF is
             the system of checks and balances through verification and counter-verification. Be-
             cause some of the nutrition services relate to behavior change (e.g., exclusive breast-



FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                                23
      CAMEROON P104525
      HEALTH SECTOR SUPPORT INVESTMENT PROJECT
      Project development objective (PDO).         and (v) patients reporting satisfaction      primary health center and hospital level.
      To increase utilization and improve          with health services. The following nu-      Also extended PBF to the community
      the quality of health services with a        trition-specific indicators were included:   level. Approved in 2009, the operation
      particular focus on child and maternal       under-five children with severe acute        took two years to get off the ground in
      health and communicable diseases.            malnutrition (SAM) and moderate acute        earnest. Between 2011 and 2014, pilots
                                                   malnutrition (MAM) treated respec-           were tested and in 2014, additional
      Results of interest. Health (improved        tively at the hospital and the primary       financing enabled nationwide scale up.
      utilization and quality of health ser-       health center (PHC) level; referrals and     Nutrition indicators were added to the
      vices), with maternal and under-five         counter-referral for nutrition (teased       existing PBF program in one region. The
      nutrition results added subsequently.        out from the total list of referrals). At    operation is now financing the nutri-
                                                   the community level: patients of SAM         tion outputs throughout the country,
      Indicators. The original PDO indicators      and MAM referred by the community            although the problem primarily affects
      were (i) children immunized for DPT3         health workers (CHW) to the facility         the north and the east. UNICEF pays
      (< 12 months); (ii) births attended by       (and confirmed); household visits by a       for the nutrition results for one region
      skilled professional; (iii) children under   team (CHW + facility staff) according        and IDA finances for the other regions.
      five sleeping under insecticide treated      to protocol. At the hospital level, the
      bednets the night before the survey; (iv)    number of inpatient days for SAM.            Evaluation showed. The provision of
      tuberculosis treatment success rate                                                       services increased, but it is too ear-
      (percentage of those who are smear           Operational modality. Improving district     ly to evaluate nutrition outcomes.
      positive who are successfully treated);      level health services through PBF at the




                                  feeding, complementary feeding, compliance with a regime of iron supplements),
                                  which are difficult to verify, these high-impact services have tended to be excluded
                                  from the PBF package. However, some of the newer World Bank operations are test-
                                  ing the limits of the verification challenge. The positive aspect of community count-
                                  er-verification of some of these services is that it could generate local involvement
                                  and the potential to change community norms related to certain behaviors.
                             •	   Capacity to deliver nutrition services. The PBF approach provides health facilities a
                                  high degree of autonomy to organize themselves to deliver the services which are in-
                                  centivized. Most of these services are at the core of medical training, whereas nutri-
                                  tion often occupies a very limited space in the medical syllabus. It may be necessary
                                  initially to offer service providers technical assistance to ensure they have sufficient
                                  capacity to deliver nutrition services.
                             •	   Potential bias against services that are not incentivized. As in any instrument in-
                                  centivizing specific services, other (non-incentivized) services may be neglected. As
                                  noted earlier, this may pose a problem for nutrition because the services that need to
                                  be delivered likely exceed the capacity for a PBF to absorb.
                             •	   Ensuring equitable distribution of the incentive. To avoid conflict among staff, often
                                  the additional funds are just equally shared rather than based on individual perfor-
                                  mance, even though the whole health facility receives the additional funds based on
                                  performance. It is much more difficult to institute performance-based rewards at the in-
                                  dividual provider level without large-scale reform of the human resource (HR) systems.
                             •	   Workload of community health workers. Some programs are exploring using PBF
                                  to incentivize community outreach through community health workers. While this
                                  approach holds promise for nutrition, the community health workers’ range of du-
                                  ties and work volume needs to be consider to assess the feasibility of assigning them
                                  more tasks.


24	                                                                                   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        Examples of Country Experience	
        Armenia, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic Repub-
        lic of Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Gambia, Ghana, Haiti, Kenya, Lao Peoples
        Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Nigeria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Zimba-
        bwe, Zambia


     • Performance Based Contracting (PBC)
        Definition	
        •	   PBC takes place when service delivery is contracted out (or contracted in) often us-
             ing non-state actors, e.g., international or national nongovernmental organizations
             (NGOs) or community-based organizations or for-profit private sector providers, and
             the contracts are performance-based.
        •	   The contracts focus on the outputs, quality, or outcomes that tie at least a portion of
             the contractor’s payment, contract extensions, or contract renewals to achieving spe-
             cific, measureable performance standards. Although any contract would be expected
             to have a performance clause—and could be terminated in the case of non-perfor-
             mance—PBC links payment to performance more explicitly and based on specific
             services and outputs to be delivered.
        •	   A standard package of health services is defined in the contract, which could include
             nutrition services. Performance is usually assessed (and payment made) based on
             delivery of the full agreed package, as opposed to PBF where payments are tied to
             individual services. The verification is at a more macro level than PBF, such as inde-
             pendent coverage surveys.
        •	   PBC is usually focused mainly on health facility based services, although it typically
             also includes community activities (e.g., screening for severe acute malnutrition) to
             create demand for facility-based services.

        Potential Strengths
        •	   Competitive selection. Contracted entities have to compete to be selected, and again to
             have their contracts renewed at regular intervals. This competition brings to the fore
             available capacity, which the government may not have been able to tap into previously.
        •	   Alignment. Often the selected entities were already delivering similar services in the
             area (perhaps at a smaller scale) but with relative autonomy from government and with
             direct financing from donors. PBC can serve to align the work of these entities with
             government priorities.
        •	   More rigorous than traditional contracts. By linking payment to the quantity and qual-
             ity of services delivered, as per agreed checklists, PBC is a better remedy for non-per-
             formance than traditional contracts, which usually have only a blunt remedy: the early
             termination of the contract.
        •	   Rapid increase in provision of services. Particularly in fragile settings where health
             service delivery is compromised and services reduced, PBC usually translates into a
             rapid increase in the availability of services.
        •	   Flexibility in service delivery. Because the contracted NGOs use their own manage-
             ment policies and procedures, they have more flexibility than a government entity to
             organize themselves for the particular challenges of service delivery, including hiring
             and firing staff according to needs and offering salaries aligned with market rates to



FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                            25
           attract qualified staff. This flexibility is potentially a significant advantage to deliver
           nutrition services because these often need to be adapted to the local context.
      •	   Multisectoral convergence for results. Because PBC can be geographically based (i.e.,
           a given geographical area is assigned to a particular contracted entity) and the enti-
           ty is more flexible than traditional government ministries, the approach can facilitate
           multisectoral convergence to achieve certain results. This multisectoral convergence
           is particularly important for nutrition and has been a challenge when working through
           traditional ministries.
      •	   Local acceptability. In areas of conflict, if the selection of the contracted entities places
           a strong emphasis on proof of having worked effectively in the particular context, it is
           likely that the entity will be better accepted by the local communities, as well as the
           parties in conflict. Often, an NGO with a long history of operating successfully in an
           area is selected and brings to the contract not only its technical and managerial capaci-
           ty but also its positioning and knowledge of the local political economy.
      •	   Prioritization of services. PBC involves defining a package of services (sometimes in
           tiers, such as a “basic package” an “enhanced package,” etc.), which is to be delivered
           under the contract. The process of defining the package (and adjusting it as needed)
           provides an opportunity to ensure that the health services offered are aligned with the
           burden of disease in the targeted area and with the latest evidence of what works to
           address that burden.

      Potential Challenges	
      •	   Government capacity to enforce contracts. The PBC requires significant capacity
           for contract monitoring and enforcement, which can be lacking in some ministries
           of health. Technical assistance on contract management may be required as part of a
           World Bank operation using PBC.
      •	   Availability of providers. In some settings where PBC has been used (e.g., fragile
           environments), a limited number of national organizations exist with the capacity
           to deliver good quality health services. The competitive selection process needs to
           include international entities, but also ensure that their knowledge and capacity to
           operate in the local environment is a key part of the selection process.
      •	   Challenging to terminate contracts. Termination could be difficult to enforce be-
           cause the government will need to find an alternative to continue service delivery
           and PBC can adjust for under-performance or higher performance. Termination re-
           quires unequivocal information.
      •	   Perceptions of government about beneficiary expectations. In some settings, the
           government is uncomfortable not being seen by the population as the direct deliverer
           of services. It may be possible to alleviate this apprehension with an effective com-
           munication strategy explaining to the public the role of government is to regulate and
           purchase services.
      •	   Prioritizing nutrition. In some settings, nutrition was not well defined in the pack-
           age of services and was limited to a few interventions. For example, because some
           NGOs’ recent experience in implementing humanitarian assistance projects focused
           on the treatment of severe acute malnutrition, there can be a tendency to assume that
           this nutrition intervention is sufficient. It may be necessary to review the package
           to define a clear set of nutrition interventions along with indicators to track in the
           information system to determine performance.




26	                                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
AFGHANISTAN P112445 / P129663
TWO BACK-TO-BACK OPERATIONS INCORPORATED PBC AND PBF
P112446—STRENGTHENING                         P129663—SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT FOR HEALTH ACTION IN TRANSITION (SEHAT).
HEALTH ACTIVITIES FOR THE RURAL               The PDO is to expand the scope, qual-     but performance payments are also
POOR (SHARP) Included contract-               ity, and coverage of health services      made at the NGO level. Thus perfor-
ing of NGOs with some performance             provided to the population, particularly  mance bonuses are paid not only to the
based incentives complemented by              for the poor, in the project areas, and   individual providers but also to the NGOs
PBF at the health facility level.             to enhance the stewardship functions      (20 percent based on performance). The
                                              of the Ministry of Public Health.         implementation of NGO contracting is
The project development objective
                                                                                        through performance based partnership
(PDO) was to contribute to improv-
                                              Indicators. Almost the same indica-       agreements. Significantly, in addition to
ing the health and nutritional status
                                              tors are used for PBC and RBF, mainly     financing the service delivery contracts,
of the people of Afghanistan, with a
                                              for maternal and child health, such as    the operation has considerable amounts
greater focus on women and children
                                              skilled birth attendance and immuni-      of resources allocated to capacity build-
and undeserved areas of the country.
                                              zation coverage. But specific nutrition   ing and system strengthening at the
                                              indicators have also been included, e.g., central and provincial levels.
Results of interest. Improved service de-
                                              pregnant and lactating women receiving
livery coverage, including quality of care.
                                              a package of infant and young child nu-   Evaluation. Afghanistan has possibly
Nutrition was part of the maternal and
                                              trition services; and under-five children the largest PBC operation in health /
child health package. Health workers
                                              with severe acute malnutrition who are    nutrition. Evaluation shows that cover-
sent a report to the Ministry of Health,
                                              receiving the requisite treatment. There  age of health services has improved, and
through NGOs, claiming payment for
                                              is also one indicator on quality of care. child / infant mortality has decreased.
the delivery of health services. The
                                              Operational modality and the incen-       Maternal mortality has also decreased
request is now electronically submitted.
                                              tives remain the same as in SHARP         significantly.




          •	   Timing of measurement. In some cases, measurement of PBC performance has been
               done less frequently (i.e., every six or twelve months) than in PBF. Because the avail-
               ability of data drives the performance reviews, the less frequent reviews results into
               slower corrections of bad performance and potentially weaker accountability.
          •	   Cost of measurement. The surveys required to track performance, while useful be-
               yond managing PBC contracts, can be costly. These surveys need to include a range
               of nutrition indicators and be well integrated into an overall national health manage-
               ment information system and nutrition surveillance system.

          Examples of Country Experience	
          Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Pakistan, South Sudan



       Community Level
      •
       Performance Based Community Contracts (PBCC) / Community PBF
          Definition	
          •	   More recently, in combination with Community Driven Development (CDD) plat-
               forms—or sometimes riding on other community mobilization efforts—some coun-
               tries have started using performance based community contracts (PBCC) to incentiv-
               ize nutrition results. That is a type of PBF at the community level.
          •	   Performance based contracts are signed with community groups and payments are
               made on the basis of results achieved.


FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                                                        27
      THE GAMBIA P143650
      MATERNAL AND CHILD NUTRITION AND HEALTH RESULTS PROJECT
      Project development objective (PDO).         children reached by basic nutrition       Indicators. PDO-level indicators were
      To increase the utilization of community     services; children between 6–59 months    children 0–6 months who are exclusively
      nutrition and primary maternal and           receiving vitamin A supplementation;      breastfed; deliveries attended by certi-
      child health services in selected regions    pregnant women receiving iron and         fied midwives in the preceding year; chil-
      in the country. The results of interest      folic acid supplement; children under     dren aged 6–59 months who received a
      include both improved nutrition and          24 months benefiting from improved        dose of vitamin A within the past twelve
      health among women and children.             IYCF practices; and under-five children   months; women using modern methods
                                                   treated for moderate or severe acute      of family planning in the preceding year.
      Results of interest. Improved knowl-         malnutrition. Under the additional        Under the additional financing, the fol-
      edge about exclusive breastfeeding,          financing, the following nutrition-spe-   lowing PDO-level indicator was added:
      postnatal care, etc., some indicators        cific results were added: Baby-Friendly   children age 6–23 months consuming
      on hygiene, e.g., cleaning up the village,   Community Initiative villages in the      at least four out of six food groups.
      etc., and sanitation, such as building of    region; vulnerable households sup-
      latrines, etc. Nutrition-specific results    ported in gardening; and communities
      included: pregnant / lactating women,        supported in establishing food banks.
      adolescent girls and / or under-five




                            •	    As for PPF, the results are verified before the payment is made and the results can
                                  include both quantitative and qualitative dimensions.
                            •	    Community-PBF can be either stand-alone or linked to operations that also establish
                                  performance contracts at other levels, e.g., facility, sub-national, and national.
                            •	    Unlike CDD, where the starting point is the community-expressed needs, with PBCC
                                  / community-based PBF, the starting point is a specific development objective (e.g.,
                                  reducing child stunting). Intermediate results are selected based on a clear theory
                                  of change.

                            Potential Strengths	
                            •	    Collective action. Community-based projects can facilitate collective action that
                                  would enable the removal of community-wide barriers that are creating nutrition
                                  problems. Some of these barriers can be social (e.g., social norms related to the role
                                  of men in caring for young children and / or about open defecation) or physical (e.g.,
                                  building a bridge to ensure easier access to a health facility, or removing conditions
                                  that enable mosquitos to breed and transmit malaria). Nutrition programs have had
                                  success in using positive deviance (e.g., identifying which households have less mal-
                                  nutrition in a community and pinpointing which factors have led to that result) to
                                  identify priority key community barriers to better nutrition.
                            •	    Multisectoral convergence. Community-based projects, if well designed, can en-
                                  courage communities to seek services from various ministries and enable the conver-
                                  gence to take place. This is important for nutrition, which requires a mix of sectoral
                                  interventions.
                            •	    Flexibility of design. The determinants of malnutrition and the socio-cultural barri-
                                  ers to change will vary by community. Community approaches enable communities
                                  to adapt global knowledge to their particular situations. However, that adaptation
                                  may require some external facilitation, e.g., through coaches.




28	                                                                                Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Flexible definition of community. Communities can be defined geographically, but
             particularly in countries where social exclusion is a challenge, communities can or-
             ganize themselves and carry out projects on the basis of characteristics such as eth-
             nicity, social class, caste, etc.
        •	   Quality checklists. Quality checklists, which are generally associated with facili-
             ty-level PBF, can also be used in PBCC or community-level PBF. The focus on quality,
             as seen earlier, is critical for the achievement of nutritional outcomes.
        •	   Can promote utilization of services. Community-based contracts can be used to en-
             gage community groups to promote the use of health and nutrition services and even
             do referrals. One such nutrition approach is community screening to identify severe
             acutely malnourished children, an approach which significantly increases the use
             of free nutrition rehabilitation sessions. Some nutrition services, e.g., treatment of
             diarrhea with zinc supplements and oral rehydration solution can be effectively de-
             livered in the communities themselves, thus reducing the need to consult a facility
             and addressing the financial barriers that limit access for the poor.
        •	   Social accountability. Community involvement can create greater accountability at
             the local level, which can lead to a higher degree of transparency and consequently
             greater trust and program acceptance.

        Potential Challenges	
        •	   Communities do not always recognize nutrition as a problem. Malnutrition may not
             be seen as a priority problem by communities partly because other pressing needs
             compete for attention, and partly because of lack of awareness about the magnitude
             of the malnutrition problem within the community, its causation, and available solu-
             tions. In communities where childhood undernutrition is widely prevalent, people
             may not recognize malnutrition as a critical problem since malnourished child are
             the norm. It may be beneficial to couple community-based PBF with awareness cre-
             ation communications campaigns.
        •	   Challenge of verifying certain nutrition results. The nutrition results that require
             community mobilization often include behaviors that are difficult to verify, e.g., ex-
             clusive breastfeeding or child complementary feeding behaviors. Because payments
             are linked to results, there is a risk that communities will learn to report the right re-
             sults without the behaviors changing or changing behaviors but not to the extent re-
             ported. This challenge is not insurmountable, but it will require creativity of design.
        •	   Potential conflict of interest and capacity constraints for verification. Community
             groups can also play a role in supervision and monitoring the PBCC operation—a watch-
             dog function. But this requires intensive technical assistance, facilitation or coaching.
        •	   Role / presence of the state. Community-based RBF programs need to have an ef-
             fective accompanying communications strategy to ensure that communities are
             aware when a program is part of a government strategy to enhance service deliv-
             ery. Otherwise, some governments may resist using the approach and risk being
             perceived as having been replaced by community-based organizations “to do the
             government’s job.”
        •	   Capacity for nutrition. Even when community organizations and their members
             recognize nutrition as a priority, they do not always have the required knowledge to
             analyze the causes of malnutrition in their community or to select evidence-based
             interventions to reduce it. For example, communities sometimes decide to carry
             out growth monitoring, but this is insufficient to improve childhood malnutrition.



FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                              29
             It must be complemented by appropriate nutrition counseling and / or supplemen-
             tary feeding interventions demonstrated to caretakers, which is usually referred
             to as growth monitoring and promotion (GMP). This capacity challenge has been
             remedied in some World Bank operations by using tools (e.g., menus of options /
             decision trees) and coaches to facilitate community participation processes, specif-
             ically on nutrition.
        •	   Need local institutional capacity. Though in principle, PBCC (PBF at the com-
             munity level) could be used in the absence of a CDD operation, e.g., Cameroon, it
             is critically important to have some sort of community organization with which
             PBCC could operate. Often CDD operations provide the platform on which PBCC
             could be built, by establishing the requisite organizational framework through
             community mobilization efforts. In Djibouti, the existing CDD program provided
             a ready organizational platform. Without such preparatory efforts—either as part
             of CDD or not—or an existing community group such as women’s groups, a health
             promotion committee or a CBO, there would be no locus for PBCC.
        •	   Communities are not always cohesive. Mobilizing communities could be a chal-
             lenge, especially with governments that are reluctant to partner with NGOs and
             CBOs. Governments typically are not strong in community mobilization and need
             the help of NGOs or CBOs to accomplish it. Some geographic communities are not
             cohesive socially. In those cases, targeting by socially defined communities may be
             helpful or by introducing additional measures to improve social cohesion such as
             conflict prevention coaching in conflict-affected areas.
        Examples of Country Experience	
        Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, the Gambia, Ghana, India (state of Andhra Pradesh),
        Indonesia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Senegal, Nepal


        ommunity Driven Development (CDD)
      •C
        Definition	
        •	   Community Driven Development (CDD) has been practiced for several decades,
             with a view to ensuring that development assistance is not just dictated from the
             top, but that the people’s voices are heard, and development efforts are responsive to
             their expressed needs. Through participatory rural appraisals and other such tech-
             niques, CDD increases the involvement and participation of the beneficiaries in the
             planning, implementation, and oversight.
        •	   Financing is provided to communities based on their own plans, addressing their
             own priorities and local approaches. The funds are spent on programs implement-
             ed through community-based organizations with oversight by community leaders or
             committees.
        •	   CDD requires strong community mobilization and capacity building, along with par-
             ticipatory planning and implementation. Most governments require technical sup-
             port, and the involvement of community-based organizations.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Ownership and local relevance. Community interventions in CDD programs are
             more likely to be locally relevant, socially acceptable, and successful due to strong
             community involvement and consequently heightened empowerment compared to
             other development programs. These aspects of CDD approaches are valuable in nu-


30	                                                     Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
              trition programs, which are highly dependent on behavior change to succeed, and
              those behaviors are anchored in local norms and traditions.
         •	   Social accountability. Community involvement can create greater accountability at
              the local level, which can lead to a higher degree of transparency and consequently
              greater trust and program acceptance.
         •	   Community contribution. Often communities provide a financial contribution as their
              “share” in the project. This helps build ownership and should enhance sustainability.
         •	   Collective action. Community-based projects can facilitate collective action that
              would enable the removal of community-wide barriers that are creating nutrition
              problems. Some of these barriers can be social (e.g., social norms related to the role
              of men in caring for young children and / or about open defecation) or physical (e.g.,
              building a bridge to ensure easier access to a health facility, removing conditions
              that enable mosquitos to breed and transmit malaria). Nutrition programs have had
              success in using positive deviance (e.g., identifying which households have less mal-
              nutrition in a community and pinpointing which factors have led to that result) to
              identify priority key community barriers to better nutrition.
         •	   Multisectoral convergence. Community-based projects, if well designed, can en-
              courage communities to seek services from various ministries and enable the conver-
              gence to take place. This is important for nutrition, which requires a mix of sectoral
              interventions.
         •	   Flexibility of design. The determinants of malnutrition and the socio-cultural barri-
              ers to change will vary by community. CDD approaches enable communities to adapt
              global knowledge to their particular situations. However, that adaptation usually re-
              quires some external facilitation, e.g., through coaches.



NEPAL P125359
COMMUNITY ACTION FOR NUTRITION PROJECT
Project development objective (PDO).     Indicators. PDO level indicators, revised   Implementation modalities. At the
The original PDO was “to improve         during restructuring and dropping the       ward level, there is a multisectoral
attitudes and practices known to         indicators that sought to measure atti-     committee to approve plans and
improve nutritional outcomes of women    tudes and refining others, include prac-    account for results. Communities get
of reproductive age and children under   tices of pregnant women regarding iron      financing which could include awards
the age of two.” The revised PDO is      and folic acid supplementation; breast-     for households / individuals for their
“to improve practices that contribute    feeding practices of mothers with chil-     achievements, e.g., for households using
to reduced undernutrition of wom-        dren 0–6 months of age; child feeding       the pit latrine most consistently. The
en of reproductive age and children      practices of households with children       Rapid Results Approach, i.e., results
under the age of two and to provide      6–24 months of age; households              in 100 days, is being used. There is a
emergency nutrition and sanitation       reporting no smoke in the room while        social mobilizer / coach hired through
response to vulnerable populations       cooking; pregnant women reporting           the NGO and contracted by the gov-
in earthquake affected areas.” The       consuming animal-sourced protein in         ernment through the project in every
project was restructured in 2015 to      the previous day; households reporting      village development council (VDC). Most
match the project’s results frame-       using improved toilet facilities; mothers   of the coaches are from the local com-
work with community choices.             (of children aged 0–2) reporting always     munity and most of them are women.
                                         washing hands at critical times.            The coach guides the communities,
Results of interest. This project was                                                assisting them in devising a proposal to
developed specifically to address                                                    reduce malnutrition in the community.
malnutrition in women of reproductive
age and children under the age of two.




FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                                                    31
      •	   Flexible definition of community. Communities can be defined geographically, but
           particularly in countries where social exclusion is a challenge, communities can or-
           ganize themselves and carry out projects on the basis of characteristics such as eth-
           nicity, social class, caste, etc. Because some nutrition-related behaviors and barriers
           are specific to some communities, the flexibility inherent in CDD approaches should
           lead to better nutritional outcomes. CDD might be particularly effective in nutri-
           tion because several factors affecting nutrition-related behaviors are socio-cultural.
           Those factors include gender discrimination, household resource distribution, wom-
           en’s health-seeking behavior, and the feeding and eating practices during pregnancy
           and infancy.

      Potential Challenges	
      •	   Communities do not always recognize nutrition as a problem. CDD programs sup-
           port what communities select as priorities and this may not prioritize malnutrition
           as the most urgent community problem. Malnutrition may not be seen as a priority
           challenge partly because other pressing needs compete for attention, and partly be-
           cause of lack of awareness about the magnitude of the malnutrition problem within
           the community, its causation, and available solutions. In communities where child-
           hood undernutrition is widely prevalent, people may not recognize malnutrition as a
           critical problem since malnourished children are the norm.
      •	   Risk of elite capture. CDD may not be suitable for communities where a feudal cul-
           ture of leadership exists. In such communities, even so-called community engage-
           ment may be captured by the most powerful members, defeating the idea of giving
           voice to the poor and vulnerable sections of the society. While a consultative process
           may occur during participatory planning, the process may not be truly inclusive.
      •	   Alignment with national plans. Often communities will request support to build
           physical infrastructure such as health centers and schools. Unless the programs are
           strongly anchored in coordination mechanisms (which are often weak in developing
           countries), there is a risk of building infrastructures when a better solution might
           have been to address transportation problems (e.g., a bridge) to increase access to the
           infrastructures in neighboring communities. Increasingly, countries are developing
           GIS-enabled infrastructure maps (e.g., national health map) that should help CDD
           programs align with national infrastructure plans. This is not a particular risk for
           nutrition programs because community actions for nutrition do not require physical
           infrastructure.
      •	   Alignment with national systems. Similar to the infrastructure point made above, a CDD
           project may finance a school, but may not have the necessary linkages with the national
           system to ensure that teachers and a regular budget is assigned to operate the school.
      •	   Role / presence of the state. CDD programs need to have an effective accompanying
           communications strategy to ensure that communities are aware when a CDD pro-
           gram is part of a government strategy to enhance service delivery. Otherwise, some
           governments may resist using the approach and risk being perceived as having been
           replaced by community-based organizations “to do the government’s job.”
      •	   Community contribution. As noted above, the community’s financial contribution
           should help enhance ownership and sustainability, but when criteria are strictly ap-
           plied (e.g., insisting on a financial contribution instead of in-kind contribution) the
           poorest communities or the poorest members of communities may be excluded. This
           potential exclusion is highly relevant for nutrition because the poorest households
           tend to be the most affected by malnutrition.


32	                                                   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Capacity for nutrition. Even when community organizations and their members rec-
             ognize nutrition as a priority, they do not always have the required knowledge to ana-
             lyze the causes of malnutrition in their community or to select evidence-based inter-
             ventions to reduce it. For example, communities sometimes decide to carry out growth
             monitoring, but this is insufficient to improve childhood malnutrition. It must be com-
             plemented by appropriate nutrition counseling and / or supplementary feeding inter-
             ventions demonstrated to caretakers, which is usually referred to as growth monitor-
             ing and promotion (GMP). This capacity challenge has been remedied in some World
             Bank operations by using tools (e.g., menus of options / decision trees) and coaches to
             facilitate community participation processes, specifically on nutrition.
        •	   Communities are not always cohesive. Mobilizing communities could be a chal-
             lenge, especially with governments that are reluctant to partner with NGOs and
             CBOs. Governments typically are not strong in community mobilization and need
             the help of NGOs or CBOs to accomplish it. Some geographic communities are not
             cohesive socially. In those cases, targeting by socially defined communities may be
             helpful or by introducing additional measures to improve social cohesion such as
             conflict prevention coaching in conflict-affected areas.
        •	   CDD programs are typically dispersed in thousands of small communities. Many of
             them may not have the necessary institutional arrangements, such as a development
             committee or a women’s group to mobilize and articulate their priorities or the ca-
             pacity to develop plans and manage programs. This often requires strong technical
             support, usually through NGOs or CBOs. Monitoring the expenditures and results
             could become difficult to manage when the program is dispersed. Information and
             communication technologies are increasingly used to address this challenge.

        Examples of Country Experience	
        Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, the Gambia, Ghana, India (state of Andhra Pradesh),
        Indonesia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Senegal, Nepal



     Household/Individual Level
     •
      Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) and Unconditional Cash
      Transfers (UCT)
        Definition	
        •	   Cash transfers are provided directly to targeted (poor) individuals and households
             to reduce their vulnerability through consumption smoothing. When used for nutri-
             tion, a secondary objective is to encourage behavioral changes that should result in
             improved nutritional outcomes. Such behavioral changes generally revolve around
             feeding and eating practices, girls’ education, caring for infants and children, hy-
             giene, and accessing health and nutrition services.
        •	   Cash transfers can be conditional or unconditional, though the recent trend is toward
             the middle ground of soft conditions—behaviors are encouraged but compliance is
             not verified or enforced. When a nutritional objective is present, the transfers are
             combined with accompanying measures, such as communication campaigns and par-
             enting classes, and the cash can be an effective “anchor” for nutrition messages.
             •	   Conditional cash transfers (CCT) involve disbursements based on verified com-
                  pliance to the prescribed behavior, e.g., accessing institutional delivery, or bring-


FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                              33
      MALI P127328
      EMERGENCY SAFETY NETS PROJECT (JIGISÉMÉJIRI)
      Project development objective (PDO).       along with nutrition education.             to poor household is accompanied by
      To provide targeted cash transfers to      Indicators. Nutrition-specific indica-      services and education / information.
      the poor and food insecure households      tors include poor households / children     The operation is linked to the National
      and to establish the building blocks       receiving the nutritional package, i.e.,    Health Insurance. The UCT targets the
      for a national safety net system.          the powder + education; households          poor, but non-poor households can
                                                 participating in the nutritional infor-     participate in the information session at
      Results of interest. Poverty allevia-      mation session; households improving        the community level. A total of 62,000
      tion; safety net for the poor and food     food consumption score, i.e., weight-       households have been identified to be
      insecure; improving living conditions.     ed score of 20 categories of food.          reached by July 2016. Consideration is
      Increasing access to social services.                                                  being given to linking the beneficiaries
      Nutrition is seen as a side effect. A      Operational modality. Unconditional         of the UCT with the health program
      nutrition program is being piloted as      cash transfer (UCT) combined with           so that growth monitoring could be
      part of this operation. Every under-five   behavior change communication (BCC)         added to the operation. On average, 70
      child and pregnant women will receive      in the five regions of the south—105        percent of the transfer is spent on food.
      a nutritional supplement (powdered         to110 communities of 703 communities
      milk + iron supplement + vitamin A),       in the country. The cash transferred




                                     ing the baby in for growth monitoring or immunization, or nutrition counselling
                                     sessions.
                                •	   Unconditional cash transfers (UCT) involve disbursements without a strict re-
                                     quirement for a specific behavior. This approach is more suitable for behaviors
                                     that are difficult to verify, e.g., exclusive breastfeeding, or increased food intake
                                     during pregnancy.
                           •	   Soft conditionalities. Even in operations designed as CCT, the conditionality is
                                seldom strictly enforced. Beneficiaries are encouraged to attend parenting classes,
                                growth monitoring and promotion sessions, cooking demonstrations and so on, but
                                the payout is not conditioned upon their participation in such accompanying mea-
                                sures. Program evaluations suggest that soft conditionalities are just as effective as
                                strict conditionalities.
                           •	   Cash transfers have evolved over time, going beyond risk management towards oth-
                                er development goals, such as reducing malnutrition. If nutrition objectives are to be
                                formally superimposed on CCT / UCT operations, it is vitally important to apply the
                                relevant knowledge and skills in preparation, implementation, and monitoring, and
                                to target the all-important first 1,000 days.

                           Potential Strengths	
                           •	   Incentivizes behavior change. Cash transfers move the incentive to the intended
                                beneficiaries, i.e., the individuals in households whose behavior needs to change to
                                improve nutrition (caretakers and those who influence them), and can be very effec-
                                tive—if designed and implemented well.
                           •	   Targeting the most vulnerable. Cash transfer programs rely on rigorous systems to
                                target the most vulnerable, most often through a proxy means test that identifies the
                                income poor. Household surveys have shown that these beneficiaries are more likely
                                to be malnourished. Using the targeting system of cash transfer programs therefore
                                could help to use more efficiently the scarce resources available for nutrition, espe-
                                cially for preventing undernutrition.


34	                                                                                Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Filling a resource gap. Cash transfers are an important part of a national nutrition
             strategy because— at least for the poorest and most vulnerable households—the avail-
             ability of financial resources is a determinant of malnutrition. The cash will enable
             these households to purchase a balanced and safe diet (which is more expensive than
             the typical diets consumed by the poor) and health services. The cash could also free
             up time for caretakers to ensure children received adequate breastfeeding and com-
             plementary feeding.
        •	   Anchoring behavior change messages. The cash transfer itself can serve as an “an-
             chor” for nutrition messages, i.e., to capture the attention of household members to
             key nutrition messages that they might otherwise not notice due to competing prior-
             ities in their complex lives.
        •	   Addressing gender dynamics. Cash transfer programs can be designed to correct
             household gender imbalances by empowering women. For example, the cash trans-
             fers are generally handed out to women rather than to the household head. This is
             likely to benefit nutrition (independent of whether or not nutrition messages are in-
             cluded with the cash transfer) because gender inequality is often a strong determinant
             of malnutrition.
        •	   Efficiency. Direct transfers to individuals through cash transfer programs avoid elite
             capture and other inefficiencies that diminish the proportion of resources that reach
             households. For example, it may be more efficient to provide a household with a cash
             transfer and information encouraging them to purchase a product such as micronutri-
             ent powders or zinc tablets from the market rather than providing these same inputs
             for free through the public health system. The act of purchasing would create owner-
             ship for the effective use of the product.
        •	   Rapid response capability. Cash transfer programs provide a platform for rapidly de-
             ploying an emergency response to crises such as floods, earthquakes, etc. Rapid de-
             ployment could help prevent or reduce the severity of the malnutrition which typical-
             ly accompanies emergency situations.
        •	   Strong information systems. Cash transfer programs require strong information sys-
             tems to identify beneficiaries, track payments and, in the case of conditional transfers,
             to communicate the conditionalities or “co-responsibilities,” and to verify compliance.
             These same information systems can be used to communicate key nutrition messages.
        •	   Political visibility. Cash transfer programs tend to be highly visible and usually ben-
             efit from strong political support. Adding a nutrition objective to a cash transfer pro-
             gram could also raise the profile of nutrition with policy-makers.

        Potential Challenges	
        •	   Requires strong management capacity and good governance. Cash transfer programs
             require strong management arrangements to ensure effective administration of the
             cash transfer, mitigating moral hazard, preventing leakage of the cash, and monitoring
             actual compliance in the case of conditional cash transfers. This capacity requirement
             can be a challenge in some countries.
        •	   Limited feedback loops from UCTs. While UCTs are easier to administer, they do not
             have built-in mechanisms to determine whether the desired behavior change has been
             achieved. Separate surveys or other ways of collecting data may therefore be required.
        •	   For CCTs, insure the service which constitutes the condition is available. The supply
             of nutrition-related services is often a constraint in countries where malnutrition is
             highly prevalent. An incentive to the providers of the service in question may be help-


FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                             35
             ful. In effect, such cases could combine a demand-side incentive though the CCT with
             PBF to incentivize the supply side. This increases the complexity and potentially the
             cost of the intervention.
        •	   Potential negative impact on intrinsic motivation. When CCT is used to increase the
             utilization of predetermined services, the use of cash alone may affect what otherwise
             may have been an intrinsic motivation to seek a service. It may be possible that the
             prescribed services would not be highly valued by the community and that they may
             consider themselves to simply be paid to use the services, rather than fully valuing the
             usefulness of the service.
        •	   Sometimes financial incentives may not be enough to overcome entrenched beliefs
             and socio-cultural barriers. It is often the case that the barriers to behavior change
             lie at the community level where norms are set. Therefore, information, education,
             and communication campaigns need to accompany any type of transfers that seek to
             change behaviors, and perhaps also community-based incentives.
        •	   Risk that the behavior change attained by a cash transfer program may not be sus-
             tained after the incentive stops. In nutrition programs, if the cash was intended to
             finance food security and access to health services, it may be necessary to ensure con-
             tinued availability of resources over relatively long periods. However, in a cash trans-
             fer program, which targeted households with children during the first 1,000 days,
             households could enter the program for a relatively shorter time. Cash transfer pro-
             grams are increasingly focusing on concurrently building the capacity of households
             to become more productive so as to eventually “graduate” and become economically
             independent.

        Examples of Country Experience	
        Bangladesh, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Guatema-
        la, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Madagascar,
        Mali, Nepal, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Tanzania


      • Public Works Programs (PWP)
        Definition	
        •	   A public works program (PWP) involves the provision of temporary paid employ-
             ment by the creation of predominantly public goods for targeted beneficiaries. The
             works are generally labor intensive and require few or no skills.
        •	   PWP have traditionally financed the construction or rehabilitation of infrastructure
             (e.g., feeder roads, small dams, etc.) as well as works to preserve the environment
             (e.g., reforestation, terracing, etc.). However, these programs have started financing
             other forms of employment, which are more directly relevant for nutrition, such as
             agriculture and child care.
        •	   A PWP functions as a form of productive social safety net by providing an income to
             targeted households or individuals in exchange for their labor. Payments can be in-kind
             or, more frequently, in cash. Wages are set sufficiently low to avoid substitution effects
             with other employment. Targeting is done either on the basis of income measures (e.g.,
             proxy means test) or by self-targeting, by setting the wage sufficiently low to attract
             only poor people. Some programs intentionally target women, or have women quotas,
             and provide complementary services (e.g., child care) to enable their participation.
        •	   In light of the obvious limitations of temporary employment, PWP are increasingly pro-


36	                                                       Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
             viding complementary services aimed at helping beneficiaries find sustainable liveli-
             hoods. They include various types of training, “forced” savings, and matching grants.
        •	   The programs can be used as part of an overall national social protection strategy and
             / or provided in response to a humanitarian crisis.

        Potential Strengths	
        •	   Target the poor. In addition to the poverty targeting (e.g., proxy means test), when
             the wages are set at the right level, PWPs create a self-targeting mechanism which
             tends to work well because only those poor enough to consider the low wages at-
             tractive will present themselves for work. Because of the link between poverty and
             nutrition, the participants of PWPs are more likely to belong to households with high
             levels of malnutrition.
        •	   Can provide a platform to transmit nutrition messages and build skills. Increasingly,
             PWPs have a longer-term vision and contain skills development training to enable the
             individuals to overcome the barriers that are keeping them trapped in poverty. The
             training sessions offer a platform to transmit information about nutrition.
        •	   Could have sustainable livelihoods component linked to nutrition-related microen-
             terprises. The training and savings component of a PWP could encourage participants
             to develop microenterprises to meet specific nutrition needs of the community. For
             example, participants could develop local low-cost vitamin fortified complementary
             food for children.
        •	   Works can build nutrition-related infrastructure. Even a more traditional PWP
             could apply a nutrition lens in the selection of the infrastructure that would be built or
             rehabilitated. Priorities could include, for example, latrines for girls at schools (to prolong
             school attendance for girls), infrastructure for irrigation, and storage of vitamin rich crops.
        •	   Good match with intrinsic motivation. Because they have worked for their wage, the
             incentive may have less negative impact on intrinsic motivation. Participants would
             feel they have earned their incentive, thus enhancing the sense of pride and self-re-
             spect among the beneficiaries.
        •	   Could provide a platform for community processes. Inasmuch as PWPs are opportu-
             nities for people to get together and work together, they could be used as a platform
             to start organizing the community for nutritionally minded collective action, e.g., re-
             moving conditions that enable mosquitos to breed and transmit malaria or improving
             access to water and the sanitary environment. The training provided by the program
             could provide a good starting point.
        •	   Potential for inter-sectoral convergence. PWPs provide a great opportunity for in-
             ter-sectoral action. The benefits go beyond health or nutrition and could yield broader
             developmental impact. If a PWP sets itself an objective to contribute to improving nu-
             trition, it can forge useful linkages with other relevant sectors. For example, the PWP
             can partner with the health system to identify malnourished kids in the families of the
             beneficiary workers, and provide nutrition services where required.
        •	   Flexibility for households. If payments are in cash, households will dispose of addi-
             tional income to spend freely. When combined with appropriate educational programs,
             the additional income could be put to good use and enhance food security and house-
             hold nutrition status.
        •	   Non-controversial entry point for nutrition. In countries that may have sensitivities
             related to their malnutrition rates, combining nutrition interventions into an existing
             PWP may be a good way to start remedying the problem.


FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                                   37
      ETHIOPIA P146883
      PRODUCTIVE SAFETY NETS PROJECT 4 (PSNP-4)
      Project development objective (PDO).        insecurity for program participants;         e-payment. 80 percent of the house-
      To increase access to safety net and        increase in average value of household       holds are paid in return for working in
      disaster risk management systems,           assets; and access of client households      the public works. But these public works
      complementary livelihoods services          to community-based nutrition services,       programs include attending behavior
      and nutrition support for food inse-        including behavioral change communi-         change sessions. Work requirements
      cure households in rural Ethiopia.          cation provided under the national nutri-    are exempted for pregnant women and
                                                  tion program. At the intermediate level,     those with young children. 20 percent
      Results of interest. Improved house-        the project includes a few nutrition-spe-    of the households receive UCT (house-
      hold food security, livelihoods and         cific indicators: clients reporting that     holds without able-bodied members).
      nutrition, and enhanced household           they can provide adequate meals for          The incentives are “soft” (encourag-
      and community resilience to shocks.         their family for 12 months a year (male /    ing) incentives / “nudges” not “hard”
                                                  female); transfers that have a value of at   conditions. There has been an evolution
      Indicators. At the PDO-level, the project   least 15 kg of cereals and 4 kg of pulses.   of increasing attention to nutrition
      measures progress in transition to a so-                                                 under PSNP. In the first PSNP, the only
      cial protection system; progress towards    Operational modality. Public works           conditionality was that Ethiopia should
      developing improved early warning           program with cash or food is given. The      have a nutrition policy. In PSNP-4, there
      triggers and agreed response mecha-         cash component is the equivalent of          is much more nutrition sensitivity.
      nisms; the net number of months of food     2,100 calories worth of food, cash or




                          Potential Challenges	
                          •	   Does not reach those who cannot work. Those who are unable to work because of age,
                               health status or family responsibilities are excluded from PWPs. So, complementary
                               programs such as cash transfers should be available to reach those households.
                          •	   No guarantees that nutrition behaviors will improve. Payments are generally given to
                               the workers, which in most cases mean payments will go to men. While poor women
                               tend to prioritize investments in human capital when they obtain additional income—
                               including better quality food, education and health services (all critical inputs for good
                                         —this is less true when the income is controlled by men, especially if the
                               nutrition)­
                               PWP does not include communication on nutrition as an accompanying measure.
                          •	   Labor-intensive works can be energy intensive and could actually aggravate mal-
                               nutrition. Most PWPs require hard physical labor, and the additional food pur-
                               chased with the wages may not offset the caloric loss (or the worker may simply not
                               increase his / her food intake and use the extra money for something else). In this
                               situation, aggravating a low body mass index situation is a risk for participants. This
                               poses a problem especially for women of child bearing age and would lead to low
                               birth weight babies.
                          •	   May be difficult to change the mindset. Some public works agencies are accus-
                               tomed to infrastructure work. It is a mindset change to have them work on social
                               sector activities.
                          •	   Horizon tends to be short-term. In most cases, beneficiaries of PWP only work for a
                               few months (4–6). There is therefore a risk that beneficiaries will focus only on short-
                               term employment and the current earning needs of their households.
                          •	   Nutrition may not be recognized as a priority. Many of these social safety net pro-
                               grams may not prioritize nutrition in their results monitoring. They therefore may
                               not result in nutritional improvements even if income poverty is alleviated.



38	                                                                                 Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Potential leakage and corruption. In some countries these PWPs are a source of
             corruption through measures such as falsification of worker lists, etc. The problem
             tends to be more acute when payment is in-kind rather than through cash payments
             made directly to individual bank accounts.

        Examples of Country Experience	
        Argentina, Bangladesh, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Democratic Republic of Congo




FINANCIAL INCENTIVE MECHANISMS APPLIED AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 	                                       39
40	   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Non-Financial Incentives




Effective interventions to achieve nutritional impact will require a mix of financial and non-fi-
nancial incentives. This section provides examples of non-financial incentives that could be con-
sidered at each level of the system. This is not a comprehensive list of non-financial incentives.
An important first step in selecting non-financial incentives, as well as financial incentives, is to
define a clear theory of change.12 It is also critical to understand the social environment in which
the interventions will be introduced, including the norms and mental models of the stakeholders
and beneficiaries. We recommend that readers consult the World Development Report 2015: Mind,
Society, and Behavior for a more detailed discussion about this topic, which should inspire the
selection of appropriate intervention design to best use non-financial incentives.



          National and Sub-National
     •	    Global SUN movement: Prestige of joining “Scaling Up Nutrition / SUN” movement and
           the personal satisfaction related to learning from the SUN tools and networks.
     •	    Costing data: Information on cost-effectiveness of nutrition interventions motivates
           decision-makers to invest for good social returns, e.g., World Bank costing studies.
     •	    Social change campaigns: Visibility of behavior change campaigns can provide social
           capital for political leaders.
     •	    Bilateral dialogue: When international donors include nutrition as part of their overall
           bilateral political dialogue, high-level decision-makers may be motivated, or in some cases
           coerced, to take action.
     •	    Rankings: International rankings, e.g., Human Development Index, can serve as motivators.
     •	    Visits from leaders / summits: World leaders’ visits and international summits (e.g., World
           Bank meeting on stunting in October 2016) can draw attention to malnutrition and thus
           motivate policy-makers either to seek visibility or to avoid being shamed.
     •	    Campaigns and reports: International campaigns and reports, e.g., Global Nutrition Report,
           can cast attention on the issue. Related in-country media coverage and debates can motivate
           leaders and policy-makers to take action.

12
     See Valters, 2015.



NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES 	                                                                               41
      •	   Global events: Events such as World Food Day and the related media coverage can motivate
           leaders and policy-makers to show what they have achieved in nutrition.
      •	   Regular use of data: Annual “nutrition report cards” can generate interest from a range of
           stakeholders and motivate action. These require more robust data systems for nutrition than
           those currently in place.
      •	   Brand recognition: Private companies can get motivated to take action on malnutrition
           because it will boost their brand.
      •	   Learning opportunities: Leaders, policy-makers and other stakeholders such as journalists
           can be motivated to take action on nutrition through learning events such as conferences and
           targeted training programs (e.g., programs targeted at parliamentarians and media leaders).
      •	   Supportive supervision: Program implementers at the national and sub-national level
           could be motivated by the feedback they receive through supervision.
      •	   Recognition: Awards, either to individual leaders or to countries, can be powerful motivators.



           Health Facility
      •	   Information tools: Having appealing information tools could motivate health workers to
           undertake good nutrition counseling.
      •	   Knowledge: Well-trained health workers will be more motivated to include nutrition as
           part of a medical consultation. Too often, nutrition is missing from pre-service or in-ser-
           vice training of health workers.
      •	   Mass media campaigns: While these campaigns are usually aimed primarily at households,
           they have been shown to also have a positive impact on the motivation of health workers.
      •	   Supportive supervision: Health workers could be motivated by the feedback they receive
           through regular supervision.
      •	   Visibility: A nutrition program could be designed to provide visibility for health facility
           workers, conferring them status in the community and possibilities of promotion into high-
           er levels of the health system.
      •	   Recognition: Awards are important motivators; these could be for individual workers or for
           entire health facilities.
      •	   Benchmarking: The use of data to establish performance standards and then using these
           standards to compare health facilities, as done in PBF, could be a motivator for health fa-
           cility workers.
      •	   Availability of supplies: Without specific supplies, e.g., zinc supplements, some nutrition
           services cannot be offered. Long periods of stock outs of these supplies could demotivate
           workers to provide these services. Conversely, the availability of the supply could serve as
           a reminder that the services should be offered.



           Community
      •	   Information tools: Having appealing information tools could motivate the community health
           worker or other community platforms to undertake good nutrition counseling. ICT tools ap-
           pear to boost the status of the community health worker in communities where tools such as
           tablets and smart phones are still a novelty.
      •	   Knowledge: Community workers are more motivated when they feel they have knowledge
           they can bring to the community. For example, the community is motivated by knowledge


42	                                                          Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
       that they can take collective action in areas such as removing the conditions required for the
       transmission of malaria.
  •	   Shame: Some social norms can be shifted through shaming, e.g., shifting the norms surround-
       ing the role of men in child feeding practices, or the norms around open defecation.
  •	   Data: Communities could be motivated by a sense of accomplishment that would come from
       knowing that their children are growing better or have lower levels of anemia. This would re-
       quire having data platforms that send this signal to communities on a regular basis.
  •	   Positive deviance: Positive deviance analysis, i.e., identifying households in the community
       where children are developing normally despite having access to similar resources, can be
       motivating to communities because it shows them that they have the ability to improve their
       situation with minimal need for external resources.
  •	   Visibility: Highly visible programs, e.g., vitamin A distributions, can be motivating both for
       caretakers and for workers and thus reach high levels of coverage.
  •	   Priority access to services: In some countries, community health workers may not receive a
       financial payment, but they have priority access to some free services such as health care and
       credit. This can serve as an important motivator, particularly if these services do not have the
       ability to cover the entire community.
  •	   Mass media campaigns: While these campaigns are usually aimed primarily at households,
       they have been shown to also have a positive impact on the motivation of community workers.
  •	   Recognition: Awards and other forms of recognition, either to individual workers or to entire
       communities, can serve as important motivators. An example is conferring on a community
       the status of being “open defecation free.”



       Households
  •	   Information: Parents who learn that well-nourished children perform better in school and
       earn more during their adult years are motivated to take action. Often caretakers are not
       performing certain behaviors because they do not know the benefits of the behavior.
  •	   Growth monitoring: If accompanied by appropriate counseling, growth monitoring can
       be a powerful tool to motivate parents to take action when their child is growth faltering.
  •	   Mass media campaigns: While these campaigns are usually aimed primarily at households,
       they have been shown to also have a positive impact on the motivation of health workers.
  •	   Nudges: Encouraging households that receive a cash payment either as part of a cash trans-
       fer program or as part of a public works program could motivate parents to modify their
       consumption patterns in favor of services and food that improve the nutritional status of
       women and children in the household.
  •	   Availability of a product: When a product such as micronutrient powders to fortify a child’s
       food directly on the plate is available in the household, it can serve as a motivator to change
       certain behaviors, in this case, starting complementary feeding at six-months of age.
  •	   Recognition of status: Nutrition-related behaviors in a household involve several individ-
       uals, but in the past, most messages have been directed mainly at the mother. Recognizing
       that the grandmother and the father are important decision makers and directly involving
       them in interventions can serve as motivators for behavior change.
  •	   Gender: Actions to increase the agency of women within the household are important mo-
       tivators for these women, which can have an impact on malnutrition.




NON-FINANCIAL INCENTIVES 	                                                                                43
44	   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Gaps to Consider when Integrating
Nutrition in World Bank Operations




In most countries, what will be needed to reinforce the nutrition system will exceed available
resources. An important first step for a World Bank team is to assess the various aspects of the nu-
trition system to gauge the priority gaps and to determine where and how the World Bank could
add the most value. In this process, it is important to clearly understand what other partners are
currently doing or planning for nutrition programming.



Value Added of the World Bank
The World Bank’s value proposition will depend on a range of factors, including the overall level
of development of the nutrition system, the results of the gap analysis, the level of resources and
government capacity, and the activities and plans of its development partners. Some areas that
are often at the core of the World Bank’s value proposition in nutrition include:
  i.	 Positioning nutrition at the highest levels as an economic development issue, e.g., Prime
      Minister, Minister of Finance
  ii.	 Convening a range of development partners, including the private sector
  iii.	 Supporting the design of large-scale programs
  iv.	 Strengthening service delivery systems, e.g., information systems, supply and logistics sys-
       tems, procurement and financial management systems
  v.	 Financing large-scale programs
  vi.	 Supporting the use of evidence for decision making, including costing data and economic
       analysis
  vii.	 Drawing on global experience of what is effective in all the nutrition-related sectors


GAPS TO CONSIDER WHEN INTEGRATING NUTRITION IN WORLD BANK OPERATIONS 	                                 45
      When conducting this analysis, World Bank teams may also find it useful to consult the tools
      developed by the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) movement (see Annex 2 references). While the
      specific decision pathway for prioritizing actions is highly dependent on the country context,
      questions that should be asked include the following.

      Policy Environment
       •	   Is there sufficient political support for nutrition from a wide range of stakeholders?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: stakeholder survey, advocacy strategy, strategic communications
                  plan.
       •	   Are there clear champions for nutrition? Are there opponents? What are their interests?
             ɅɅ Possible actions: political economy analysis, advocacy strategy, strategic communi-
                  cations plan.
       •	   Is there a common narrative on the causes of and solutions for malnutrition in the country?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: develop a common narrative document based on the analysis of the
                   determinants of malnutrition, e.g., secondary analysis of Demographic and Health
                   Surveys (DHS) and other surveys; ensure full ownership of the narrative by all rele-
                   vant stakeholders.
       •	   Does the country have an evidence-based nutrition policy and strategy?
             ɅɅ Possible actions: TA for development / updating the policy and strategy.
       •	   Are the related legal instruments in place, e.g., regulations for food fortification?
             ɅɅ Possible actions: TA for the development of the legal instruments.
       •	   Is there sufficient willingness and capacity to enforce regulations for nutrition?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: political economy analysis, TA to reinforce capacity for regulation.

      Governance and Institutional
       •	   Is there sufficiently strong accountability for achieving nutrition results?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: annual scorecard, media engagement.
       •	   How aware is the general population of nutrition issues?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: national media campaign targeting the most critical nutrition-re-
                 lated behaviors.
       •	   Do regulatory systems function well?
             ɅɅ Possible actions: political economy analysis of specific regulatory systems, e.g., food
                 fortification and food safety regulations, address specific barriers such as capacity,
                 corruption, etc.

      Financing
       •	   Is nutrition sufficiently financed? Is the financing of nutrition well understood?
              ɅɅ Possible action: Public expenditure review and fiscal space analysis.
       •	   Have clear priorities been set for nutrition financing?
             ɅɅ Possible action: Costing analysis that identifies cost and benefits of priority interven-
                 tions and models various scenarios for scaling up.
       •	   Is nutrition well reflected in the annual planning process, e.g., annual health plans, annual
            agriculture plans?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: TA to support integration of nutrition in the planning process.
       •	   Is adequate financing allocated to nutrition by the government and development partners?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: advocacy, public expenditure review, TA for participatory budgeting.


46	                                                            Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Partnerships
  •	   Is there a common platform for coordination, led by a senior government official, optimal-
       ly an individual above sectoral ministries, e.g., in the Prime Minister or President’s Office?
         ɅɅ Possible actions: advocacy to create the platform, e.g., obtain Prime Minister com-
              mitment, TA and financial support to establish a secretariat for coordination.
  •	   Has the country joined the SUN movement? Are the SUN networks functional, i.e., do-
       nors, multilaterals, private sector, civil society?
         ɅɅ Potential actions: advocacy to have the country join SUN, World Bank to join donors
             group, financing of TA for the coordination structure, e.g., a Secretariat.
  •	   How engaged is the private sector in nutrition?
        ɅɅ Possible actions: specific engagement strategy for the private sector, ensuring regula-
            tory framework incentivizes the private sector to engage.
  •	   Are national media engaged with the issue?
        ɅɅ Potential actions: training for leading journalists on the fundamentals of nutrition,
            organizing media debates on the issue.
  •	   Who are the leading academics generating knowledge on nutrition in the country? Are
       they aligned with global best practice in the field?
         ɅɅ Potential actions: financing for key researchers to participate in global nutrition
             conferences, TA to support leading universities, e.g., developing or reinforcing the
             capacity of research and teaching programs on agriculture so they become nutri-
             tion-sensitive.
  •	   What role is civil society playing?
        ɅɅ Possible actions: TA to engage civil society organizations that are not working on the
            issue, e.g., sensitization, technical assistance for those who want to develop advocacy
            or programs, challenge fund to incentivize innovations in program delivery, contract-
            ing community-based organizations for service delivery, e.g., performance-based
            contracting or performance-based financing.

Information, Monitoring, and Learning
  •	   Is there a common results framework for nutrition?
         ɅɅ Possible actions: TA to develop the common results framework, political analysis to
            understand the interests of different stakeholders.
  •	   How recently was national / sub-national information collected on nutritional status and
       program implementation?
         ɅɅ Possible actions: finance a national nutrition survey; ensure that nutrition is well cov-
            ered in household surveys such as Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), Multiple
            Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS), poverty surveys, etc.
  •	   What system is in place to produce routine data on nutrition, i.e., on nutritional status and
       on program implementation?
         ɅɅ Potential actions: review which nutrition indicators are included in the health in-
            formation management system (HMIS) and other sectoral management information
            systems, TA to enhance the utilization of the data for decision making, establishment
            of a “light” sentinel site data collection system for nutrition.
  •	   Are there opportunities for the government and development partners to come together to
       learn about effective programs?
         ɅɅ Potential actions: support a national institution, e.g., academic or civil society, to



GAPS TO CONSIDER WHEN INTEGRATING NUTRITION IN WORLD BANK OPERATIONS 	                                  47
                  undertake regular reviews of “good practices” and to organize workshops to share
                  lessons. The good practice reviews can serve as an incentive for implementers to
                  document more systematically their experience.


      Planning and Implementation Capacity
       •	   Do officials at the national and sub-national, e.g., district, levels have sufficient capacity to
            plan and monitor nutrition interventions?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: training, results-based contracts.
       •	   Do health workers have sufficient capacity to implement nutrition interventions?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: training and incentives for workers.
       •	   Does the country have a cadre of community health and nutrition workers? Do other com-
            munity platforms exist?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: TA for policy and guidelines on community-based services; training
                 and incentives for community workers.


      Service Delivery
       •	   Is there consensus on a “priority package” of nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive in-
            terventions that needs to be financed and scaled up?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: evidence review, taking into consideration specific characteristics
                 of the country, costing of interventions and benefits, TA for the development of stra-
                 tegic and implementation plans, study tours / workshops to learn from other coun-
                 tries’ experiences.
       •	   What is the current coverage of nutrition-specific interventions (see Table 1)?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: support for the scale up of specific low coverage interventions. This
                 is usually through the health sector, but some interventions could be implemented
                 through other sectors.
       •	   Are the agriculture / water and sanitation / education / social protection systems nutri-
            tion-sensitive? Has a theory of change for nutrition been developed in each sector? Does
            each system specifically track nutrition-related results?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: develop theory of change, identify a key actions and support im-
                 plementation, including measurement of nutrition-related results, support rigorous
                 evaluation of interventions that are not yet supported by evidence.


      Specific Targeting Measures
       •	   What is the social-economic composition of the population? Are there specific groups that
            tend to suffer from social exclusion? How many languages are required to communicate
            effectively with the population? How much cultural variation would be expected in the
            population, e.g., taboos related to maternal and child feeding?
              ɅɅ Possible actions: build in flexibility in the interventions so they are delivered appro-
                 priately to different groups, e.g., materials in different languages, community–based
                 approaches that leave the community flexibility on how to address certain challeng-
                 es so they are appropriate for their own group, targeting of specific groups, which are
                 often socially excluded (and tracking results separately).




48	                                                            Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
  •	   What are the gender dynamics in the population?
        ɅɅ Possible actions: ensure interventions are gender sensitive; include interventions to
           improve gender sensitivity; target interventions to specific genders, e.g., men’s groups
           to discuss malnutrition, targeting of grandmothers.


Supplies and Logistics
  •	   Do health facilities and community platforms have sufficient commodities e.g., supple-
       ments, information materials, and weighing scales, to deliver nutrition interventions?
        ɅɅ Possible actions: finance gaps in commodities, strengthening the supply and logistics
           system capacity to forecast requirements and manage stocks.
  •	   Does the supply and logistics system need reinforcement to handle nutrition-related com-
       modities?
        ɅɅ Possible actions: TA to strengthen the supply and logistics system, inclusion of nutri-
           tion commodities in performance-based contracts for the supply chain.



Issues to Consider when Prioritizing
How should a World Bank team prioritize the wide range of potential nutrition actions? There is
not one simple answer, but some of the following principles could guide the prioritization.
Identify the results of interest, theory of change, and critical bottlenecks. The starting point
for project planning should be (a) to identify clearly the project’s targeted results, e.g., improved
behaviors for infant and young child feeding or increases in coverage of key nutrition services,
(b) to articulate a clear theory of change on how to achieve the results, and then (c) to address
the most critical bottlenecks to achieving the results. The results of interest could be directly
related to beneficiaries in the critical 1,000 day window, or they could be other types of results,
such as systems strengthening, political commitment, etc. The bottlenecks will vary based on the
environment in which the project will be implemented. The list of questions above would help
identify the main potential bottlenecks.
Focus on scaling up where the evidence is strongest. The evidence is currently strongest for
nutrition-specific interventions but their coverage is often still suboptimal in many countries.
Priority should be given to scaling up nutrition-specific interventions, while at the same time
developing approaches to deliver nutrition-sensitive interventions. Particularly in the latter case,
investments should be made to evaluate and document nutrition interventions to contribute to
the operational evidence base.
Understand the political economy and be opportunistic. Be clear on the opportunities that may
exist at different times to support specific aspects of nutrition in a country. Some influential ac-
tors may be pushing for health system reforms, e.g., strengthening of the supply system of the
health management information system (HMIS), in which nutrition could be included. During
some periods, such as during the lead up to elections, it tends to be politically easier to implement
more visible initiatives, e.g., treatment of severe acute malnutrition, micronutrient supplemen-
tation campaigns, etc. It is important to understand and seize such opportunities to advance a
nutrition agenda. It is also possible to conduct political economy analysis to help identify how to
proactively create opportunities to implement nutrition advocacy strategies.
Achieve a balance between reaching target beneficiaries and systems strengthening. To reduce
child stunting, maternal malnutrition, and micronutrient deficiencies, the quantity and quality
of services—including messages—that reach the intended beneficiaries, e.g., women and chil-


GAPS TO CONSIDER WHEN INTEGRATING NUTRITION IN WORLD BANK OPERATIONS 	                                  49
        dren during the first 1,000 days, will need to be the main focus. It is unlikely that nutrition ser-
        vices would be delivered in a void. Therefore, reinforcing the systems that deliver the services
        is also necessary. System strengthening will also help to enhance sustainability. Activities to
        strengthen systems should be balanced with activities enabling service delivery to the targeted
        beneficiaries. In nutrition, as in public health more broadly, a dichotomy exists between propo-
        nents of “campaign-style” delivery, which achieves high levels of equitable coverage, and advo-
        cates of systems strengthening. It may be more appropriate to merge the two positions, whereby
        campaigns at regular intervals become a routine outreach approach to extend the delivery of
        health services.
        Harmonize with development partners and identify the value proposition for the World Bank.
        The World Bank is just one of the development partners active in nutrition programming in
        developing countries (see section below). If the country is a member of the global Scaling Up
        Nutrition (SUN) movement, it is likely that the partners are organized into specific networks as
        follows: donors, including the World Bank, UN agencies, civil society, and business. An import-
        ant step in prioritizing the focus of World Bank support is to map out what each development
        partner is doing and what is the Bank’s comparative advantage.



                      Targeting of Nutrition Interventions
To the                To the extent possible, nutrition interventions should be targeted to maximize effi-
                      ciency. The following types of targeting need to be considered.
extent                •	 Age: Interventions need to target women and children during the first 1,000
                          days from conception to the child’s second birthday. Maternal nutrition inter-
possible,                 ventions should include adolescent girls, e.g., to delay age of first pregnancy,
                          address adolescent anemia before pregnancy, etc.
nutrition              •	   Socio-economic: While households from all income quintiles are affected
                            by malnutrition, those from the poorest two quintiles are consistently more
interventions               affected, and they also tend to have less access to health services. Special mea-

should be                   sures should be taken to ensure that services reach these poorer households.
                            Similarly, communities who suffer from social exclusion should be targeted.
targeted to           •	    Gender: While there are no longer significant differences in nutritional
                            status of young girls versus young boys, gender dynamics amongst adults in
maximize                    the household continue to be a strong determining factor of malnutrition for
                            women and children in the household. In recent decades, much focus has been
efficiency.                 given to targeting women in gender empowerment interventions for nutrition,
                            which has often left out men. The emphasis needs to be re-shifted to a “whole
                            household” approach ensuring that those who wield the most power, often the
                            men and the grandmothers, are included in the discussions.
          •	   Opinion leaders: Behavior change is a core intervention to achieve most nutrition
               results. Community members are more likely to adopt new behaviors if a leader in their
               community— either their geographic or their social community —has already adopted the
               behavior. Programs should target these opinion leaders first. For example, it may be more
               effective to also target wealthier individuals in communications for a new product such as
               micronutrient powders, not only because their children would benefit, but also because of
               the demonstration effect they will have on less wealthy households.
          •	   Interventions: Some nutrition interventions, by their very nature, are targeted at spe-
               cific groups. Iron tablets are targeted at pregnant women and adolescent girls, zinc sup-



50	                                                              Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
      plements for treating diarrhea are targeted at children suffering from diarrhea, vitamin A
      supplementation is targeted at children aged six to 59 months, etc.
 •	   Geographic: Some areas within countries are often more heavily affected by malnutri-
      tion, and these could be targeted. When selecting geographic areas to target, other factors
      should also be considered, such as the presence of other development partners, the ease
      of implementation and thus likelihood of success, and the political interest in some areas,
      which would provide visibility for results.




GAPS TO CONSIDER WHEN INTEGRATING NUTRITION IN WORLD BANK OPERATIONS 	                              51
52	   CONCLUSIONS 	   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium   52
Indicators for Incentive-Based
Operations with Nutrition Results




Monitoring indicators should be SMART: Specific, Measurable, Attributable, Realistic / Rel-
evant and Time-Bound. This is even more important when incentive payments are linked to
achieving results. Although indicators could connote outputs or outcomes, it is generally more
appropriate to link incentive payments to outputs or intermediate outcomes—rather than to final
nutritional status outcomes. Improvements in nutritional status take much longer to materialize,
and could be affected by factors beyond the control of whoever is to be incentivized. While direct
measures of nutrition results are preferable, proxies may have to be used.
  To target the incentive instrument to the right behaviors, a clear theory of change needs to be
formulated and borne in mind. The results chain should include actions / behaviors at various
levels, so that appropriate behaviors are incentivized at the relevant levels. The theory of change
would take account of policies and programs at the government levels, supply-side readiness at
the service delivery levels, the social mobilization and empowerment at the community level, and
the eating / feeding / caring behaviors at the household and individual level. The ability to verify
the achievement of targets—and to counter verify independently as necessary—is often a critical
factor in selecting financial incentive indicators.
  The basic framework for the causation of malnutrition is the starting point for the theory of
change. Three broad sets of determinants are often cited as resulting in good or bad nutrition.
They are household food security, access to quality health care services, and behavioral factors—gen-
erally referred to as the triad of food, health, and care. Therefore, the policies, programs, services,
and behaviors that affect any of these three sets of determinants need to be clearly identified, and
the incentive instruments need to be applied at the appropriate levels where the instruments are
expected to be effective.


INDICATORS FOR INCENTIVE-BASED OPERATIONS WITH NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                        53
      Government Level
        evelopment policy financing
      •D
      Development policy financing indicators can incentivize behaviors relating to nutrition-sen-
      sitive policies, budgeting, and other stewardship functions, such as multisectoral coordi-
      nation and accountability, as well as legislation, and achievement of plans. The incentive
      would “wedge” nutrition into the overall national and subnational policy and stewardship
      agenda. Potential indicators at this level include:
          •	 Increased allocation and expenditure on programs / activities contributing to nutri-
              tion (nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive)
         •	   Preparation, approval, and adoption of a comprehensive nutrition strategy, and a ful-
              ly costed national action plan, reflected clearly in the budget. Indicators could also
              track major milestones in the implementation of the strategy
         •	   Establishment and functioning of a high-level multisectoral coordination structure
         •	   Establishment of integrated management information systems that include appro-
              priate data on nutrition indicators
         •	   Nutrition-sensitive agricultural policies
         •	   Legislation mandating appropriate food fortification with micronutrients
         •	   Legislation on food safety
         •	   Legislation on nutritional content of certain foods, e.g., banning sugary drinks
         •	   Existence and functioning of enforcement mechanisms for regulation of food fortifi-
              cation, food safety, nutritional contents of food, etc.
         •	   Social safety net programs that are nutrition-sensitive, that go beyond income gen-
              eration, and promote better household behaviors aimed at improved nutrition status
         •	   Education policy and programs that are sensitive to nutrition, such as an educational
              curriculum that includes substantive nutrition content and a program of extracurric-
              ular activities on behavior change for nutrition
         •	   Labor laws are changed to mandate crèches and breastfeeding rooms for female em-
              ployees
         •	   Country-specific reform measures, e.g., improved targeting measures to focus on the
              first 1,000 days

        rogram for Results (PforR / DLI) and Performance Based Budgeting (PBB)
      •P
      PforR / DLI and PBB can use a combination of policy reform indicators (see above), as well
      as service delivery indicators. The specific service delivery indicators would depend on
      which services need to be incentivized the most—keeping in mind factors such as strength
      of evidence, cost-effectiveness, affordability, low coverage, relative newness of the interven-
      tion, etc. While incentivizing service delivery through these mechanisms, measures should
      be taken to assess quality—even if it complicates the process—as well as quantity.
        The targets for some of these indicators could evolve over the life of a project, starting at
      more modest levels and progressively reaching higher levels, including behavior change.
      One way of conceptualizing the process would be to define “results streams” and to set
      progressively more difficult disbursement linked indicators along the results chain for each
      stream. An example of such a results stream could be as follows.
         •	 Year 1: Districts sign a performance agreement to implement a set of high-impact nutri-
              tion interventions



54	                                                       Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Year 1.5: Community workers’ knowledge of appropriate infant and young child feeding
             (IYCF) practices
        •	   Year 2: Availability (coverage) of community counseling services for IYCF
        •	   Year 2.5: Caretakers’ knowledge of young children for IYCF practices
        •	   Year 3: Appropriate IYCF practices, with increases in targets over subsequent periods
    Service delivery indicators for PforR / DLI and PBB could include:
        •	   Districts included in a national social registry for targeting the poorest and most vul-
             nerable households
        •	   Districts implementing a nutrition sensitive social protection program
        •	   Districts, or other locally relevant subnational administrative units, with at least 80
             percent of community health workers / midwives trained to deliver a package of core
             nutrition services. A more ambitious indicator would incentivize the knowledge of
             workers, but that will be more difficult to assess.
        •	   Districts implementing a nutrition sensitive agriculture program
        •	   Districts, or other subnational administrative units, where at least 80 percent of pri-
             mary health centers offer community based nutrition counselling services
        •	   Health facilities with all the inputs—human resources, equipment, supplies, as per
             checklist—required to provide comprehensive nutrition services to pregnant and
             lactating women and under-five children
        •	   Districts, or other subnational administrative unit as appropriate, where more than
             90 percent of the population has access to safe water and sanitary facilities
        •	   Women 15–49 years of age, and under-two children who have received a basic pack-
             age of reproductive health and nutrition services
        •	   Caretakers and influencers who demonstrate a minimum level of infant and young
             child feeding knowledge
        •	   Children 0–6 months who are exclusively breastfed
        •	   Children at age six months receiving complementary food



     Health Facility Level
     •
      Performance Based Financing and Performance Based Contracting
     In performance based financing, payment is made on the basis of the quantity and quality of
     pre-identified individual services provided. Rates paid for the achievement of each service
     are pre-established, so that the incentives are clear to providers, and can be adjusted over
     time. Quality checklists are used periodically as complementary tools and the performance
     on the quality review is a factor in the total payment. Payments are also often adjusted to
     account for the additional cost of operating in certain areas, e.g., remote areas of a country.
       When developing indicators to use in a PBF scheme, attention must be paid to ensuring
     that (i) the services selected have a clear operational definition that is easy to understand,
     e.g., what is the minimum content of the service; (ii) services are easily measurable; (iii)
     verifiers are able to extract the data on the service from registers or files; (iv) the name of
     an individual who received the services is identifiable so that the services can be verified
     and counter-verified; (v) services are provided on a regular basis so that health facilities can
     obtain payments regularly, i.e., at least quarterly; and (vi) not too many services are incentiv-
     ized, i.e., a maximum of 25, due to the intensity of the verification and counter-verification.


INDICATORS FOR INCENTIVE-BASED OPERATIONS WITH NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                       55
        Most of the experiences with PBF to date have been with services that fall under the
      responsibility of a health facility, i.e., services provided directly by facility workers or by
      community outreach workers that are accountable to a health facility. However, the PBF
      approach is increasingly being used to incentivize other levels of the system to ensure the
      alignment of incentives for effective service delivery.
        Iron supplementation during pregnancy is one example of a nutrition service that could be
      incentivized with PBF. The quantity indicator could be the antenatal visits (first to fourth),
      which is a fairly standard indicator in PBF schemes, and which is when iron tablets and the
      related antenatal counseling should be provided. It may therefore be unnecessary to add a
      new quantity-related indicator. Alternatively, the indicator “pregnant women receiving a
      course of iron / folic acid tablets during ANC visits” may be used. In the quality checklist, the
      availability of iron tablets in the facility and the quality of counseling, tested by the knowl-
      edge of the health worker, could be incentivized. At higher levels in the system, other critical
      elements could be incentivized—such as up-to-date policy and implementation guidance
      for iron supplementation, timely availability of supplies in the supply chain, and inclusion of
      information on iron supplementation in the community mobilization policy—either through
      a PBF approach or a PforR within the same project. Similar approaches could be devel-
      oped for most of the core nutrition-specific nutrition interventions outlined in Table 1. Some
      of the interventions, e.g., promotion of exclusive breastfeeding, lend themselves better to
      incentivizing the delivery of messages (payment of information sessions) and beneficiary
      knowledge than the breastfeeding behavior because that behavior is difficult to verify.
        Examples of quantitative nutrition indicators for a PBF approach include:
         •	   Children 0–24 months who receive a predefined package of essential nutrition ser-
              vices, meeting agreed quality standards / national protocol through a facility nutri-
              tion visit
         •	   Pregnant and lactating women who receive a predefined package of essential nutri-
              tion services meeting agreed quality standards / national protocol through a facility
              visit; it could be the antenatal or child vaccination visit
         •	   Pregnant and lactating women who receive iron / folic acid supplements
         •	   Children 0–59 months with diarrhea receiving appropriate treatment with zinc and
              oral rehydration solution
         •	   Children 6–59 months receiving vitamin A supplementation every six months
         •	   Children 6–24 months receiving micronutrient powders to improve the quality of
              the diet
         •	   Children receiving deworming treatment every six months
         •	   Children 11–59 months old successfully treated for severe acute malnutrition
         •	   Children 0–59 months receiving household visits for nutrition promotion, including
              nutrition counseling for the caregiver
         •	   Households with pregnant women and / or under-five children visited by a health
              worker and provided outreach services including nutrition
        Elements to consider in the PBF quality checklist for nutrition services include:
         •	   Workers’ knowledge of key child feeding and caring behaviors
         •	   Quality of counseling on child feeding and caring behaviors
         •	   Availability of nutrition supplies, e.g., vitamin A, zinc, oral rehydration solution, iron
              / folic acid supplements, micronutrient powders, etc.




56	                                                       Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        •	   Availability and quality of nutrition counseling behavior change materials, e.g., post-
             ers, guides, videos, etc.
        •	   Data on women and children in need of nutrition services in the target area
        •	   Data on women and children currently being left out from nutrition services
        •	   Micro plans for community outreach activities
       When PBC is used, a wider list of nutrition indicators can be adopted because the verifi-
     cation usually focuses on coverage of services and not on the payment of individual services,
     such as in PBF. Examples of nutrition indicators for a PBC approach include:
        •	   Children 0–24 months who receive a predefined package of essential nutrition ser-
             vices, meeting agreed quality standards / national protocol would include counsel-
             ling to caretakers on breastfeeding, complementary feeding, handwashing, etc.
        •	   Pregnant and lactating women who receive a predefined package of essential nutri-
             tion services meeting agreed quality standards / national protocol
        •	   Children 0–59 months with diarrhea receiving appropriate treatment with zinc and
             oral rehydration solution
        •	   Children 6–59 months receiving vitamin A supplementation every six months
        •	   Children receiving deworming treatment every six months
        •	   Children 11–59 months old successfully treated for severe acute malnutrition
        •	   Children 0–59 months receiving household visits for nutrition promotion, including
             nutrition counseling for the caregiver
        •	   Households with pregnant women and / or under-five children visited by a health
             worker and provided outreach services including nutrition
        •	   Children fully immunized



     Community Level
     •
      Community-Based PBF and Community-Based Development (CDD)
      Programs
     In community-based PBF and CDD programs, a main objective is to incentivize results that
     specifically require either community mobilization or collective action to create an envi-
     ronment that enables positive nutrition change to occur. There is a difference, however,
     between community-based PBF and CDD programs. Community-based PBF involves con-
     tracting with a community platform to achieve nutrition results, and payments are linked
     to the achievement of these pre-identified results. CDD programs aim to achieve similar re-
     sults, but payments are not typically linked to these results. Because CDD payments are not
     linked to results, verification is less of a constraint and thus a somewhat wider range of nu-
     trition indicators may be used. However, CDD programs tend to be more “bottom-up” than
     community-based BPF, which enhances ownership but poses an additional challenge that
     malnutrition is not always recognized as a priority by the community. Some of the determi-
     nants of malnutrition, e.g., access to water and sanitation, access to health and education
     services, improved agricultural practices, tend to emerge as community priorities, but not
     with specific nutrition objectives which the evidence demonstrates are critical to achieving
     nutritional impact.
       Both community-based approaches could involve improvements in the physical environ-
     ment, such as removal of physical barriers to accessing services, e.g., by building a small



INDICATORS FOR INCENTIVE-BASED OPERATIONS WITH NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                     57
      bridge to cross a river. It could also involve changing community norms that create barriers
      to certain behaviors, such as norms surrounding the role that men should or should not play
      in infant and young child feeding.
         Collective action could also be incentivized, such as community mapping of malnutrition
      and positive deviance approaches, whereby lessons learned from households with lower or
      no malnutrition are applied to support households with high levels of malnutrition in the
      same community.
         Some nutrition products and services that are typically provided in facilities, e.g., zinc
      and oral rehydration solution for treatment of diarrhea, and services to treat cases of severe
      acute malnutrition without complications, can be provided in community settings. Such
      community-based services may be particularly useful in communities that are either isolat-
      ed geographically or excluded socially, and consequently have less access to health facilities.
         As noted above, one challenge with community-based approaches is that communities
      do not always identify malnutrition as a problem, and therefore, they may not know which
      specific actions to take to address it. In this case, the choice of indicators is all the more
      important because well-chosen indicators will focus the attention of community members
      on improvements. The choice of priority indicators will vary by community and should be
      based on an analysis of the determinants of malnutrition in the community—or at least at
      the next highest administrative level, for example at the district level, where data is more
      likely to be available. Some Bank operations have developed tools to facilitate the analysis of
      determinants of malnutrition at the community level, such as in Nepal. Operations may also
      need to build in a network of technical advisors in CDD operations to “coach” communities
      in making their projects more nutrition-sensitive.
        Indicators that could be used in community-based PBF and CDD programs include:
         •	   Community growth charts, accompanied by information on determinants of malnu-
              trition, displayed at a prominent place in the community and updated regularly
         •	   Positive deviance mapping and related action plans produced
         •	   Children under-five suffering from severe acute malnutrition who are referred by the
              community to an appropriate health facility for management
         •	   Children under-five identified as suffering from severe acute malnutrition who are
              successfully treated through community-based approaches
         •	   Households which have sanitary toilet facilities and safe water supply
         •	   Community members who do not practice open defecation
         •	   Community plan to address food insecurity
         •	   Households using adequately iodized salt for routine consumption
         •	   Pregnant women / mothers of under-five children with the correct knowledge of
              pre-identified minimum, nutrition-related behaviors. Same indicator for men and
              for grandmothers
         •	   Sufficient quantities of zinc and oral rehydration solution available to treat all cases
              of diarrhea in children under-five
         •	   Pregnant and lactating women consuming iron supplements
         •	   Quality checklists (similar to facility level)—applied to community-based events, in-
              cluding testing the quality of the messages




58	                                                      Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
     Household / Individual Level
     •
      Cash Transfer Programs / Public Works Programs
     Cash transfer programs and public works programs each have their respective “core indica-
     tors” to measure the performance of their basic objectives, which is to protect poor house-
     holds from shock and to ensure a minimum income. The income itself can have a positive
     impact on the consumption of nutritious foods, e.g., micronutrient-rich foods, or on the uti-
     lization of health and education services. These outcomes should be tracked.
        Nutrition objectives can be further incentivized through cash transfer and public works
     programs, for example, by linking the cash transfers—through conditions or information
     packages—to the utilization of proven nutrition services (see list in Table 1). Since cash
     transfer programs are increasingly using softer conditions, i.e., less use of hard conditions
     that are difficult and costly to verify, the verifiability of indicators is less of a challenge than
     for performance based financing. It is therefore possible to incentivize results further up the
     chain of worker knowledge • caretaker / beneficiary knowledge • caretaker / beneficiary
     behavior • nutritional impact. This is an important feature because few of the incentive
     mechanisms reviewed in this study have the ability to reach as far up the results chain.
        Public work programs provide additional income and increasing, skills training and other
     related services, e.g., savings. The more innovative programs also ensure that women can do
     work that is less strenuous; thereby decreasing the risk of further reducing their already low
     body mass index (BMI). Training programs for the beneficiaries should focus on some nutri-
     tion-sensitive areas, such as small-scale food processing and fortification. The choice works
     to be constructed through public works programs can also be nutrition-sensitive. Indicators
     that could incentivize nutrition results include:
        •	   Pregnant women who attend antenatal clinics regularly—at least four times during
             pregnancy
        •	   Consumption of iron supplements by women during pregnancy
        •	   BMI of women during pregnancy
        •	   Children fully immunized
        •	   Women and children sleeping under insecticide-treated bednets to prevent malaria
        •	   Household food consumption profile, by gender and age
        •	   Rate of school completion for adolescent girls
        •	   Mothers who report early and exclusive breastfeeding
        •	   Mothers who report appropriate complementary feeding behaviors
        •	   Mothers who participate regularly in nutrition promotion sessions
        •	   Children who receive appropriate oral rehydration therapy and zinc for treatment of
             diarrhea
        •	   Children under-five who consume adequate quantities of multiple micronutrient
             powders along with their regular diet
        •	   Availability of crèches as part of public work programs
        •	   Nutrition-sensitive community infrastructure constructed




INDICATORS FOR INCENTIVE-BASED OPERATIONS WITH NUTRITION RESULTS 	                                          59
60	   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Landscape of Nutrition Partners
Working on Nutrition




Given the magnitude and complexity of the nutrition challenge, working in a cohesive and com-
plementary manner with development partners is critical. When developing a nutrition-sensi-
tive World Bank operation, an important step will be to undertake a mapping of partners and
their priorities, and their areas of support. If the country has joined the Scaling Up Nutrition
(SUN) movement, such a mapping may already exist, and the partners should already be orga-
nized into the following networks: donors, UN agencies, business, and civil society. See www.
scalingupnutrition.org. When mapping nutrition partners, the following types of partners
should be considered.
  •	 Bilateral Donors: Some bilateral donors have prioritized nutrition for decades, where-
      as others have discovered it more recently. Donors are active in policy dialogue at the global
      level and through their bilateral relationships, e.g., through embassies in countries. They
      are also a source of financing for nutrition, either through their bilateral agreements with
      governments, through their contributions to multilateral agencies, or through direct agree-
      ments with implementation agencies such as nongovernmental organizations. They have
      traditionally distinguished between nutrition as part of an emergency response and human-
      itarian assistance or as part of addressing the long-term aspects of malnutrition—notably
      stunting and micronutrient deficiencies. Some donors have separate divisions responsible
      for each part of their programming areas. Increasingly, these two types of assistance are
      merging into a continuum. Some of the donors have a stronger interest in financing nutri-
      tion-specific interventions, whereas others have chosen to build on their preexisting priori-
      ty areas, such as agriculture, and to make those investments more nutrition-sensitive.


LANDSCAPE OF NUTRITION PARTNERS WORKING ON NUTRITION 	                                                 61
          •	   Multilateral institutions: A range of multilateral institutions are active partners
               in nutrition. All are active in the policy arena—nationally and globally—while also a source
               of financing at the country level. Some specialize in certain aspects of nutrition, e.g., mater-
               nal and child nutrition, food security, safety net programs, etc., whereas others bring to the
               table the ability to work in a wide range of sectors.
          •	   Foundations: In recent years, a number of international and national foundations have
               made nutrition a priority. Particularly the larger foundations can play a role similar to bilat-
               eral donors, i.e., a combination of policy advocacy and direct project financing. Some foun-
                              dations have been created by companies to support non-commercial work
                              and can be an entry point for collaboration with the private sector.
                             •	   Civil Society: A wide range of civil society organizations are active
                                  players in nutrition. These include:
                                  •	 International and national nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).
                                     Some NGOs specialize in certain aspects of nutrition, whereas others
                                     are generalists. Some of the international NGOs are active in interna-
 Given the                           tional policy advocacy as well as in direct program implementation. In
                                     some cases, international NGOs play a technical advisory role to na-
 magnitude                           tional NGOs on nutrition issues. National NGOs working in nutrition
                                     are numerous and varied. They play an advocacy role and implement
 and complexity                      programs directly. NGOs are at times the implementers of contracts
                                     from governments, e.g., performance based contracting.
 of the nutrition                 •	 Media. Media personalities are opinion leaders that play an important
                                     role in raising the overall profile of nutrition and clarifying some of
 challenge,                          the specific issues. Some media partners are also involved in behavior

 working in a                        change communication, either through groups dedicated to the sub-
                                     ject, e.g., media foundations that specialize in behavior change in de-
 cohesive and                        veloping countries, or as contracted implementers of behavior change
                                     communication activities. In a country where nutrition is not a high
 complementary                       priority or where it is misunderstood, it may be wise to proactively en-
                                     gage with the media to develop their capacity to engage on the issue.
 manner with                      •	 Religious leaders. In many countries where malnutrition is highly
                                     prevalent, religious leaders are opinion leaders, and they can be effec-
 development                         tive agents either in an advocacy campaign or for individual behavior
                                     change. Some religious groups also manage organizations that offer
 partners is                         nutrition services to the population. These same organizations are
                                     also a potentially important source of financing for nutrition in some
 critical.                           countries.
                                  •	 Academia / think tanks. Some research groups and think tanks have
                                     focused specifically on nutrition and are important partners in areas
                                     such as advocacy and evidence generation for nutrition. A range of
                                     national and international universities are key players, with roles that
                                     range from preservice training of nutrition workers to impact evalu-
                                     ation and other types of research. Some academics in countries are
                                     important opinion leaders due to their deep technical knowledge on
                                     nutrition.
          •	   Private sector: The private sector plays a critical role in nutrition. They produce and
               process food, provide a high proportion of the health services in developing countries and
               produce nutrition-related products—such as specialized products for treatment of severe


62	                                                              Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
     malnutrition, vitamin and mineral supplements, and nutrition assessment tools.
     The private sector also tends to have a comparative advantage in deploying logis-
     tics systems in areas that are difficult to reach, which is a particular challenge for
     enabling the poorest and most vulnerable to access nutrition services. Assessing
     the private sector’s level of engagement in a country will be a critical aspect of the
     partner mapping. A good starting point is usually national federations or associa-
     tions that represent private sector entities. Equally important will be to assess the
     government capacity to engage with the private sector, notably in the area of reg-
     ulation to balance the private sector’s incentive to provide value to shareholders
     with the public interest in reducing malnutrition.




LANDSCAPE OF NUTRITION PARTNERS WORKING ON NUTRITION 	                                        63
64	   Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Additional Support to Task Teams
and Leaders to Incentivize Nutrition
Programming




A number of other resources are available at the World Bank to support task team in scaling up
nutrition, including:
  •	 Experienced staff: A group of World Bank staff who have technical knowledge and
      experience in integrating nutrition into national policies and programs. This group op-
      erates as a community of practice and is one of the Global Solutions Groups within the
      Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, under the leadership of the Global Solu-
      tions Lead, Meera Shekar (mshekar@worldbank.org). They can be integrated into World
      Bank task teams to support policy dialogue and operations.
  •	   SWAT team: The staff in the Global Solutions Group for nutrition and short-term consul-
       tants are available for rapid mobilization as part of the World Bank’s response to country
       requests for technical assistance in policy reform, program design, implementation sup-
       port evaluation, etc.
  •	   Reference materials: A number of technical guidance notes and other reference
       materials are available to guide teams. See Annex 2.
  •	   Trust Funds: A number of trust funds are available to support country teams in scaling
       up nutrition, including:
         •	   Japan Trust Fund
         •	   Power of Nutrition Trust Fund
         •	   Global Financing Facility (GFF) Trust Fund for Every Woman Every Child
         •	   Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund
         •	   Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF) Trust Fund
         •	   Rapid Social Response (SRS) Trust Fund
         •	   Early Learning Partnership
  •	   Additional support: Several donors and partners are in discussion with the World
       Bank to see how they can best support the institution to scale up its financing of operations
       to prevent stunting.



ADDITIONAL SUPPORT 	                                                                                   65
Annexes
ANNEX 1. The Nutrition System




What are the main elements of a national nutrition system?
Countries successfully managing national nutrition programs share common governance struc-
tures, systems, and determinants—even if the political, cultural, and economic contexts for each
country’s nutrition problems and solutions differ. Based on a recent systematic literature review
of nutrition governance and policy processes, we outline the structures and factors that affect how
the World Bank and its clients are solving their distinct undernutrition situations. This review13
highlights the critical components, challenges, and enabling factors that characterize countries
with successful nutrition programs, which are alleviating undernutrition in their populations.
   A country’s enabling environment is a critical backdrop to scale up effective national nutri-
tion programs. The 2013 Lancet series on maternal and child nutrition defines an enabling en-
vironment as “political and policy processes that build and sustain momentum for the effective
implementation of actions that reduce undernutrition.”14 The 2015 Global Nutrition Report15
identifies a series of actions in three domains that are required to create an enabling environment
ultimately leading to actions to improve nutritional status. These are (1) governance and political
economy; (2) capacity and resources; and (3) framing and evidence (see Figure 1). Each domain
is described below.



 S. Gillespie et al. 2013 The Lancet Maternal and Child Nutrition 4. The politics of reducing malnutrition: building commit-
13

ment and accelerating progress. 82–99.
14
     Ibid.
 International Food Policy Research Institute. 2015. Global Nutrition Report (GNR) 2015 Actions and Accountability to Ad-
15

vance Nutrition and Sustainable Development. Washington, DC.
             Figure 1. Structural Elements to Achieve Nutritional Impact at Scale




Source: Adapted from the Global Nutrition Report 2015.

1.	 Governance and Political Economy
Cross-sectoral governance structures
A high-level, cross-sectoral governance structure(s) is needed at the national level to coordinate
nutrition programing, e.g., a nutrition focal point located in the Prime Minister’s office. This
structure is charged with and accountable for coordinating an integrated nutrition policy and
a proven set of programs to reduce undernutrition. In addition to a high level nutrition coordi-
nating structure, platforms for cross-sector and multi-stakeholder actions need to be established
to support nutrition programming. The Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) global movement supports
countries in establishing multi-stakeholder platforms (MSP) as an important first step in scaling
up nutrition at the national level.
Nutrition policies and legislation
A national nutrition strategy and policies are also necessary to guide the process of improving the
environment contributing to poor nutrition. A recent review16 of scaled up nutrition programs
found that national nutrition policies frequently lack a number of components critical for suc-
cess. These are planning for well-designed evidence-based nutrition interventions; clear goals,
targets, and timelines for desired nutrition outcomes and impacts; attention to capacity building
at all levels; monitoring and evaluation; and a financing plan.
  Improved governance through legislation for nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive ac-
tivities and commodities is also central to achieving effective nutrition programs. For example,
governments need to institute laws and standards to govern food fortification, legislation to im-


16
     S. Gillespie et al. 2015. Advances in Nutrition 6. Scaling Up Impact on Nutrition: What Will it Take? 440–51.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                                            69
        plement the Code of Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes, food safety standards, maternity leave,
        and regulations regarding the marketing of foods to children—among other issues that require
        good governance.
        Accountability mechanisms
        Government accountability to its citizens is reinforced by international commitment. “Account-
        ability is the glue that connects commitment to action,” according to the 2015 Global Nutrition
        Report.17 International accountability mechanisms include the six 2025 World Health Assembly
        (WHA) nutrition targets and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The international com-
        munity has committed to a series of important nutrition targets by 2030. SDG 2.2 calls for an end
        to all forms of malnutrition, including achieving by 2025 the internationally agreed targets on
        stunting and wasting in children under-five years of age and addressing the nutritional needs of
        adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women, and older persons.18 Countries need to develop
        and disseminate specific commitments and targets for nutrition, e.g., reducing child stunting,
        coverage of children with vitamin A supplements, and the early initiation of breastfeeding.
          Tracking and reporting the accomplishments of national nutrition commitments are import-
        ant next steps. A variety of reporting mechanisms exist at the global level and can be adapted to
                              individual country contexts. In 2015, for example, WHO member states ad-
                              opted a Global Monitoring Framework on Maternal, Infant and Young Child
                              Nutrition with 14 nutrition related indicators, in addition to the six WHA
                              nutrition targets.19
                                Checklists and scorecards to track nutrition commitments can be used at
 Accountability               multiple levels within a country, starting at the community and moving to
                              district, regional, and national levels. Social audits and public hearings at the
 is the glue                  local levels help to raise awareness, create demand on the part of families,
                              and mobilize the commitment of communities to invest resources in the
 that connects                damaging but often invisible problem of undernutrition. Another important
                              accountability mechanism is engaging the media to highlight progress or
 commitment                   challenges.

 to action.                   The private sector
                              The private sector plays a major role in a nation’s food system(s) and direct-
                              ly affects the nutrition status of its citizens. Ranging from food production
                              and processing to food distribution and retail, the private sector is a major
                              player in the business of feeding a population. In addition, through the pri-
                              vate sector’s participation in the health sector, the media, and the technology
                              sector—including mobile phones to provide nutrition and health information
        to consumers as well as data collection for monitoring and evaluation purposes, the private sec-
        tor is an influential partner in producing better or worse nutrition for vulnerable groups such as
        children and pregnant women.
          The potential for conflict of interest is significant between the private sector’s primary goal
        of increasing value for investors and shareholders and optimal public health and nutrition out-
        comes. Aggressive marketing of breastmilk substitutes is a classic example. So is the production
        and marketing of sugary beverages and high fat and salty snack foods, which contribute to over-
        weight, obesity, and the rise of chronic diseases such as diabetes.



        17
             International Food Policy Research Institute. 2015.
        18
             United Nations. http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E.
         WHO indicators. http://www.who.int/nutrition/events/2015_informal_consultation_monitoringframework_miycn_back-
        19

        groundpaper_indicators.pdf.



70	                                                                       Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
   How can the private sector be incentivized to meet the nutritional needs of the lower income
quintiles by developing low-cost fortified complementary foods and affordable multiple micro-
nutrient supplements for pregnant women, for example, while also holding the private sector
accountable for positive nutrition outcomes? Governments, international organizations, and civil
society can work together to meet this challenge through a variety of mechanisms, including
regulatory, political, and market-based mechanisms.20 Transparency is a critical attribute of pub-
lic-private sector engagements, including clarifying how policies that affect the nutrition of vul-
nerable groups are affected by private sector influence.
   Accountability mechanisms for engaging with the private sector can include direct imposition
of food safety laws and production standards, taxes and subsidies, and public praise or criticism
of industry and businesses by politicians or others. Consumer watchdog groups, shareholder ac-
tions at annual company meetings, and consumer boycotts are ways that civil society can hold the
private sector accountable to positively affecting nutrition.21

2.	 Capacity and Resources
Nutrition leaders and champions
Focused leadership and national and international champions for nutrition are critical for suc-
cess in nutrition programs and approaches.22 23 Strategic, experienced senior leaders, particularly
within government, are critical to mobilize others across sectoral boundaries and to build ef-
fective teams and partnerships to collaboratively address complex undernutrition issues and to
manage competing stakeholders’ interests at all levels of the nutrition and food system.24
  Common challenges for nutrition leaders include working effectively with ministries, donors,
and other stakeholders, scarce data, understanding local level contexts and scenarios of undernu-
trition, as well as the lack of coherent country policies, goals, and programs. Even when political
rhetoric supports nutrition, the ability to hold politicians and bureaucrats accountable to nutri-
tion commitments is frequently difficult.
  Possible approaches to build the capacity of leaders in nutrition include (1) coaching and other
techniques to increase adult development, which require a substantial investment of time, and
(2) training programs to impart technical nutrition knowledge and skills in stakeholder mapping,
advocacy, and transforming evidence to policy reform and action, among other trainings that
are generally shorter in duration. Proactive planning for and investment in developing nutrition
leaders is crucial to improving nutrition outcomes in high burden countries.
Frontline workers at sufficient capacity
The technical capacity and motivation of frontline workers is critical to delivering quality nutri-
tion services. Accurate nutrition knowledge and training in applied skills is necessary, e.g., mea-
surement of children and effective counseling techniques for all cadres and levels of health care
staff from physicians and nurses to community health workers and village volunteers. Staffing
and coverage of rural and remote health facility settings is often problematic, and the high turn-
over of paid and volunteer health workers is a challenge to adequate human capacity nutrition
staffing for many countries.
  Incentives to encourage and retain nutrition workers—particularly frontline workers—can take
different forms. Financial rewards are one type of incentive, but others may also be effective,


20
     International Food Policy Research Institute. 2015.
21
     Ibid.
22
     Ibid.
23
  N. Nisbett et al. 2015. Food Policy 53. What drives and constrains effective leadership in tackling child undernutrition? Find-
ings from Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India and Kenya. 33–45.
24
     Ibid.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                           71
       including peer recognition, the opportunity for additional training or study, performance-linked
       rewards such as local community-based award ceremonies, competitions between service areas,
       and job promotions.25
       Implementation at district and community level
       A functioning decentralized administrative governance structure is key to the effective deliv-
       ery of nutrition services at the district and community levels. A six-country governance study 26
       found that the following attributes of sub-national governance are helpful for moving nutrition
       policy successfully into action. They are (1) capacity to effectively implement nutrition services at
       the local level; (2) politicians and local leaders at district and community levels who understand
       and support the importance of addressing nutrition issues, which are also supported by decen-
       tralized budgets and an understanding of the potential political salience of malnutrition; and (3)
       timely and accurate data about the undernutrition situation.
       Supply and logistics systems
       An effective and efficient supply system is required to source and deliver the commodities that
       support nutrition programming. Supplies include micronutrient supplements, e.g., vitamin A
       capsules, micronutrient powders, oral rehydration salts and zinc tablets, therapeutic food for
       malnourished children, supplementary food, scales and other monitoring and measurement
       equipment, among other necessary supplies.
          Supply chain planning depends on the careful assessment of need, including determining the
       number of beneficiaries that require which type(s) of commodities; the duration of need; the dis-
       tance or methods of commodity transport, etc.; and a functioning information system to manage
       the process from planning through procurement, transportation, storage and delivery to bene-
       ficiaries. Determining the shelf life of commodities must be part of the planning, including the
       risk of food-borne illness, e.g., for supplementary foods. A quality assurance system must also be
       established for product sampling and testing, for example.
          New technologies, such as Rapid SMS, are providing innovative ways to monitor supply chain
       logistics. By sending mobile text message data, with real-time reports on the distribution of nu-
       trition commodities, staff can report stock-outs at local health clinics to central warehouses so
       supplies can be transported immediately, instead of weeks or months later.
       Financing
       Sustainable and effective nutrition programming requires predictable funding from a combina-
       tion of domestic, international, donor, and public and private sectors. To determine the financing
       requirements and gaps for national nutrition programs, a costing exercise is a necessary first step
       in the planning process. Several different costing approaches and tools have been used. More
       than 20 Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) countries have prepared costed nutrition plans using sev-
       eral approaches. The program unit cost approach is based on estimates of the cost per child of a
       program in similar countries, such as a program for the community management of severe acute
       malnutrition. The ingredients approach breaks down activities into their components and costs
       them individually. Although the ingredients approach is considered the more precise, it is also
       the more resource-intensive approach to costing a program.

       3.	 Framing and evidence
       Narratives that create compelling argument for change
       Generating political will is necessary to build and sustain the interest and momentum necessary

      25
           S. Gillespie, et al. 2015. Advances in Nutrition 6. Scaling Up Impact on Nutrition: What Will it Take? 440–51.
      26
        A.M. Acosta and Fanzo, J.. 2012. Fighting maternal and child malnutrition: analyzing the political and institutional determinants
      of delivering a national multisectoral response in six countries. A synthesis paper. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.



72	                                                                               Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
for successful national nutrition policies. The experiences of Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, India,
Peru, and Zambia demonstrate the importance of insuring that nutrition is framed as part of the
broader national development agenda to raise nutrition to a higher public profile.27 Raising na-
tional awareness about the critical 1,000 day window to prevent irreparable damage to a child’s
cognitive and physical development links nutrition programming directly to a nation’s human
capital and development goals.
  Peru and Brazil have elevated nutrition to the national agenda. In Peru, nutrition became a
centerpiece of the government’s engagement with its citizens with a presidential promise to re-
duce stunting by 5 percent for all children under five in five years, known as the “5 by 5 by 5”
commitment. Brazil framed its drive to improve nutrition as part of the government’s program
to alleviate poverty and hunger—raising the issue of nutrition from a narrow
health sector concern to one of broad and national importance.                                                                 For
Information systems with data and metrics for monitoring nutrition
For accountability mechanisms to be effective, accurate data must be avail-
                                                                                                                 accountability
able to track, analyze, and report the results of interventions and programs
designed to reduce undernutrition. Governments need to collect compara-
                                                                                                                     mechanisms
ble data systematically with consistent frequency, coverage, and quality over
time. Persistent gaps exist in data about infants and young children’s diets
                                                                                                                  to be effective,
and the heights and weights for women of reproductive age across coun-
tries—as well as many other information gaps for individual countries.28
                                                                                                                         accurate
  The traditional nationally representative household surveys such as the                                           data must be
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) or UNICEF’s Multiple Indicator
Cluster Surveys (MICS) can be complemented by less expensive survey                                                   available to
methods. For example, the Helen Keller International post-event coverage
surveys (PECS) require smaller samples and can be implemented annually.                                           track, analyze,
Mobile phones can also be used for rapid data collection, which may be use-
ful to expand nutrition surveillance and increase the availability and use of                                          and report
quality nutrition data.
  The European Union and the Scaling Up Nutrition movement are leading                                               the results of
the National Information Platforms for Nutrition initiative (NIPN). It aims to
be a country-led and owned approach to support the collection of comparable                                         interventions
information about nutrition outcomes and resources and programs supportive
of improved nutrition. The NIPN’s intended goals are better donor coordina-                                       and programs
tion, strengthened nutrition strategies and program planning, and a fuller un-
derstanding of the contributions of nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive                                           designed
actions delivered through multiple sectors.
                                                                                                                        to reduce
What is needed to scale up an effective response?
With a solid evidence base to guide the selection of nutrition-specific inter-                                   undernutrition.
ventions, countries must prioritize national scale up of programs that effec-
tively and efficiently deliver quality nutrition services. As nutrition-sensitive approaches to im-
proved nutrition are tested and evaluated for delivery through agriculture, social protection, and
education, they will also need to be scaled up. The following key elements critical to scaling up
nutrition programs based on the research by Gillespie29 are as follows:
  •	 A clear vision of the type of large-scale nutrition impact that is envisioned, along with met-
       rics and a persuasive story line to explain how and why this impact will be achieved.

 Ibid.
27

28
     International Food Policy Research Institute. 2015.
29
     S. Gillespie et al. 2015. Advances in Nutrition 6. Scaling Up Impact on Nutrition: What Will it Take? 440–51.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                        73
             •	   Clarity about the specific interventions / approaches that will be scaled up, e.g., nutri-
                  tion-specific, nutrition-sensitive, and the context, e.g., household and community settings,
                  stand-alone project or integrated into the national health system, etc., in which the scale
                  up will occur.
             •	   High-level political support, including a nutrition leader / champion; national and local lev-
                  el commitment to resolving nutrition problems and incentives for achieving tangible results.
             •	   Planning for what will be scaled up and how. Scaling up processes may take the form of
                  quantitative scale up (expansion in size, geographical reach or budget); functional scale
                  up (increased types / numbers of activities); political scale up (growing through political
                  support); and organizational scale up marked by increased strength and capacity of the
                  organization.
                                   •	    dequate capacity to go to scale, including strong organizations and sys-
                                        A
 A                                      tems that will support / empower the workforce needed to achieve the
                                        nutrition objectives of the program / strategy. In addition, the strategic ca-
 comprehensive                          pacity of leaders and managers, e.g., skills for building commitment, con-
                                        flict resolution, and strategic communication among others, and the op-
 approach                               erational capacity of both management and the workforce are important.

 to reducing                       •	   W
                                         ithin governance, there is a need for horizontal (the systems / structures
                                        supporting cross-sectoral engagement on nutrition) and vertical (national
 malnutrition                           to community-level systems and structures) coherence as well as the reso-
                                        lution of trade-offs for such issues as tension between community owner-
 will require                           ship of small-scale programs and large scale implementation, quantity ver-
                                        sus quality in the process of scaling up, and short-term versus longer-term
 actions at                             impacts.
                                   •	    o finance scale up of nutrition programs, funding needs to be adequate,
                                        T
 all levels of a                        stable, and flexible to support adaptation of the scale up process as need-
                                        ed, including responding to local needs and learning.30
 country’s health                  •	    onitoring, learning, and adapting midcourse, and evaluation of pro-
                                        M

 system, across                         gram impacts are all important components of the process of going to
                                        scale.
 a number of
                                   How to coordinate an effective multisectoral response?
 key sectors,                      A comprehensive approach to reducing malnutrition will require actions at all
                                   levels of a country’s health system, across a number of key sectors, and focused
 and focused                       on supply and demand. The health sector policy-making and service delivery
                                   systems—the traditional “home” of nutrition interventions—will likely con-
 on supply and                     tinue to be a main platform to address the immediate causes of malnutrition
                                   through direct nutrition interventions. Nevertheless, several nutrition-spe-
 demand.                           cific interventions can at least be partly delivered through other sectors. Ad-
                                   dressing the underlying causes of malnutrition through nutrition-sensitive
                                   interventions will also require actions from other key sectors, notably educa-
                                   tion, social protection, agriculture, gender, and water and sanitation.



        30
          Estimating the cost of scaling up nutrition programs remains challenging for several reasons. Detailed costing studies for
        specific contexts are often unavailable, although there are several groups, including the World Bank, that are working with
        countries to correct this. More is known about the costs for delivering nutrition-specific interventions; whereas much less in-
        formation is available about the costs of nutrition-sensitive approaches to undernutrition. Similarly, there is little information
        about the costs of creating an enabling environment for nutrition.



74	                                                                              Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
  A multisectoral nutrition response is complex and requires a strong coordinating mech-
anism at the national level, but usually also at other levels of the system. In federated
states, coordination mechanisms are also necessary at the provincial and state level, and
in all countries, usually also at a district level or its equivalent. Given the complexity of
the undertaking, a successful model may follow the following steps:
                     Plan multisectorally • implement sectorally •
                       review progress regularly multisectorally.
While multisectoral coordination is required at the planning and review stages, the sec-
tors will implement independently. Such a model is probably more realistic than attempt-
ing to have all the sectors implementing jointly at all times in a given geography. However,
the model is workable only if the relevant ministries are incentivized to meet together
to plan the program and to re-meet to review progress and to take corrective actions as
necessary.




ANNEXES 	                                                                                       75
      Annex 2. Useful References




      Financial Incentives and Costing
      Bredenkamp, C., G.B. Fritsche, B. Meessen, C. Ndizeye, R.A. Soeters, G. Van Heteren. 2014. Per-
      formance-based financing toolkit. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. http://documents.world-
      bank.org/curated/en/2014/02/19164378/performance-based-financing-toolkit.
      del Ninno, C., K. Subbarao, and A. Milazzo. 2009. How to Make Public Works Work: A Review of
      the Experiences. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Gneezy, U., S. Meier, and P. Rey-Biel. 2011. When and Why Incentives (Don’t) Work to Modify
      Behavior. J Econ Perspect 25 (4): 191–209.
      Health Results Innovation Trust Fund. 2014. A smarter approach to delivering more and better re-
      productive, maternal, newborn, and child health services. Washington, DC: The World Bank Group.
      Horton, S., M. Shekar, C. McDonald, A. Mahal, and J.K. Brooks. 2010. Scaling Up Nutrition; What
      Will it Cost? Washington, DC: The World Bank.
      Laviolette, L. S. Gopalan, L. Elder, and O. Wouters. 2016. Incentivizing Nutrition: Incentive Mech-
      anisms to Accelerate Nutrition Outcomes. Washington, DC: World Bank.
      Loevinsohn, B. 2008. Performance-Based Contracting for Health Services in Developing Countries:
      A Toolkit. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/978-0-
      8213-7536-5.
      Ranganathan, M., and M. Lagarde. 2012. Promoting healthy behaviours and improving health
      outcomes in low and middle income countries: A review of the impact of conditional cash trans-
      fer programmes. Prev Med 55: S95–S105.
      Shekar, M., J. Kakietek, J. Dayton-Eberwein, and D. Walters. The World Bank. Forthcoming 2016.
      Subbarao, K., C. Del Ninno, C. Andrews, and C. Rodriguez-Alas. 2013. Public Works as a Safety
      Net: Design, Evidence, and Implementation. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
      World Bank. 2015. Development Policy Financing Retrospective: Results and Sustainability. Wash-
      ington, DC: The World Bank.
      World Bank. 2015. Program-for-Results: Two-Year Review. Washington, DC: The World Bank.



76	                                                                  Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
        Nutrition
        Copenhagen Consensus. http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/copenhagen-consensus-iii.
        Global Nutrition Report (including country profiles). http://globalnutritionreport.org.
        Making Health a Right for All: Universal Health Coverage (UHC) and Nutrition. http://uhcfor-
        ward.org/sites/uhcforward.org/files/Making%20Health%20a%20Right%20for%20All.pdf.
        Secure Nutrition: linking agriculture, food security, and nutrition. https://www.securenutrition-
        platform.org/Pages/Home.aspx.
        Scaling Up Nutrition Global Movement. http://scalingupnutrition.org/.
        Shekar, M. 2006. Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale
        Action. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
        Sustainable Development Goal 2. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg2.
        UNICEF. 2015. State of the World’s Children. http://www.unicef.org/sowc/.
        UNICEF, WHO, WBG. 2015. Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates. http://data.worldbank.org/
        child-malnutrition.
        World Health Assembly global nutrition targets 2025. http://www.who.int/nutrition/global-tar-
        get-2025/en/
        World Bank.2010. Scaling Up Nutrition: A Framework for Action, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
        World Bank Nutrition. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/nutrition.


        Nutrition-Specific Interventions
        Levinson, F.J., B.L. Rogeres, K.M. Hicks, T. Schaetzel, L. Troy, and C. Young. 1999. Monitoring and
        Evaluation: A Guidebook for Nutrition Project Managers in Developing Countries. Washington, DC:
        The World Bank.
        Micronutrient Initiative. www.micronutrient.org.
        The Lancet Series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. 2013. http://www.thelancet.com/series/ma-
        ternal-and-child-nutrition.
        World Bank, Results for Development Institute, 1,000 Days, 2016. Investing in Nutrition; the Founda-
        tion for Development. Washington, DC. http://thousanddays.org/resource/investing-in-nutrition/.


        Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions
        Agriculture for Nutrition and Health (CGIAR). Diet Diversity 101. http://www.a4nh.cgiar.
        org/2014/05/05/dietary-diversity-101/  and    http://securenutrition.org/how-to-guide-ip-
        s/78/234#sthash.CtrxlYow.dpuf.
        Bryce, J., D. Coitinho, I. Darnton-Hill, et al. 2008. Maternal and child undernutrition: effective
        action at national level. The Lancet 371 (9611): 510–26.
        FAO. 2015. Designing nutrition-sensitive agriculture investments. http://www.fao.org/docu-
        ments/card/en/c/6cd87835-ab0c-46d7-97ba-394d620e9f38/. See pp. 24–25.
        Levinson, F.J. and Y. Balarajan. 2013. Addressing Malnutrition Multisectorally. http://www.secure-
        nutrition.org/resources/addressing-malnutrition-multisectorally-what-have-we-learned-re-
        cent-international-experience.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                                      77
      NOURISHING Framework of nutrition-related country policies. http://www.wcrf.org/int/poli-
      cy/nourishing-framework.
      UNICEF. 2013. Multisectoral Approaches to Nutrition: The case for investment by social protection
      programs. http://www.unicef.org/eapro/Brief_Social_Transfer.pdf.
      USAID. 2015. Update on Nutritional Status by Sociodemographic and Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
      Indicators Collected in Demographic Health Surveys. http://www.securenutrition.org/resources/nu-
      tritional-status-women-and-children-2014-update-nutritional-status-sociodemographic-and-wa-
      ter-sanitation-and-hygiene-wash-indicators-collected-demographic-and-health-surveys.
      WHO, UNICEF, USAID. 2015. Improving nutrition outcomes with better water, sanitation, and
      hygiene.      http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/washandnutrition/en/.
      See also http://securenutrition.org/how-to-guide-ips/82/240#sthash.oyi1iKFQ.dpuf
      World Bank Group. 2016. Multisectoral Approaches to Improving Nutrition: Water, Sanitation,
      and Hygiene. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/01/25835248/multisectoral-ap-
      proaches-improving-nutrition-water-sanitation-hygiene. 22–23.
      World Bank Group. 2013. Improving Nutrition through Social Protection. http://www.securenutri-
      tion.org/resources/improving-nutrition-through-social-protection-brief.
      World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition through Multisectoral Approaches—Health Brief. http://
      www.securenutrition.org/resources/improving-nutrition-through-health-brief. See also http://
      securenutrition.org/how-to-guide-ips/79/247#sthash.nud4VP4C.dpuf.


      Political Nutrition Leadership
      Horton, S., M. Shekar, C. McDonald, A. Mahal, and J.K. Brooks. 2010. Scaling Up Nutrition; What
      Will it Cost? Washington, DC: The World Bank.
      International Food Policy Research Institute. 2016 Global Nutrition report. From Promise to Im-
      pact; Ending Malnutrition by 2030. Washington, DC. http://globalnutritionreport.org/
      Nisbett, N, E. Wach, L. Haddad, and S. El Arifeen. 2015. What drives and constrains effective lead-
      ership in tackling child undernutrition? Findings from Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India and Kenya.
      Food Policy 53: 33–45.
      Shekar, M. 2006. Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development: A Strategy for Large-Scale
      Action. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
      World Bank Group. 2007. The Political Economy of Nutrition Policy Reform. http://documents.
      worldbank.org/curated/en/2009/02/10496012/carrots-sticks-political-economy-nutrition-pol-
      icy-reforms. See also http://securenutrition.org/how-to-guide-ips/81/175#sthash.2Q8I5CYJ.
      dpuf.
      World Bank. 2010. Scaling Up Nutrition: A Framework for Action, Washington, DC: The World
      Bank.
      World Bank. 2015. World Development Report 2015. Mind, Society, and Behavior. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.




78	                                                                  Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Annex 3. World Bank Projects with Nutrition Objectives

                              PROJECT
 REGION     COUNTRY                     PROJECT TITLE                                      TASK TEAM LEADER
                              NUMBER
                                                                                           Mulder-Sibanda,
 AFR        Benin             P143652   Food, Health and Nutrition Project
                                                                                           Menno
                                                                                           Monchuk,
 AFR        Burkina Faso      P124015   Social Safety Net project
                                                                                           Louise Victoria

 AFR        Cameroon          P104525   Health Sector Support Investment (SWAP)            Robyn, Paul Jacob

            Central Afri-
 AFR                          P149512   Emergency Food crisis & Agriculture relaunch       Ehoue, Bleoue Nicaise
            can Republic
                                        Mother and Child Health Re-
 AFR        Chad              P148052                                                      Diack, Aissatou
                                        sults Strengthening Project

 AFR        Chad              P151215   Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Response       Hopkins, Jane C.

 AFR        Comoros           P150754   Social Safety Net Project                          Vermehren, Andrea

            Congo, Demo-                                                                   Samaha,
 AFR                          P147555   Health System Strengthening Project
            cratic Republic                                                                Hadia Nazem
                                                                                           Fritsche,
 AFR        Congo, Republic   P143849   Health Sector Project
                                                                                           Gyorgy Bela
                                        Health Systems Strengthen-
 AFR        Cote d'Ivoire     P147740                                                      Haazen, Dominic S.
                                        ing & Ebola Preparedness
                                                                                           Kamil, Hamoud
 AFR        Cote d'Ivoire     P119328   Emergency Basic Education Support Project
                                                                                           Abdel Wedoud

 AFR        Djibouti          P131194   Improving Health Sector Performance                Ozaltin, Emre

 AFR        Ethiopia          P146883   Productive Safety Nets Project 4                   Coll-Black, Sarah

 AFR        Ethiopia          P148591   Second Agricultural Growth Project                 Goodland, Andrew D.

 AFR        Gambia, The       P143650   Maternal & Child Nutrition & Health Results        Hasan, Rifat

                                                                                           Akala, Francis-
 AFR        Ghana             P145792   Maternal, Child Health & Nutrition
                                                                                           ca Ayodeji

 AFR        Ghana             P105092   Nutrition and Malaria Control for Child Survival   Awittor, Evelyn

 AFR        Guinea            P147758   Primary Health Services Improvement                Magazi, Ibrahim

 AFR        Guinea            P123900   Productive Social Safety Net Project               Zampaglione, Giuseppe

                                                                                           Ramana,
 AFR        Kenya             P148098   Kenya Health Sector Support Project
                                                                                           Gandham N.V.
                                                                                           Yamashita-
 AFR        Lesotho           P114859   Lesotho Maternal & Newborn Health PBF
                                                                                           Allen,Kanako
                                        Emergency Support to Critical Ed-
 AFR        Madagascar        P131945                                                      Qamruddin, Jumana N.
                                        ucation, Health, Nutrition

 AFR        Madagascar        P149323   Social Safety Net Project                          Vermehren, Andrea

 AFR        Malawi            P125237   Nutrition & HIV/AIDS Project                       Hyder, Ziauddin

                                        Agricultural Development Pro-
 AFR        Malawi            P105256                                                      Durand, Olivier
                                        gram Support Project

 AFR        Malawi            P133620   Strengthening Safety Nets System                   Drabek, Ivan

 AFR        Malawi            P154803   Malawi Floods ERL                                  Parvez, Ayaz




ANNEXES 	                                                                                                          79
                                   PROJECT
      REGION   COUNTRY                       PROJECT TITLE                                      TASK TEAM LEADER
                                   NUMBER

                                                                                                Pereira Guimaraes
      AFR      Mali                P127328   Emergency Safety Nets project
                                                                                                Leite, Phillippe George

      AFR      Mozambique          P151407   Third Agriculture Development Policy Operation     Nijhoff, Jan Joost

      AFR      Niger               P147638   Population and Health Support Project              Karamoko, Djibrilla

      AFR      Niger               P132405   Support to Quality Education Project               Majgaard, Kirsten

      AFR      Niger               P123399   Niger Safety Net Project                           Del Ninno, Carlo

                                                                                                Loevinsohn,
      AFR      Nigeria             P146583   Saving One Million Lives
                                                                                                Benjamin P.
                                                                                                Odutolu,
      AFR      Nigeria             P120798   Nigeria States Health Investment Project
                                                                                                Ayodeji Oluwole

      AFR      Senegal             P129472   Health & Nutrition Financing                       Lemiere, Christophe


      AFR      Senegal             P070541   Senegal Nutrition Enhancement Program              Mulder-Sibanda, Menno

                                             Rapid Response Child-Focused Social Cash
      AFR      Senegal             P115938                                                      Mulder-Sibanda, Menno
                                             Transfer and Nutrition Security Project

      AFR      Senegal             P133597   Senegal Safety Net                                 Coudouel, Aline

      AFR      South Sudan         P127187   South Sudan Health Rapid Results Project           Chisaka, Noel

      AFR      Tanzania            P152736   Strengthening PHC for Results                      Nguyen, Son Nam

                                                                                                Ousmane
      AFR      Togo                P143843   Maternal and Child Health Support
                                                                                                Diadie, Haidara

      AFR      Togo                P127200   Community Development and Safety Nets              Van Dyck, John

      AFR      Togo                P144484   Pilot Cash Transfer Program                        Van Dyck, John

      AFR      Uganda              P143324   Enhance Smallholder Family Nutrition               Hyder, Ziauddin

      AFR      Uganda              P149286   Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition              Hyder, Ziauddin

                                                                                                Workie, Net-
      AFR      Zambia              P145335   Health Services Improvement Project
                                                                                                sanet Walelign

      AFR      Zambia              P147745   Livelihood & Nutrition Project                     Hyder, Ziauddin

      EAP      Cambodia            P132751   SP Cash Transfer Pilot Project                     Acosta, Pablo Ariel

      EAP      Indonesia           P128832   PNPM RURAL 2012-2015                               Woo, Sonya

      EAP      Indonesia           P132585   TF PNPM GENERASI PROGRAM                           Wrobel, Robert

               Lao People's Dem-             Health Governance and Nutri-
      EAP                          P151425                                                      Chanthala, Phetdara
               ocratic Republic              tion Development Project
               Lao People's Dem-
      EAP                          P120495   Lao PDR Community Nutrition                        Tandon, Ajay
               ocratic Republic
               Lao People's Dem-
      EAP                          P123891   Mobilizing Ethnic Communities for Imp              Ishihara, Satoshi
               ocratic Republic

      EAP      Timor-Leste         P145491   Community Driven Nutrition Improvement             Sullivan, Eileen Brainne

      EAP      Vietnam             P152023   Northern Mountain Child Nutrition                  Dao, Huong Lan




80	                                                                 Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
                                 PROJECT
 REGION     COUNTRY                        PROJECT TITLE                                TASK TEAM LEADER
                                 NUMBER

 EAP        Vietnam              P128072   VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction       Bradley, Sean

 ECA        Tajikistan           P146109   Tajikistan JSDF Nutrition Grant 2            Lavado, Rouselle F.

                                                                                        Steta Gandara,
 LCR        Brazil               P101504   Second Bolsa Família
                                                                                        Maria Concepcion
                                                                                        Gordillo-Tobar,
 LCR        El Salvador          P117157   Strengthening Public Health Care System
                                                                                        Amparo Elena

 LCR        Haiti                P123706   HT Improving Maternal and Child Health       Rajkumar, Andrew Sunil

 LCR        Guatemala            P077756   Maternal and Infant Health and Nutrition     Lao Pen, Christine

                                                                                        Gordillo-Tobar,
 LCR        Nicaragua            P106870   Community and Family Health Care Services
                                                                                        Amparo Elena

 LCR        Haiti                P126744   Relaunching Agriculture: RESEPAG II          Colleye, Pierre Olivier

 LCR        Honduras             P148737   Corredor Seco Food Security Project          Weiss, Eli

 LCR        Nicaragua            P148809   Caribbean Coast Food Security Project        Garcia, Augusto

 LCR        Peru                 P079165   Sierra Rural Development Project             Diaz Rios, Luz Berania

 LCR        Haiti                P124134   Education for All Project - Phase II         Baron, Juan

 LCR        Guatemala            P145410   Pilot Improve the Dev and Nutrition          Bassett, Lucy Katherine

 LCR        Peru                 P117310   Results Nutrition for Juntos SWAp            Marini, Alessandra

                                                                                        Silva Villalobos, Carmen
 LCR        Peru                 P131029   Social Inclusion TAL
                                                                                        Veronica Del Rosar

                                                                                        Koettl-Brodmann,
 MNA        Djibouti             P130328   Crisis Response-SSN project
                                                                                        Stefanie
                                                                                        Abdel-Hamid, Alaa
 MNA        Yemen, Republic of   P094755   Health & Population
                                                                                        Mahmoud Hamed
                                                                                        Abdel-Hamid, Alaa
 MNA        Yemen, Republic of   P131236   Emergency Targeted Nutrition Intervention
                                                                                        Mahmoud Hamed

 SAR        Afghanistan          P129663   System Enhancement for Health (SEHAT)        Sayed, Ghulam Dastagir

                                           Strengthening Health Activities
 SAR        Afghanistan          P112446                                                ul Haq, Inaam
                                           for the Rural Poor (SHARP)

 SAR        Bangladesh           P009496   Bangladesh Integrated Nutrition Project      Gragnolati, Michele

 SAR        Bangladesh           P118708   Health Sector Development Program            Alam, Bushra Binte

                                           Health Nutrition and Popula-
 SAR        Bangladesh           P074841                                                Binte Alam, Bushra
                                           tion Sector Program

 SAR        Bangladesh           P120583   Modern Grain Storage Facilities              Verissimo, Patrick

 SAR        Bangladesh           P123457   Integrated Agricultural Productivity         Cook, Edward C.

 SAR        Bangladesh           P149605   Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improvement Project   Manoharan, Seenithamby

                                                                                        Malik,
 SAR        Bangladesh           P146520   Income Support Program for the Poorest
                                                                                        Muhammad Iftikhar




ANNEXES 	                                                                                                          81
                           PROJECT
      REGION   COUNTRY               PROJECT TITLE                                      TASK TEAM LEADER
                           NUMBER

      SAR      India       P121731   IN: ICDS Syst Strength & Nut Imp Program           Pinto, Sangeeta Carol

      SAR      India       P149811   Karnataka Multisectoral Nutrition Pilot            Al-Omair, Abeyah A.

      SAR      India       P143608   Telangana Rural Inclusive Growth Pr                Shah, Parmesh

      SAR      India       P152210   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr           Shah, Parmesh

      SAR      India       P102627   Bihar PRI                                          Nagarajan, Mohan

      SAR      Nepal       P125359   Community Action for Nutrition Project             Bhattarai, Manav

                                                                                        Mghenyi, Elliot
      SAR      Nepal       P128905   Agriculture and Food Security Project
                                                                                        Wamboka

      SAR      Pakistan    P123394   Punjab Health Sector Reform Project                Masud, Tayyeb

      SAR      Pakistan    P131850   Enhanced Nutrition for Mothers and Child           Kaufmann, Silvia

      SAR      Pakistan    P128307   Sindh Agricultural Growth Project                  Syed, Tahira

                                                                                        Alvi, Mohammad
      SAR      Pakistan    P150974   Improving Nutrition at Local Level
                                                                                        Imtiaz Akhtar
                                                                                        Navaratne,
      SAR      Sri Lanka   P118806   Second Health Sector Development
                                                                                        Kumari Vinodhani




82	                                                         Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
Annex 4. Glossary of Nutrition Terms


 TERM                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                         Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 First 1,000 days        The period of time, or window of opportunity, from conception to 2 years old, in
                         which nutritional requirements are substantial and damage from malnutrition
                         is largely irreversible.

 Anthropometry           The study and techniques of measuring the human body. Anthropometric
                         measurements are often used to compare or classify individuals or population
                         groups.

 Community-based         The management of acute malnutrition through (1) inpatient care for children
 management of acute     with severe acute malnutrition with medical complications and infants under 6
 malnutrition            months old with visible signs of severe acute malnutrition; (2) outpatient care
                         for children with severe acute malnutrition; and (3) community outreach.
 Complementary feeding   The introduction of other foods and liquids when breast milk alone is no longer
                         sufficient to meet the nutritional requirements of infants. The transition from
                         exclusive breastfeeding to family foods typically covers the period from 6–24
                         months old, even though breastfeeding may continue beyond 2 years old. This
                         is a critical period of growth during which nutrient deficiencies and illnesses
                         contribute globally to higher rates of undernutrition among children under 5
                         years old. Complementary food is any food, whether manufactured or locally
                         prepared, given in addition to breast milk (or a breast milk substitute) to satisfy
                         the nutritional requirements of the child.
 Deworming               Periodic drug treatment with an anthelmintic to purge the body of
                         soil-transmitted helminths, such as roundworm, whipworm, and hook-
                         worm. Soil-transmitted helminths impair nutrition status through loss
                         of iron and protein, and malabsorption of and competition for nutrients.
                         WHO estimates that over 270 million preschool children and over 600 mil-
                         lion school-age children are living in areas where these parasites are inten-
                         sively transmitted and in need of treatment and preventive interventions.
 Dietary diversity       The number of food groups consumed over a given period of time used as an
                         indicator of household food security and diet quality.

 Double burden of        The simultaneous occurrence of undernutrition and overweight or obesity in
 malnutrition (DBM)      the same community, household, or individual. The DBM is linked to two simul-
                         taneous global transitions: (1) the nutrition transition, which refers to the shift-
                         ing dietary consumption and energy expenditures that coincide with economic,
                         demographic, and epidemiological changes, such as modernization, urbaniza-
                         tion, economic development, and increased wealth; and (2) the epidemiological
                         transition that accounts for the replacement of infectious diseases by chronic
                         diseases over time and refers to the pattern of increased population growth
                         rates, due to improved public health, sanitation and disease therapy and treat-
                         ment, followed by a releveling of population growth, due to subsequent declines
                         in fertility rates.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                                  83
 TERM                                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                                         Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 Food security                           When all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient,
                                         safe, and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an
                                         active and healthy life.

 Food system                             A collaborative network that integrates sustainable food production, processing,
                                         distribution, consumption, and waste management in order to enhance the envi-
                                         ronmental, economic, and social health of a particular place.

 Food fortification                      The addition of one or more micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) to a food
                                         during processing. Ideally, food fortification provides a public health benefit
                                         with minimal risks to health in the population.
 Growth monitoring                       Growth monitoring follows the growth rate of a child in comparison to a stan-
                                         dard by periodic, frequent, anthropometric measurements in order to assess
                                         growth adequacy and identify faltering early. Growth Monitoring & Promotion
                                         (GMP) consists of growth monitoring combined with counseling to increase
                                         awareness of child growth, improve caring practices, and increase demand for
                                         other nutrition-related services.
 Hunger                                  A feeling of discomfort, illness, weakness, or pain due to a prolonged lack of
                                         food.

 Infant and Young Child                  Refers to specific recommendations and guiding principles for feeding children
 Feeding (IYCF)                          between birth and 24 months old for optimal nutrition, health, and develop-
                                         ment. A set of eight core population-level indicators31 have been developed to
                                         assess feeding trends over time; improve targeting of interventions; and moni-
                                         tor progress in achieving goals and evaluating the impact of interventions. The
                                         principles include:
                                         •	 Early initiation of breastfeeding—initiation of breastfeeding within one
                                             hour of birth.
                                         •	 Exclusive breastfeeding for infants under 6 months old—the feeding of an
                                             infant only with breastmilk from his or her mother or a wet nurse, or ex-
                                             pressed breastmilk, and no other liquids or solids except vitamins, mineral
                                             supplements, or medicines in drop or syrup form.
                                         •	 Continued breastfeeding at 1 year—children 12–15 months old who received
                                             breast milk during the previous day.
                                         •	 Introduction of solid, semisolid or soft foods—infants 6–8 months old who
                                             receive solid, semisolid or soft foods.
                                         •	 Minimum acceptable diet—a composite indicator consisting of both mini-
                                             mum dietary diversity (children 6–23 months old receiving foods from four
                                             or more food groups) and minimum meal frequency (children 6–23 months
                                             old receiving solid, semisolid, or soft foods the minimum number of times
                                             per day or more).
                                         •	 Consumption of iron-rich or iron-fortified foods—children 6–23 months
                                             old who receive an iron-rich food or iron-fortified food that is specially de-
                                             signed for infants and young children or a food that is fortified in the home.
31
   WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. Indicators for Assessing Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices. Conclusions of a Consensus Meeting held
November 6–8, 2007. Washington, DC: WHO.



84	                                                                                         Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
TERM                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                        Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

Intergenerational       Also referred to as the undernutrition cycle, a concept that describes how growth
cycle of malnutrition   failure is transmitted across generations through the mother. The theory links un-
                        dernutrition in the various stages of development: Small adult women are more
                        likely to have low-birth-weight babies; children born with a low birth weight are
                        more likely to suffer from growth failure during childhood; girls born with a low
                        birth weight are more likely to become small adult women; and adolescent girls
                        who become pregnant are even more likely to have low-birth-weight babies.
                           A child born weighing less than 2,500 grams is categorized as having a low birth
                        weight. At the population level, the proportion of infants with a low birth weight
                        often serves as an indicator of a multifaceted public health problem that includes
                        long-term maternal malnutrition, ill health, hard work, and poor health care in
                        pregnancy.
Lean or hunger season   Refers to the period between planting and harvesting, when food supplies can be-
                        come scarce. Families may have to sell livestock, farming tools, and other assets to
                        pay for food. During this period, poor farmers are at increased risk for malnutrition.

Malnutrition            Poor nutritional status caused by deficiency (undernutrition) or excess.
                          Commonly used anthropometric measures of nutrition status include:
                          •	 Stunting (chronic malnutrition)—low height for age, defined as more than
                              2 standard deviations below the mean of the sex-specific reference data.
                              Stunting is the cumulative effect of long-term deficits in food intake, poor
                              caring practices, and illness.
                          •	 Wasting (acute malnutrition)—low weight for height, defined as more
                              than 2 standard deviations below the mean of the sex-specific reference
                              data. Wasting is usually the result of a recent shock, such as lack of calories
                              and nutrients or illness, and is strongly linked to mortality.
                          •	 Underweight—low weight for age, defined as more than 2 standard devia-
                              tions below the mean of the sex-specific reference data.
                          Other anthropometric indicators are commonly used for program purposes,
                        including:
                          •	 MAM (moderate wasting)—weight for height between 2 and 3 standard
                              deviations below the mean of sex-specific reference data.
                          •	 AM (severe wasting)—weight for height more than 3 standard deviations
                              below the mean of sex-specific reference data.
                          •	 Global acute malnutrition (moderate and severe wasting combined)—
                              weight for height more than 2 standard deviations below the mean of
                              sex-specific reference data.
                          •	 Moderate malnutrition (moderate underweight)—weight for age between
                              2 and 3 z-scores below the mean of sex-specific reference data.
                          •	 BMI is a measure of body fat, calculated as weight in kilograms (kg) di-
                              vided by the square of height in meters (m2). Other measures of nutrition
                              status are calculated using BMI. Overweight is defined as a BMI between
                              25 and 30 kg/m2. Obesity is defined as a BMI of 30 or more. Although BMI
                              is a good measure for determining a range of acceptable weights, it does
                              not take into consideration some important factors, such as body build,
                              the relative contributions of fat, muscle, and bone to weight.


ANNEXES 	                                                                                                    85
 TERM            DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through Mul-
                 tisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 Micronutrient   •	   Also referred to as hidden hunger, the lack of one or more micronutrients,
 deficiency           often caused by disease or lack of access to or consumption of micronutrient-
                      rich foods such as fruit, vegetables, animal products, and fortified foods.
                      Micronutrients are vitamins and minerals that are needed by the body
                      in small amounts to produce enzymes, hormones, and other substances
                      essential for proper growth and development. Micronutrient deficiencies
                      increase the severity and risk of dying from infectious diseases such as
                      diarrhea, measles, malaria, and pneumonia. More than two billion people in
                      the world are estimated to be deficient in iodine, vitamin A, iron, or zinc.
                      Common micronutrient deficiencies include:
                 •	   Anemia—the condition of having a hemoglobin concentration below a
                      specified cut-off point, which changes according to age, gender, physiological
                      status, smoking habits, and the altitude at which the population being assessed
                      lives. WHO defines anemia in children under 5 years old and pregnant women
                      as a hemoglobin concentration of less than 110g/l at sea level. It is estimated
                      that 50 percent of anemia worldwide is due to iron deficiency. Other causes
                      of anemia include malaria and other parasitic infections; acute and chronic
                      infections that result in inflammation and hemorrhages; deficiencies in other
                      vitamins and minerals, especially folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin A; and
                      genetically inherited traits, such as thalassemia.
                 •	   Iron deficiency—the most common nutritional deficiency in the world,
                      resulting from insufficient iron in the body due to inadequate consumption
                      of bioavailable iron, blood loss, or unmet increased iron requirements due
                      to infection, pregnancy, rapid growth, dietary habits, or any combination of
                      these.
                 •	   Iron deficiency anemia—the condition in which a deficiency in iron causes an
                      insufficiency of healthy red blood cells. Iron deficiency and iron deficiency
                      anemia are associated with fetal and child-growth failure, compromised
                      cognitive development in young children, lowered physical activity and
                      labor productivity in adults, and increased maternal morbidity and mortality.
                      Women and young children are the most vulnerable to iron deficiency anemia,
                      which increases the risk of hemorrhage and sepsis during childbirth, and is
                      implicated in 20 percent of maternal deaths. Furthermore, children with
                      iron deficiency anemia suffer from infections, weakened immunity, learning
                      disabilities, impaired physical development, and in severe cases, death.
                 •	   Iodine deficiency—the condition resulting when iodine intake falls below
                      the recommended level of 100-199g/l, tested through median urinary iodine
                      concentraWtion.
                 •	   Iodine deficiency disorders—the consequences of iodine deficiency in a
                      population that can be prevented by ensuring that the population has an
                      adequate intake of iodine. Iodine deficiency disorders can affect children
                      at any stage of rapid growth, with the greatest negative effect on cognitive
                      development occurring during pregnancy. Symptoms range from mild
                      impairment of brain development and subtle degrees of brain damage, goiter,
                      hypothyroidism, reproductive disorders (spontaneous abortion, stillbirth,




86	                                                       Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
 TERM                                     DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                                          Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 Micronutrient deficiency,                      hypothyroidism, reproductive disorders (spontaneous abortion, stillbirth,
 (continued)                                    congenital abnormalities, and perinatal mortality) to its most severe form,
                                                cretinism. Iodine deficiency is the primary cause of preventable mental re-
                                                tardation and brain damage in the world
                                          •	    Vitamin A deficiency—the condition resulting when vitamin A intake falls
                                                below recommended levels. Vitamin A deficiency may be exacerbated by
                                                high rates of infection and greatly increases the risk that a child may die from
                                                diseases such as measles, diarrhea, and acute respiratory infections. It is the
                                                leading cause of childhood blindness. Vitamin A deficiency compromises
                                                the immune systems of approximately 40 percent of the developing world’s
                                                children under 5 years old and leads to the deaths of as many as one million
                                                young children each year.
                                          •	    Zinc deficiency—the condition resulting when zinc intake falls below rec-
                                                ommended levels. Zinc deficiency is associated with growth retardation,
                                                malabsorption syndromes, fetal loss, neonatal death, and congenital abnor-
                                                malities. Zinc supplementation reduces the duration and intensity of diar-
                                                rheal illnesses and reduces clinical disease caused by acute respiratory in-
                                                fections and malaria.

 Nutrition education                      Encompasses a wide range of efforts to improve nutrition outcomes by chang-
                                          ing nutrition practices, including one-to-one counseling and BCC, and leverages
                                          available communications channels including IEC, social media, and communi-
                                          ty-level education and mobilization.

 Nutrition security                       The ongoing access to a balanced diet, adequate care and feeding practices, a
                                          safe and clean environment, clean water, and adequate health care (both pre-
                                          ventive and curative) for all people, and the knowledge needed to care for and
                                          ensure a healthy and active life for all household members.

 Nutrition-sensitive                      Interventions that address the underlying and basic determinants of maternal,
                                          fetal, and child nutrition and development, including food security; adequate
                                          caregiving resources at the maternal, household and community levels; and ac-
                                          cess to health services and a safe and hygienic environment, and incorporate
                                          specific nutrition goals and actions. Nutrition-sensitive programs can serve as
                                          delivery platforms for nutrition-specific interventions, potentially increasing
                                          their scale, coverage, and effectiveness. Examples include programs for agri-
                                          culture and food security; SSNs; early childhood development; maternal mental
                                          health; women’s empowerment; child protection; schooling; WASH; and health
                                          and family planning services.32




32
  Ruel, M.T., Alderman, H., and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. The Lancet series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. Nutrition-sensitive
interventions and programmes: how can they help to accelerate progress in improving maternal and child nutrition? Vol. 382: 536-551.



ANNEXES 	                                                                                                                                             87
 TERM                                     DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                                          Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

 Nutrition-specific                       Interventions that have an immediate and direct impact on maternal, fetal,
                                          and child nutrition and development, including adequate food and nutrient
                                          intake, feeding, caregiving and parenting practices, and low burden of infectious
                                          diseases. Examples include adolescent, preconception, and maternal health
                                          and nutrition; maternal dietary or micronutrient supplementation; promotion
                                          of optimum breastfeeding; complementary feeding and responsive feeding
                                          practices and stimulation; dietary supplementation; diversification and
                                          micronutrient supplementation or fortification for children; treatment of SAM;
                                          disease prevention and management; and nutrition in emergencies.33

 Oral rehydration therapy                 A type of fluid replacement used to prevent or treat dehydration, especially that
                                          due to diarrhea, which is defined as the passage of three or more loose or liquid
                                          stools per day or more frequently than is normal for the individual. Diarrhea is
                                          usually a symptom of gastrointestinal infection, which can be caused by a variety
                                          of viral and parasitic organisms. Severe diarrhea leads to fluid loss and plays a
                                          particularly important role in nutrition and growth faltering, because it can lead
                                          to malabsorption of nutrients and appetite suppression. The adjusted odds of
                                          stunting at 24 months old increases by 5 percent with each episode of diarrhea
                                          in the first 24 months of life.
                                            An oral rehydration solution is a liquid electrolyte solution that is used for the
                                          management of diarrhea among children. It is typically distributed in ready-to-
                                          use sachets that are added to one liter of clean water.

 Psychosocial stimulation                 The maternal-infant bond formed at the beginning of life is essential for cog-
                                          nitive, emotional, and social development later in life. Feeding and other care
                                          practices provide opportunities for psychosocial stimulation and help to estab-
                                          lish a positive attachment between caregiver and child.

 School garden                            A small plot or plots within school grounds or nearby—typically managed by
                                          the schoolchildren with the help of parents, teachers and other community
                                          stakeholders—where a variety of crops are grown for the purpose of learning,
                                          recreation, and improving diets. Crops commonly include vegetables, fruits,
                                          legumes, tubers, and nonfood plants including medicinal herbs, spices, and fuel
                                          material that are grown throughout the year. Sometimes small livestock and fish
                                          are raised.

 Smallholder farmer                       Marginal and submarginal farm households that own or cultivate typically less
                                          than two hectares of land. Smallholder farmer households constitute a large
                                          proportion of the population in the developing world and of households living
                                          in poverty and hunger.




33
  Ruel, M.T., Alderman, H., and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. The Lancet series on Maternal and Child Nutrition. Nutrition-sen-
sitive interventions and programmes: how can they help to accelerate progress in improving maternal and child nutrition? Vol. 382: 536-551.



88	                                                                                           Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium
      TERM                    DEFINITION (adapted from World Bank. 2013. Improving Nutrition Through
                              Multisectoral Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.)

      Specialized             A wide range of foods aimed at improving nutritional intake, including:
      nutritious foods        •	   Fortified blended foods, such as corn soya blend and wheat soya blend.
                              •	   Point-of-use or ready-to-eat foods, commonly lipid-based nutrient
                                   supplements, such as ready-to-use therapeutic food, which is a high-energy
                                   and protein-rich food with added electrolytes, vitamins and minerals,
                                   specifically designed to treat SAM in the rehabilitation phase, and ready-
                                   to-use supplementary food, which is a high-energy nutrition supplement
                                   particularly suited as a nutritional support in emergency situations or
                                   in the context of nutritional programs for the prevention or treatment of
                                   moderate malnutrition and deficiency-related illnesses. Typically oil- or
                                   peanut-based, ready-to-use foods do not have to be mixed with water and
                                   are microbiologically safe to enable outpatient use.
                              •	   Micronutrient powders (such as multiple micronutrient powder, multiple
                                   micronutrients, and micronutrient sprinkles) which are tasteless powders
                                   that come in individual sachets containing the recommended daily intake of
                                   16 vitamins and minerals for one person. The powders can be sprinkled into
                                   home-prepared food after cooking or just before eating.
                              •	   High-energy biscuits are wheat-based biscuits that are easy to distribute
                                   and can improve the level of nutrition in the first days of an emergency when
                                   cooking facilities are scarce.

      Supplementary feeding   A direct transfer of food to target households or individuals, most commonly
                              PLW and children. The food may be prepared and eaten onsite or given as a dry
                              ration to take home. Supplementary feeding is often provided as an incentive for
                              participation in public services such as primary health care and education.

      Undernourishment        When a person’s usual daily food consumption, expressed in terms of dietary
                              energy (kcal), is below the energy requirement norm. An undernourished per-
                              son is not able to acquire enough food to meet the daily minimum dietary energy
                              requirements.




89	   ANNEXES 	                                               Incentivizing Nutrition: A Practitioner’s Compendium   89
This document was produced with the financial support of the Micronutrient Initiative (www.micronutrient.org).

                         For more information: Luc Laviolette (llaviolette@worldbank.org)
