The Health Dimension of Climate Change
          THE WORLD BANK GROUP
              1818 H Street, N.W.
           WASHINGTON, D.C. 20433




                                         1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


TABLE OF ACRONYMS




                    2
                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                   CONTEXT

I.      The Health Dimension of Climate Change
II.     Analytical time scales
III.    Types of Impacts
IV.     Extremes and Averages
V.      Cross-cutting Issues
VI.     Timeframe for Action
VII.    Assessment Frameworks
VIII.   Adaptive Capacity in Health Systems
IX.     Report Structure

                                  SECTION ONE
        Evidence Base for Climate Change Events and Health Impacts in ECA

1.1   Overview
1.2   Extreme Weather Events
1.2.1 Floods
      Flood-related mortality in ECA
      Water-borne and food-borne diseases
      Vector-borne diseases
      Rodent-borne disease
      Others
1.2.2 Heat waves
      Excess mortality
      Cause-specific mortality
      Heat -related morbidity
      Additional Risk Factors
1.2.3 Droughts
1.3   Changing Average Temperatures & Impacts on Health in ECA
      Vector-borne diseases
      Water-borne and food-borne diseases
      Allergies
1.4.  Other Impacts of Climate Change: Migration
      The Impact of Migration on Health




                                                                            3
                                 SECTION TWO
           Country-Level Climate Change-Health Vulnerability Assessment

2.1     Overview
2.2     Toolkit proposal, definitions and rationale for indicators
2.3     Climate Change-Health Vulnerability Assessment Toolkit

                                  SECTION THREE
                       Climate Change-Health Adaptive Strategies

3.1     Overview
3.2     Adaptive Strategies for Extreme Weather Events (table)
3.3     Adaptive Strategies for Changing Averages (table)
3.4     Adaptive Strategies for Migration-Related Health Effects (table)
3.5     Adaptive Strategies for Coastline-Related Health Effects (table)

Annex 1: Summary Table for Flood-Related Health Outcomes
Annex 2: Summary Table for Heat Wave-Related Health Outcomes
Annex 3: Summary Table for Drought-Related Health Outcomes
Annex 4: Qualitative Indicators
References

Table 1: Climate Change-Health Outcome Matrix
Table 2: Top Ten Flood Events Recorded in EM-DAT that Killed the Greatest Number of People;
Europe & Central Asia 2000-2007
Table 3: Classification of flood disaster deaths
Table 4: Mean Change* for heat wave duration index and frost days for the period of 2031-2050
compared to 1981-2000 under emissions scenario A1B
Table 5: The reported number of morbidities as a result of heat wave events in ECA
Table 6: Malaria Incidence and Reported Cases in ECA 1990-2005
Table 7: Vector and disease projections for ECA
Table 8: Climate change health impacts and migration
Table 9: Adaptive Strategies for Extreme Weather Events
Table 10: Adaptive Strategies for Changing Averages
Table 11: Adaptive Strategies for Migration-Related Health Effects
Table 12: Adaptive Strategies for Coastline-Related Health Effects



Figure 1: Direction and magnitude of change of selected climate change health impacts.
Figure 2: Global burden of deaths and DALYs in 2000 and 2020 attributable to climate change under
a no intervention climate scenario
Figure 3: Relative Vulnerability to Floods in the Context of Flood-related Mortality; Europe and
Central Asia 1980-2000
Figure 4: ECA 2000-2007 Landslides
Figure 5: Epidemic Curve of daily incidence of typhoid fever in Kulyab, Tajikistan 1996.
Figure 6: Comparison of the mortality effect of the six heat-wave events in Budapest, Hungary.
Figure 7: Precipitation Deficit and Drought in Central and South West Asia (1999-2001).
Figure 8: Projected Changing Averages in ECA according to scenario A1B
Figure 9: Migration Patterns in ECA
Figure 10: The links between climate change, migration and health outcomes.



                                                                                               4
Box 1: Climate Change effects on health
Box 2: Lessons learned - control of gastrointestinal outbreaks following 1997 floods (Poland)
Box 3: Urban Heatwaves
Box 4: Fires
Box 5: Moldova’s 2007 Drought
Box 6: Case study - Drought and Migration (Republic of Moldova)
Box 7: Case study - Floods and migration (Kazakhstan)
Box 8: Eutrophication and Human Health




                                                                                                5
                                              CONTEXT

I.       The Health Dimension of Climate Change

Along with other processes that support life, climate systems fundamentally shape
conditions for most living organisms, including humans. In the Europe and Central Asia
(ECA) region and throughout the planet, weather and climate variability often crucially
determine societies’ livelihoods, health and well-being. This paper attempts to aggregate
what is currently known of the current and projected impacts of climate system behavior
on human life.

As reiterated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its fourth
assessment, warming of the climate is “unequivocal” and “very likely due to
anthropogenic causes.” This ongoing and future anthropogenic climate change involves a
change in the radiative forcing1 of the Earth, due to the increased concentration of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and resulting in increased temperatures and altered
meteorological variables. Other effects of this warming include an increase in heavy
rainfall episodes, melting of ice sheets and glaciers, and thermal expansion of the oceans.

The global increase in average temperature of the atmosphere and the oceans is “with
high likelihood” already affecting natural and human systems through regional changes
in climate, notably through increased weather variability and a shift in average
temperatures and precipitation. Scientists say the influence on the physical and biological
systems may even be discernible on the global level in the last three decades2 – a short
time span compared to the periods required, prior to now, for observable change in the
action of climate factors.

Prompted by mounting evidence on the presence and extent of induced climate change, a
number of researchers, institutions and international organizations have directed their
efforts towards predicting and quantifying its impacts on the health of human
populations. In the origins and development of most of these analytical exercises, it has
proven of extreme importance to adequately frame an appropriate specification of the
meteorological exposures of interest (i.e. the specific factors that may directly or
indirectly harm health). This precision proves so critical because various health outcomes
often show disparate lag periods between exposure and effect, with direct implications
for the assessment of causality. Therefore, an overall assessment, including different
types of health endpoints, call for a rigorous definition of timing in exposure factors and
latency periods.




1
   Radiative forcing is the change in the balance between radiation coming into the atmosphere and radiation
going out. A positive radiative forcing tends on average to warm the surface of the Earth (Source: IPCC)
2
  IPCC 2007, WHO 2007


                                                                                                          6
II.      Analytical time scales

As used in the scientific literature, the concepts “climate” and “weather” refer to different
analytical approaches to atmospheric phenomena, and can be summarized over different
scales in time and space. “Weather” refers to the state of the lower atmosphere at a given
time and place, described by variables such as temperature, precipitation, moisture, wind,
etc. “Climate” however, refers to a statistical description of the “average weather” over a
period ranging from months to thousands of years or more; a classical period of analysis
is 30 years.

Predicted impacts of climate change on health will be mediated through the relevant mid
and long-term trends both in climate and in weather phenomena, involving seasonal,
stochastic and long-term occurrence, from the next few years to several decades in the
future. Current studies suggest that effects on health will occur through increased
frequency and/or intensity of extreme weather events and via factors related to a
progressive increase in average atmospheric temperatures.

Changing patterns of precipitation - some regions will become drier while other areas
will become wetter - will add further complexity. Furthermore, increase in precipitation
will likely occur through an increase in the frequency of the heavy precipitation events.
Resulting interactions and modulating influences at the local level will result in a large
pool of potential impacts on human health.

III.     Types of Impacts

Progressive and/or cyclical effects on health will be expected in relation to a gradual
increase in average temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns. They will be
mediated through effects on agricultural and ecosystems’ services (hence on livelihoods),
disruption of social and behavioral systems, synergies with pollution dynamics, changes
in disease transmission patterns, variations in altitudinal and latitudinal ranges of vectors,
and the destructive effects of new weather extremes, among other factors. A model for
the causal pathway from Climate Change to health outcomes is reflected in Box 1 below.

Certainly, a wide array of infectious vector-borne, food-borne and water-borne disease
shows sensitivity to average temperature and/or precipitation. In general, warmer
temperatures within a range improve the viability and shorten the maturation processes of
vectors2 and pathogens. Of growing relevance in ECA are salmonella poisoning, cholera,
and tick-borne and other vector-borne diseases, whose prevalence is projected to
increase.




2
  In epidemiology, a vector is a carrier which transmits an infective agent from one host to another,
frequently an animal, such as insects, etc. (Source: CDC).


                                                                                                        7
Box 1.- Climate Change effects on health




Source: Adapted from McMaster et al (2003)

Climate Change will translate into alterations of regional weather patterns, which in turn will result in increased frequency
and/or intensity of extreme events as well as an increase in average temperature and changes in precipitation. Some of these
factors may burden health by themselves (e.g. heatwaves) but often times they will impact health through altering
transmission pathways in infectious diseases and disruption in livelihoods, food-producing systems and social and behavioral
structures. Resulting health outcomes will be related to infectious (vector-,rodent-,water- and food-borne) diseases,
environmental exposures (e.g. air pollution, high temperature) and diminished or damaged food and water supplies. In this
complex causal chain, modulating influences related to susceptibility and concurring factors will likely have large effects
depending on the local context. Attending to site-specific projected impacts, actions taken to adapt the health sector to Climate
Change will also modulate the exposure-outcome relationship, in a feedback loop. Further research is needed in virtually
every step of the causal pathway, including regional impacts, mediating factors, health effects, evaluation of adaptation
strategies and adequacy of health-specific adaptation actions.


         It must not be overlooked, however, that a sizeable part of the impact of climate change
         on public health will likely occur through the consequences, for health, of the disturbance
         of livelihoods associated with natural and agricultural food-producing ecosystems, rising




                                                                                                                     8
sea-levels and population displacements within and across countries. Such processes may
take decades to become evident, further obscuring the underlying causal links.


IV.    Extremes and Averages

Extreme weather events are expected to become more frequent with climate change. In
some cases, severity of these events is also likely to increase. Health effects from these
extremes can stem from excessively high or low temperatures, as well as of complex
episodes like droughts, severe storms or floods. Although the effects of disastrous
weather on health are particularly difficult to estimate in most developing countries
because of poor surveillance and reporting capacity, heatwaves, floods and droughts will
probably be of high relevance for ECA countries.

An episode of excessively hot days, or heatwave, can in itself cause heat-related illnesses.
The biggest effect, however, will occur through an aggravation of pre-existing diseases,
especially in vulnerable urban populations. Adding to the uncertainty of attributing cause-
specific excess mortality in populations at high baseline risk, heatwaves can further
enhance the formation and residence time of air pollutants, with resulting additional
effects on cardiovascular and respiratory disease.

Floods can cause drowning, traumatic kills or injuries at the onset of the event, but may
also increase morbidity and mortality through disruptions in water and sanitation systems,
spread of vectors, displacement of populations and damage to livelihoods, among other
factors.

Though causal links are especially difficult to establish at a population level, droughts set
the conditions for a wide range of nutritional, infectious, psychological and other health
consequences that usually occur after a severe disruption of basic economic systems,
such as the ones likely to occur in many developing countries in most climate change
scenarios.

In keeping with the inherent complexity of this subject, not all predicted health impacts
of climate change will be adverse. Milder winters are predicted to smooth the seasonal
winter-time peak in mortality that occurs in countries across temperate regions. In
currently hot countries, an increase in average temperatures might reduce the viability of
disease-transmitting vector populations or the carried pathogens themselves, a positive
impact unlikely to occur in the ECA region. Overall, however, evidence suggests that
most health impacts of climate change will be adverse, and of much greater magnitude
than that of positive impacts (see Fig 1. IPCC 2007).




                                                                                             9
  Figure 1




Figure 1: Direction and magnitude of change of selected climate change health impacts. Positive impacts
result from milder winters predicted to smooth the seasonal winter peak in mortality that occurs in countries
across temperate regions. Also, in currently hot countries, an increase in average temperatures might reduce
the viability of disease-transmitting vectors or of the carried pathogens themselves, a positive impact unlikely
to occur in ECA. For confidence guidelines, see www.ipcc.ch/activity/uncertaintyguidancenote.pdf
Source: IPCC 2007.



V.       Cross-cutting issues

Though there is some uncertainty as to the predicted presence and extent of specific risks
at a sub-regional scale, upcoming impacts of climate change will share some cross-
cutting characteristics which are relevant in terms of policy analysis.

Firstly, climate change will not suppose any novel type of environmental exposure;
however, many of the above-mentioned current major threats to public health and
environmental determinants of health are climate-sensitive, and they are predicted to
worsen under most currently considered climate change scenarios.

Secondly, a substantial proportion of the World’s (and ECA’s) population will be
exposed in some way, either directly or indirectly; many of these affected communities
will live in the poorest countries, where health impacts are expected to be greatest. These
widespread exposures over large populations would result in huge effects, with
inequitably shared risks.

VI.      Timeframe for action

The magnitude and relevance of recent and forthcoming impacts immediately raises a
question regarding the available timeframe for action. Indeed, current evidence stresses
the need for urgent decision-making. Changes in climate in the last decades are


                                                                                                         10
responsible for an observable proportion of the current and recent past mortality and
morbidity burden of climate-sensitive events and diseases. According to WHO, climate
change effects on mortality through floods, malaria, diarrhea and malnutrition worldwide
in the year 2000 accounted for an estimated total of 150,000 (0.3%) deaths and the loss of
5,517,000 (0.4%) Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) per year (Campbell-Lendrum
et al. 2005, Zhang et al. 2007).

Under a “Business as Usual” (no intervention) scenario, these impacts are predicted to
increase substantially by 2020 (see Fig 2). Though estimates for ECA region are
comparatively mild compared to other parts of the world (e.g. Sub-Saharian Africa and
Southeast Asia), the order of magnitude and worldwide increasing trend of these burdens
is substantial enough for careful consideration within a precautionary approach.

   Figure 2




Figure 2: Global burden of deaths and DALYs in 2000 and 2020 attributable to climate
change under a no intervention climate scenario. Source: Campbell-Lendrum et al. 2005.

Given the probability of the risks, the size of eventual losses and the potential benefits of
early action, societal response should be initiated despite uncertainties. In particular,
Health services in affected areas should start building their adaptive capacity in order to
adequately respond to the consequences of climate change.

VII.    Assessment Frameworks

Acknowledging the differences in region and country priorities and issues, the World
Health Organization (WHO) recently stressed the need to carry out National Assessments
on human health vulnerability and public health adaptation to climate change. Other
internationally relevant players have also developed different Vulnerability Assessment
frameworks and guidelines on their application to country cases. The intent of these



                                                                                          11
frameworks is to understand current vulnerabilities and to evaluate the capacity of health
systems to modify health infrastructure and adopt relevant measures, in light of nationally
relevant predicted climate change impacts.

A lack of definition as to the plausible indicators to track progress in vulnerability aspects
has been a common shortcoming for the practical application these tools. There is also a
need for a deeper understanding of these vulnerability dimensions in order to facilitate
the issuance of policy-relevant recommendations, tailored to the specific countries’
needs. Further research is needed, along with pilot studies. Results of the application of
these analytical tools are yet to be compared systematically in different settings, but they
constitute, as of today, a solid starting point for the comprehensive type of assessment
that will be needed for sound health policy decision-making in the wake of climate
change.


VIII. Adaptive Capacity in Health Systems

As in most other sectors, building adaptive capacity for health will require a cross-
boundary dialogue between health practitioners, decision-makers, the public and the
climate change science community. As a component of the overall need for adaptation to
climate change, adaptive strategies in health will be based on actions that governments,
institutions and the public can take to adjust to impacts, moderate their damage or cope
with their consequences.

Most relevant actions for adaptive capacity will be those enabling commonly accepted
good public health and development practice, beyond climate change considerations. The
creation and maintenance of basic public health infrastructure in terms of training,
surveillance, immunization, vector control and emergency preparedness and response
will both provide development benefits and increase resiliency to health impacts of
climate change. As circumstances continue to change, novel actions and strategies will
develop through the appearance of new technologies, discoveries and a growing
understanding of the relationships between natural and man-made systems and human
health.

In this report, adaptive strategies are classified as anticipatory (planned and implemented
before the onset of an event) or responsive (planned before the onset and implemented at
the onset of an event). The timescale of a responsive adaptive strategy depends on the
type of hazard, its duration, and its health-associated impacts. For example, a responsive
adaptive strategy to flood could last up to a few days, while the flooding occurs, months
afterwards, in order to control potential breakouts of vector and water-borne diseases, or
even years afterwards, in order to provide psychological support for victims with event-
associated trauma-induced disorders.

Any meaningful package of nationally relevant adaptive strategies will have to be based
on a comprehensive assessment of vulnerabilities, including the magnitude and nature of
specific exposure, the underlying sensitivity of the population to that exposure, and the



                                                                                           12
current ability of the health-related systems to respond to the resulting impacts (i.e. their
adaptive capacity).

Once evaluated for feasibility and effectiveness, risk and sensitivity will have to be
addressed first by policy action. Only then can strategies be designed to deal with
multiple vulnerability dimensions simultaneously, including economic resources,
technology, use of information and human capital, institutional constraints, and equity,
among others. Governments, health institutions and the public will have to assume
responsibility in the design and implementation of these strategies, both at the
anticipatory and responsive stages.

Ultimately, only an ongoing balanced and constructive dialogue among stakeholders will
allow for the decisions and actions needed to enhance the ability of communities to cope
with current and future climatic variability.

IX.      Report Structure

This report focuses on the health impacts of climate change that are relevant for ECA
countries, assessing the vulnerability of health sectors to these impacts, and providing
insights into building health-specific adaptive capacity. The impacts of climate change on
health are detailed and analyzed at various levels, in relation to an increased frequency
and/or intensity of extreme weather events as well as those due to a progressive increase
in temperatures entailing expanded disease vector distribution and other climate-sensitive
factors. However, climate change also impacts health outcomes through modulating
influences related to pollution, shifting coastlines, etc. and environmental changes such as
water scarcity, mud slides, UV rays etc. These environmental changes impact behavior in
areas such as migration, hygiene, health services seeking, water utilization, food safety,
and agricultural livelihoods, including fishing.

The report is divided into three main sections: (i) discussion of climate change events and
their health impacts in ECA; (ii) a country-level climate change-health vulnerability
assessment; and (iii) adaptive strategies for optimizing health outcomes in the face of
climate change.

Section one reviews published scientific articles and reports3 which document the direct
and indirect impact of climate change on health in ECA. “Climate change” here refers to
extreme weather events (floods, heatwaves and droughts) as well as to changing average
temperature and precipitation. The section also reviews indirect health impacts, such as
from migration and shifting coastlines. The ECA Climate Change-Health Outcome
Matrix outlines the potential climate change burden on morbidity and mortality (see
Table 1).


3
  A detailed description of the reviewed literature is summarized in Annexes 1-3 to include the following:
reference; a brief synopsis of the study/report; location in ECA where the study/report is applicable; study
design, if applicable; population affected by the exposure; documented outcomes, and measures of effect, if
given or if their calculation is possible.


                                                                                                         13
Section two of the report deals with country-level climate change and health vulnerability
assessment tools. It builds on both the Australian Government’s Climate Change, Risk
and Vulnerability report (ref) and the World Health Organization’s (WHO’s) framework
(Ref WHO-Europe) for the assessment of adaptive capacity – a risk management tool
that utilizes information on country-specific exposures and sensitivities. This section goes
on to develop a Climate Change-Health Vulnerability Assessment Toolkit, which points
up sources of vulnerability in order to actively inform health policies and sector-specific
dialogue (see Fig. 3).

Section three focuses on identifying policies and measures to enable Health Systems to
cope with the expected impacts of Climate change, by building adaptive capacity
consistently, usefully, and manageably. Adaptive strategies are categorized as
anticipatory (in advance of climate change effects) or responsive (mostly planned and at
the institutional level). The main output of this section is an Adaptive Strategy Matrix for
the different events, with recommendations for government, health institutions and the
public.




                                                                                         14
                Section One
Evidence Base for Climate Change Events and
          Health Impacts in ECA




                                              15
                                 SECTION ONE
       Evidence Base for Climate Change Events and Health Impacts in ECA

1.1 Overview and Climate Change-Health Outcomes Matrix

The health impacts of climate-related exposures in ECA are treated in this section, first in
a summary matrix, followed by a closer look at the direct and indirect impacts of extreme
weather events (floods, heat waves, and droughts) and the impacts of changing average
temperatures. Both the sudden occurrences as well as the more gradual shift in
temperatures may affect human migration behavior, with health implications both for
migrants and for host societies.

The severity and frequency of extreme weather events is likely to increase, according to
most projections. While effects of extreme weather events are difficult to track in
developing countries because of poor capacity, they are likely to be notable in ECA.
Floods, for example, in addition to causing drownings, often promote the spread of
disease through rodents, insect vectors, and water and food-borne agents. Each of these
can increase dramatically after a flood event. Extreme heat can harm a person’s health
outright, or can exacerbate existing health conditions, especially in urban areas for those
sensitive to the worsening of air pollution that is caused by heat. Droughts disrupt
economic systems and weaken populations’ disease immunity through inappropriate
nutrition.

Gradual climate change affects the conditions for disease vectors over time as well. The
incidence of Cholera, salmonellosis, lyme borreliosis, tick-borne encephalitis, dengue
fever and malaria may increase when new zones become warm enough to support their
spread. Warmer temperatures over bodies of water also allow nutrients and bacteria
harmful to humans to flourish.

By devastating livelihoods, all of these events and changes may spur migration. The
migration process is stressful and often characterized by poor access to health and
sanitation services; it puts a burden on host populations as well as migrants.

Climate change itself is difficult to predict with accuracy, with uncertainty and unknown
factors, to contend with in projection models. The health outcomes that are linked to
climate change depend on a host of factors as well, some quantity of which are, in all
likelihood, presently unanticipated. This section represents an attempt to account for
known factors and possible outcomes as related to the human health-climate change
nexus.

The Climate Change-Health Outcome Matrix
As indicated above, the following matrix was developed from a review of the literature
that treats the relationship between climate change and health.




                                                                                         16
Table 1
                                                 Direct Impacts                       Indirect Impacts
    Exposure
                                       Extreme Weather Events
                                                                      Changing                    Coastal
                                  Heatwaves Floods Droughts                         Migration
    Outcome                                                           Averages                     Lines

    Mortality (Cause-specific)
    Drowning                                     x
    Physical Trauma                              x
    Heat Exhaustion                x             x
    Fire                           x                         x
    Suicide                                      x
    Morbidity (System-Related)
    Respiratory Diseases
    Asthma                                                                x
    Acute Lower Respiratory
                                                             x
    Tract Infections
    Mental Diseases
    Depression                                   x           x                          x
    Post-Traumatic        Stress
                                                 x           x                          x
    Disorder
    Reproductive Diseases
    Perinatal complications*                     x
    Amenorrhea                                   x
    Morbidity (Transmission Pathway-Related)
    Rodent/Vector Borne Diseases
    Leptospirosis                                x
    West Nile fever                              x
    Tahyna                                       x
    Malaria                                      x                        x             x
    Dengue                                                                x
    TBE                                                                   x
    Lyme Borreliosis                                                      x
    Water/Food Borne Diseases
    Cholera                                      x           x            x             x
    Dysentery                                    x                                      x
    Hepatitis A                                  x                                      x
    Salmonellas                                  x                        x
    Acute Toxicity                                                                                    x
    Other
    Malnutrition                                             x                          x
    HIV/AIDS                                                                            x
    Allergies                                                             x
    Dehydration                                              x
    Dermatitis                                                                                        x
    Gastroduodenal        ulcer
                                                 x
    disease
Table 1: Climate Change-Health Outcome Matrix4
*Includes pregnancy loss and disorder (premature delivery, missed abortion, birth asphyxia, premature
rupture of membranes, intrauterine growth retardation).
‘x’ denotes evidence for association
        denotes no evidence suggesting association


4
    Crosses (x) represent evidence of an association between defined exposures and health outcomes.


                                                                                                          17
The matrix represents a simplified summary of possible associations. In reality, the
mediating causal pathways between climate change and human health are highly
complex, with modulating influences whose analysis is far beyond the scope of this
report. Increased frequency, intensity and duration of heatwaves, for instance, would
increase mortality, but would also imperil livelihoods (e.g. killing cattle and crops) and
energy supplies (e.g. with blackouts), and would exacerbate urban air pollution. More
frequent and severe floods would cause drownings, but would also facilitate epidemics.
Droughts affect food and water supplies and thus increase malnutrition and
accompanying illnesses. Changes in patterns of precipitation are predicted to decrease
crop yields, but will also influence the range and distribution of vectors for certain
infectious diseases.

Acknowledging the multitude of ultimate exposures, causal pathways and health
endpoints, the matrix focuses on mortality and morbidity outcomes for which there is
solid and consistent evidence of likely effects due directly or indirectly to extreme
weather events and a gradual increase in average temperatures.

Extreme weather events and changing averages are considered to have direct effects on
human health through deaths by trauma and the increased spread of disease vectors.

1.2 Extreme Weather Events

As mentioned above, and as indicated by the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (FCCC) and the WHO, natural climate variability over a period of time,
coupled with human activities that directly or indirectly affect and change the
composition of the atmosphere are expected to increase the frequency of extreme weather
events such as floods, heatwaves, and droughts, with mostly negative impacts. Hardest hit
will be low income countries where health sector capacity is weak and populations are
generally more vulnerable.

1.2.1 Floods

Floods account for half of fatalities due to natural disasters world-wide (Noji 1991). Flash
floods are more fatal than river floods and have death rates comparable to those of
earthquakes (Jonkman 2005). Most flood fatalities are due to drowning (hypothermia and
asphyxiation), with the elderly at greatest risk (Ahern et al. 2005). Heart attacks, carbon
monoxide poisoning, fires, electrocution, and trauma, including vehicle-related accidents,
also contribute to the death toll.

While most documented fatalities are reported during the flood event, some occur before
or after. Pre-event fatalities may occur under conditions of stressful evacuations. In the
2002 floods in Germany, three out of fourteen heart attack fatalities were reported during
evacuation (Jonkman and Kelman 2005). Unplanned hospital evacuations prevented a
hospital from extending its full services (Meusel and Kirch 2005). Loss of life during
evacuations may be avoided through improved organization and preparation (Jonkman et



                                                                                         18
al. 2005). Post-event fatalities include accidents during clean-up, but few studies5
longitudinally examine the post-event mortality effects on overall mortality rates due to
the challenge of ascertaining causality through the variable time elapsed between the
event and outcome (Ahern et al 2005)

Flood-related mortality in ECA

The relative vulnerability of several ECA countries for flood-mortality between 1980 and
2000 is listed in Fig. 4, as calculated by a UNDP natural disaster risk analysis. Relative
vulnerability here is defined as the annual average number of deaths due to floods over
the annual average number of people exposed x 1,000,000.

For that period, Georgia exhibited the greatest vulnerability, followed by the Czech
Republic, Slovakia, and Moldova. Georgia had a severe shortage of medical supplies
following independence; in 1991 the crisis required emergency international aid (OFDA
1991). An additional burden to the health system in Georgia was the internal
displacement of large populations, due to ongoing civil conflict and the aftermath of past
natural disasters. Between 1987 and 1989, earthquakes, floods, and landslides caused the
displacement of 20,000 people in the Svanetia and Ajara regions (UNHCR 2004). In
1993, thousands were driven out of settlements; in 1998 the same population, swelling to
40,000, was driven out of a second settlement (OFDA 1998).

In 1997, 29 people were killed in flooding in the Czech Republic (OFDA 1997). Two
weeks after returning to their homes, many had to evacuate again as a second wave of
flooding hit the area. The same flood hit parts of Poland and killed 55 people. In the same
year, 20 people were killed in a flood in Romania.




5
    Ahern et al 2005 reviews several of these studies.


                                                                                        19
Figure3
                                                                        Europe & Central Asia 1980-2000
                                                   Relative Vulnerability* to Floods in the Context of Flood-related Mortality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

    Relative Vulnerability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                             FY




                                                    Bu




                                                                                                  Hu




                                                                                                                          Po




                                                                                                                                                                         Ar


                                                                                                                                                                                     Ro


                                                                                                                                                                                                Tu


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mo


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sl o


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cz


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ge
                                        Cr




                                                                Ky


                                                                Be


                                                                                       Ka




                                                                                                             Az




                                                                                                                                    Ru


                                                                                                                                                 Uk


                                                                                                                                                             Al b



                                                                                                                                                                            me
                                                      l ga




                                                                                                                            l an




                                                                                                                                                                                                  r ke


                                                                                                                                                                                                            go




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ec
                                           oa
                               R




                                                                                                    ng




                                                                                                                                                                                       ma
                                                                   r gy


                                                                   l ar


                                                                                         za




                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                   r ai




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l do




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              or g
                                                                                                                                      s si




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          va
                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                               rba
                              Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      hR
                                             tia




                                                                                                      ar y




                                                                                                                                                                              ni a




                                                                                                                                                                                                              sl a
                                                                                           kh
                                                                        us




                                                                                                                                                        ne
                                                          ria




                                                                                                                                d




                                                                                                                                                                                                      y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                         n ia
                                                                        zR




                                                                                                                                       aF




                                                                                                                                                                    ia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                va




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                  ij an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Re
                                                                                           sta
                                 c




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vi a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ep
                                                                                                                                         ed
                                   ed




                                                                           ep




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pu
                                                                                              n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ub
                                                                                                                                             era
                                      on




                                                                              ub




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b li



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           li c
                                        ia




                                                                                l ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                                                                 tion




Figure 3: Relative Vulnerability to Floods in the Context of Flood-related Mortality; Europe and
Central Asia 1980-2000
* Relative vulnerability= the yearly average number of people killed by flood/ Average yearly population
exposed to floods * 1,000,000.
Source: UNDP

Further information on the number of deaths and the affected population for each country
can be extracted from the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT www.emdat.be), a
collaboration between the Belgian Government and the World Health Organization.6 The
EM-DAT is updated often, but information is sometimes incomplete7 and thus should be
used only cautiously for regional analysis. Nevertheless, it does provide an excellent
source of information and is increasingly being used for many different types of reports.

According to EM-DAT, the top ten most fatal flood events in ECA since 2000 have been
in Russia, Turkey, Romania, Poland and Tajikistan (see Table 2).

Table 2
Year                         Country                                             Location                                                                                                             Casualties
2002                         Russia                                              Novorossiisk                                                                                                         167
2002                         Russia                                              Stavropol, Krasnodar, Karachaevo-                                                                                    91
                                                                                 Cherkesia, Ingushetia, Adygea,
                                                                                 Chechnya, Kabardono-Balkaria, North
                                                                                 Osetia-Alania, Dagestan
2006                          Turkey                                             Cinar, Bismil                                                                                                        47

6
  The criteria for entering flood events, or any disaster events, in EM-DAT are one or more of the following: 10 or more people
reported killed; 100 or more people reported affected; declaration of a state of emergency, or call for international assistance.
7
 For example, as of Jan. 2008, the database still has not entered the event in 1998 in Uzbekistan when the
Aksu and Shahimardan river floods killed 109 people (Khadjibayev et a.l 2005).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
2002                           Rize, Corum,Yozgat, Kars and Mus
                                      Turkey                           34
                               provinces
2005          Romania          Harghita, Mures, Dolj, Bacau, Vrancea,  33
                               Galati, Braila, Bistrita, Gorj, Suceava
2006          Romania          Arbore, Bistrita, Maramures, Arad       30
2001          Poland           Malopolskie, Swietokrzyskie,            27
                               Donoslaskie, Oploskie, Slaskie,
                               Warminsko-Mazurkie, Podlaskie,
                               Gdansk, Slupsk regions
2005          Romania          Alba, Tulcea, Giurgiu, Vrancea, Bacau,  24
                               Braila, Galati, Vrancea, Ialomita
2002          Tajikistan       Dasht, Langar                           24
2007          Tajikistan       Asht district                           21
Table 2: Top Ten Flood Events Recorded in EM-DAT that Killed the Greatest Number of People;
Europe & Central Asia 2000-2007.
Source: EM-DAT, January 2008.

Note that three out of the ten events were flash floods, often associated with high
mortality rates. With the exception of the 2006 flood in Turkey, the ten events took place
in the summer. Two of the events were associated with a secondary hazard: landslides.
Thirty-one flood events recorded in EM-DAT in ECA countries between 2000 and 2007
were associated with landslides (See Fig. 4).

Figure 4

                              Europe & Central Asia 2000-2007 Flood Events Associated with Landslides
                                                     and the Number of Deaths


                          9
                          8                                                                            Over 50 deaths reported
       Number of Events




                          7
                          6
                                                                                                       Betw een 11- 50 deaths reported
                          5
                          4
                          3                                                                            Betw een 1-10 deaths reported
                          2
                          1                                                                            No deaths reported
                          0
                              Az e

                                      Bo




                                          Sl o

                                                                  Bul



                                                                  Ma

                                                                  Ru

                                                                                       Tu

                                                                                       Ge

                                                                                       Ro

                                                                                       Ta
                                          Se




                                                                  Ky
                                        s ni




                                                                                         rke




                                                                                         ji ki
                                                                     s si




                                                                                          ma
                                              rbi a




                                                                     rgy

                                                                     c ed




                                                                                          or g
                                              va k

                                                                      gar
                                  r
                                bai




                                                                                               sta
                                                  a-H




                                                                          a

                                                                                               y




                                                                                                n ia
                                                                          z st




                                                                                                ia
                                                                           ia
                                                   ia




                                                                           oni
                                                    Mo
                                   j an




                                                                                                   n
                                                                              an
                                                      erc




                                                                               aF
                                                       nte
                                                          ego




                                                                                  RY
                                                           neg
                                                             ve n

                                                              ro
                                                                 ia




Figure 4: ECA 200-2007 Landslides
Source: EM-DAT. Based on information obtained from database on January 2008.




                                                                                                                                       21
In addition to EM-DAT, several databases8 have been developed to record flood-related
deaths. To date, they also do not record epidemiological information on cause of death,
nor demographic data on victims. This lack of detailed data makes well-supported risk-
assessment difficult.

Records on behavioral factors are also scarce ; there are, however, studies and records on
the influence of behaviors in flood-related mortality and morbidity. In 2002, 8 of 19
fatalities in German floods were due to unnecessary behavior such as going into the
house to pick up laundry or crossing a flooded street (Reimer 2002; Jonkman and Kelman
2005). With better public awareness of safety precautions, these fatalities can be
reduced.

Water-borne and food-borne diseases

Diarrhea and dysentery

An outbreak of dysentery – an infectious disease caused by the bacterium Shigella
dysenteriae - followed a series of severe floods that hit parts of Tajikistan in 1992
(OFDA). A significant burden on the health system at that time was the effect of civil
unrest; displaced people from floods had to keep moving from place to place due to civil
strife. The flooding affected water and irrigation systems and the outbreak resulted in
increased childhood mortality in the villages of Kykyab and Kurgan Tyube (now known
as Qurghonteppa) (OFDA).

Typhoid fever

Typhoid fever is an infectious disease that spreads through ingestion of food or drink that
is contaminated with the bacterium Salmonella typhi from an infected person’s urine or
feces. Flooding may lead to the contamination of water supplies with sewage water that
contains the bacterium.

In late May 1996, following heavy rains and flooding in Tajikistan, the already poorly-
maintained sewage system, contaminated with Salmonella typhi, mixed with drinking
water supplies. An outbreak of typhoid fever followed, with up to 7,516 cases reported in
August, of which 34% were children under 14 years of age (WHO 1996). The situation
was aggravated by flood damage to public facilities; the OFDA reports that 50 health
clinics and schools were damaged. Tarr et al. report that the open toilets that served as a
sanitary facility for the main hospital in Kulyab were inundated. By the end of that
month, many of the hospital’s typhoid cases came from a 200-meter radius around those
toilets (Tarr et al. 1999).

Conditions favorable to the Tajikistan outbreak were present before the May floods. Due
to civil unrest, government funding of public health faltered. In 1995, soap was not easily

8
 Examples of such databases can be found at the Dartmouth Flood Observatory
(www.dartmouth.edu/~floods/), the Asian Disaster Reduction Center (ADRC http://www.adrc.or.jp), the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR www.unisdr.org), and Swiss Re (www.swissre.com).


                                                                                                   22
available and chlorination of water was discontinued due to lack of supplies (Tarr et al.
1999). In some parts of the country, people relied on open canals for water supply (Tarr
et al. 1999). When the flood hit in 1996, a total of 300 canals and irrigation systems were
ruined (OFDA). Finally when the outbreak happened in May 1996, an additional burden
to the health system was a shortage of diagnosis materials and treatment drugs (WHO
1996).


 Box 2: Lessons learned from the control of gastrointestinal outbreaks following the 1997 floods in
 Poland.

 As a measure to reduce the spread of hepatitis A following the major floods in 1997 in Poland, annual
 vaccination against the disease increased from between 13 and 23 thousand people to 166 thousand
 people per year. In 1996 the endemic level of the disease was considered medium. By 1997 the level
 was low, and by 2002, very low despite the occurrence of another major flood in 2001. An intervention
 such as increasing vaccination levels at appropriate times seems to be effective at preventing the spread
 of disease (Magdzik and Czarkowski 2004).

 Additionally, Plonka and Dzbeński (1999) show that were was no increase in the frequency of intestinal
 infections in 7 year-old children from 25 affected provinces in Poland following the 1997 floods.




                                                                                                         23
Figure 5




Figure 5: Epidemic Curve of daily incidence of typhoid fever in Kulyab, Tajikistan 1996. Epidemic
peaks occurred after heavy rainfall.
Source: Tarr et al. 1999.

Vector-borne diseases

West Nile Virus

West Nile Virus (WNV) spreads most commonly through the bite of an infected
mosquito. Fatality rates are relatively high for the elderly. Flooding creates favorable
conditions for vector increase, as larvae thrive in standing water.9

Following the 1999 flood in the Czech Republic, Aedes mosquitoes rapidly increased in
flood-affected areas (Gratz 2006). Central Europe’s first WNV outbreak followed;
thirteen of 619 patients screened had WNV antibodies (Hubálek and Halouzka 1999),
and a new strain appeared (Bakonyi et al. 2005).

To date, the greatest recorded outbreak of WNV in Europe, and the first in an urban area
(Han et al. 1999), was in Romania in 1996, with 527 cases of meningitis or encephalitis.
The likely principle vector was Culex. pipiens (Gratz 2006). A study on the risk factors
for obtaining WNV among apartment residents in Bucharest showed that a flooded
basement was a significant risk factor [OR= 3.94 (1.16-13.7)] ( Han et al. 1999).

9
  According to Hubálek: “ [WNV] Outbreaks are associated with high populations of mosquitoes
(especially Culex spp.) caused by flooding and subsequent dry and warm weather, or formation of suitable
larval breeding habitats (Hubálek and Halouzka 1999).”


                                                                                                      24
WNV is a growing public health concern in Europe, (Gratz 2006), and a likely increase in
flooding as climate change continues will exacerbate this risk.

Tahyna

Tahyna is the most common California group virus in Europe and Asia. Vectors include
Oc. sticticus, Oc. cantans, Ae. vexans, and Ae. cinereus (CDC year; Hubálek et al. 2005).
Following the floods of 1997 in the Czech Republic, antibodies to Tahyna were detected
in 333 (53.8%) out of 619 inhabitants of a flooded area (Gratz 2006), and after the 2002
flood, in 82 (16.5%) of 497 inhabitants of flooded areas (Hubálek et al. 2005).10

One study categorized serum samples according to the residential region of the Tahyna
patient. Risk zones were designated based on the number of mosquitoes in each region
following the floods; one control zone was also included. It was found that there was a
positive correlation between flood risk zone and seroprevalence of Tahyna. Tahyna
seroprevalence was significantly higher in risk zones than in the control zone (χ 2 =14.57;
p=0.002). Seroprevalence also increased as residential distance to floodplain forests
decreased (χ 2 =8.51; p=0.003) (Hubálek et al. 2005).

Malaria

Although malaria has been eradicated in most countries in Europe, cases have been
reported in the past 10 years in Armenia and Central Asia. The WHO (year) reports that
in Azerbaijan in 1997, mudslides worsened malaria prevalence. Although reported
incident malaria cases in Azerbaijan decreased from 13,135 cases in 1996 to 9,911 cases
in 1997, prevalence remained high, denoting further need for widespread treatment. The
mudslides may have made it more difficult to control the disease spread as it increased
mosquito breeding sites considerably.


Rodent-borne diseases

Leptospirosis

Leptospirosis is an infectious disease that spreads through contact with moist soil, mud,
vegetation, or fresh water contaminated with the bacterium Leptospira interrogans from
the urine of infected rodents or other animals. Flooding helps spread the bacteria as water
saturates the soil, pushing the bacteria to the surface.

At least three flooding -related outbreaks of leptospirosis have been reported in ECA. In
Krasnodar Territory, Russia in 1997, defects in sanitary and veterinary measures after a
flood event led to an outbreak (Kalashnikov et al. 2003). Most of those infected were

10
  A study by Hubálek Z et al 2005 categorized serum samples according to the residential region of the
patient, with risk zones designated in the order of the number of mosquitoes that followed the floods, and
one control zone.


                                                                                                         25
exposed to contaminated freshwater, soil, or animals through “fishing, work on plots of
land adjoining their summer cottages, [or] dog breeding.” (Gol'denshteĭn ZA et al. 2001).

In Ukraine, leptospirosis followed floods in 1997 (Githeko and Woodward 2003) – 102
people were affected, according to EM-DAT. Registered cases continued to increase,
from 2.75 to 3.17 per 100,000, between 1997 and 1998 (National Report on the State of
the Environment in Ukraine, 1998).

After two major floods in the Czech Republic in 1997 and 2002, cases of leptospirosis
increased from .3 to .9 per 100,000, with at least 92 infected in 1997 and 94 in 2002.
Prior to this, the disease had been extremely rare (Zitek and Benes 2005).

Leptospirosis seems to be a re-emerging infectious disease in some parts of ECA (Pappas
et al. 2007). Floods, if not well managed, may create favorable conditions for the spread
of the disease.

Other water-borne and food-borne diseases

Other water-borne diseases were also reported following the May flooding in Tajikistan;
a 3-fold increase in S. paratyphi infections, and a less than .5-fold increase in hepatitis A
and shigellosis (Tarr et al. 1999).

Increase in cholera, hepatitis A, and salmonella in Ukraine followed the 1995 flood that
was caused by the heaviest rainfalls in over a century (OFDA). The floods inundated the
sewage system and hundreds of thousands of cubic meters of sewage water were being
released into rivers daily (OFDA).

In 2004, heavy rains caused the flooding of the Varzob river in Tajikistan which led to
the pollution of 60% of the municipal water supply (OFDA).

The international community is aware of the indirect threats that floods pose to health.
For example, in April 2006, a warm winter caused snow melt, which, compounded by
heavy rain, flooded half the regions of the Czech Republic. Amidst concern over the
spread of vector-borne diseases, US-AID donated $30,000, for the transportation of
larvicide (OFDA 2006).

Other Flood-related health effects

Mental Health
Experiencing a major flood event, losing loved ones and precious belongings, sustaining
injuries, and dealing with cleanup of damages and insurance may create stress with
effects that linger long after the flood waters recede. Ohl et al. report that “being
evacuated [during a flood] from home and losing personal possessions may undermine
people’s sense of place as well as their sense of attachment and self-identify.” (Ohl et al.
2000). Mental health issues were observed following most major flood events in Europe,
notably in Poland after the 1997 flood.



                                                                                          26
In 1997, heavy rains caused the flooding of the Oder River, affecting 86 cities and towns,
875 villages, and 450,000 farms (OFDA 1997). The economic toll amounted to
$3,500,000,000, compared to a loss of $500,000,000 in a 1987 flood (EM-DAT). These
losses are the highest sustained from any flood event in all of ECA, as recorded in EM-
DAT. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies reported a
study of 50 flood- linked suicides in Poland in the two-month period following the flood
event (Hajat et al. 2005).

Numerous studies were conducted in Poland on depression and post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) in children, adolescents, and adults affected by the 1997 flood (for
examples, see works by Bokszczanin and Norris). A study by Bokszczanin shows an 18%
prevalence of long-term PTSD in a group of children and adolescents 28 months after the
flood event (Bokszczanin 2007). The study shows that PTSD symptoms and the level of
trauma experienced - an indicator of flood severity - are positively correlated. This latter
result was also found in a study by Norris et al. on adults one month after the flood event
(Norris 2002). Both studies highlight the need for mental health interventions and
programs immediately following a flood disaster as well as during the few years
afterward.

Others

Other outcomes or diseases that are related to flood events are discussed in several
studies by Neuberg et al. on the 1997 flood event in Poland, which show the indirect
effects of floods on physical health through increased stress levels. Neuberg looked at the
consequences of flood-induced stress on physical health. One study found that stress
experienced during the flooding period caused hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
amenorrhea – the absence of menstrual bleeding – in adolescent females (Neuberg et al.
1999). Another found that, among pregnant women stressed during the flood event,
pregnancy loss and perinatal complications, including premature delivery, were relatively
high (Neuberg et al. 1998). These studies highlight the need for additional medical
attention for stress and non-physical trauma.

1.2.2    Heatwaves

Heatwaves are events characterized by higher than average temperatures that last for one
day or more. To date, there is no international standard definition of a heatwave; the term
is relative to the usual weather of an area. One challenge for creating a standard definition
is that threshold temperatures across nations and within a nation are not the same through
time and place. A temperature that is normal in one climate may be considered a
heatwave if it is outside the normal pattern for another climate.

The long-term trend of warming average temperatures is predicted to increase the
frequency, intensity, and duration of heatwaves. It is also predicted to decrease the
number of frost days. Below (Table 4) are projections for heatwave duration index and
frost days in ECA for the period of 2031-2050, under emissions scenario A1B, where it is



                                                                                          27
assumed CO2 emissions will continue to increase until 2050, and then begin to decline.

Table 4
Region/Country        Heatwave duration index 1 Frost days2 mean change
                      mean change (spatial variation (spatial variation min;max)
                      min;max)
Siberia and Far East 29 (8; 50)                      -14 (-33;-11)
Russia
South Siberia         23 ( 18; 30)                   -14 ( -18; -11)
Urals and Western 31 (19; 35)                        -18 (-22; -15)
Siberia
Western Arctic Russia 35 (31;43)                     -20 (-25: -14)
Central and Volga 34 (31; 36)                        -23 (-27;-18)
Russia
North Caucasus Russia 37 (21; 33)                    -20 ( -26; -14)
Baltic Russia         31 (21; 34)                    -23 (-27; -20)
Baltics               25 (17; 31)                    -30 (-33; -24)
Kazakhstan            29 ( 19;35)                    -22 ( -27; -12)
Central Asia          22 (16;29)                     -21 (-36; -10)
Caucasus              23 (15;27)                     -22 (-29;-9)
Central Europe        28 (19; 32)                    -26 (-33; -11)
Southeastern Europe   25 (20; 31)                    -17 (-31; -5)
Table 4: Mean Change* for heatwave duration index and frost days for the period of 2031-2050
compared to 1981-2000 under emissions scenario A1B
1
  Heatwave duration index= a period of more than 5 consecutive days where the maximum temperatures are
5oC greater than the normal daily maximum summer temperatures for the period of 1961-1990.
2
  Frost days= the number of days where the absolute temperature is less than 0oC.
* Results are based on 8 General Circulation Models (GCMs). All results display model concordance
where over 75% of models run show same sign of change.
Source: M. Westphal 2008.

While the projections show an increase in warm days and a decrease in cold days, this is
only as related to anthropogenic climate change. Natural climate variations, such as La
Niña and El Niño, may add more days of extreme ambient temperatures.

A review of the known health effects of heatwaves in ECA follows.

Excess Mortality

Heatwave related mortalities are generally more thoroughly documented than related
morbidities.11 In epidemiological studies, the mortality effects of heatwaves are usually
discussed in terms of attributed deaths and deaths in excess of the norm. A variety of
methods are used to obtain these numbers. Excess deaths are sometimes measured by

11
   While the positive correlation between high ambient temperatures and mortality have been examined and
established in many cities (e.g. Pattenden et al. 2003 for the city of Sofia, and Ravich et al. 2007 for the
city of Moscow; see appendix), the added affect of heatwave events on mortality have also been examined
specifically (e.g. Kyselý 2004 for the Czech Republic and Páldy et al. 2005 for Budapest; see appendix).


                                                                                                         28
subtracting observed mortality from expected mortality, the latter usually estimated using
regression models.

For example, in July 2001, Moscow experienced a heatwave resulting in more than 276
deaths (EM-DAT). The heatwave was unusually long, with temperatures above 25° C
lasting for 9 consecutive days, as contrasted with the long term average of 3 days per
year. Mortality for that July in Moscow was 93% higher than the multiyear average
mortality for the month of July (Granberg et al. 2008). The heatwaves in Croatia,
Slovenia, and the Czech Republic that summer caused 788, 289 and 418 excess deaths,
respectively (EM-DAT).

Methods for calculating the excess deaths from heatwaves are under constant revision.
The initial estimates for the 2003 heatwave in Europe were 22,000-45,000 excess deaths;
the latest estimates are 70,000 (Robine 2007).

The timing, the duration, and the magnitude of a heatwave event all impact mortality. A
study by Páldy et al. for 3 pairs of heatwaves in Budapest, each pair occurring in the
same year (for the years 1994, 1998, and 2000) shows that the mortality effect of the first
heatwave during each year was greater than for the second, regardless of the duration and
magnitude of the event.

There are two possible explanations for this finding. In one, the population may not have
been acclimatized to heat earlier in the season, or may have been better prepared for the
second wave. In the second, those most vulnerable within the population may have died
during the first wave; this is known as the mortality displacement effect (Páldy et al.
2005). The stronger mortality effects of heatwaves that occur earlier in the season have
also been noted elsewhere; see Hajat et al. 2002.

Cause-specific mortality

Heatwaves can cause death (1) directly through causing heat illnesses, (2) by aggravating
pre-existing heat-sensitive medical conditions, (3) by placing pressure on water and
electrical systems, (4) through risk-associated behavioural responses (5) through
worsening environmental conditions, especially air quality . The following is a discussion
of each of these factors.




                                                                                        29
Figure 6




Figure 6: Comparison of the mortality effect of the six heat-wave events in Budapest, Hungary. X-
axis time of year. Y-axis excess mortality, all cause, all age (%) with 95% confidence intervals
Source: Páldy et al. 2005.



Heatwave-related Morbidity

One of the indicators for increased morbidity during heatwaves is increased ambulance
call-outs. During the 2003 heatwave in Europe, there was such an increase, for example
as reported in Budapest (Páldy et al. 2005). Similarly, during the 2007 heatwave in
Europe, emergency clinics throughout Bosnia-Herzegovina experienced twice as many
emergencies as usual, and in Bucharest in Romania call-outs reached nearly 20,000
during the heatwave period (DPA 2007, Salzmann 2007).

The EM-DAT reports an increased number of people requiring medical attention as a
direct result of heatwave events (see Table 5). However, detailed information on the type
of medical assistance required is not recorded.

Table 5
           Heatwave
           Temp. Record                                                    Number of heat-wave
Year       °C                 Country (Location)                           related morbidities*
2005       36                 Romania (Bucharest)                          500
2000a      46                 Turkey                                       300
2000       35                 Croatia (Zagreb, Split, Osijek, Rijeka )     200
2006       36                 Romania                                      200


                                                                                              30
 1996       40                 Romania                                        200
 2000       43                 Romania ( Bucharest, Bechet )                  100
 2007       40.3               Slovakia                                       89
 2000       42                 Serbia Montenegro                              70
 2007b      45.5               Bulgaria                                       50
Table 5: The reported number of morbidities as a result of heatwave events in ECA
* Reported in EM-DAT as number of injured, the people suffering from physical injuries, trauma or an
illness requiring medical treatment as a direct result of a disaster.
a
  Heatwave associated with drought event.
b
  Heatwave associated with wild fires and drought event.
(Source: EM-DAT. Based on information obtained in January 2008).



Heat Illnesses

Heatstroke is the most severe heat illness. It occurs when the body, exposed to ambient
heat, is overexerted and stops sweating; body temperatures rise to dangerous levels.
Fainting, organ dysfunction, or death may occur.

Heat cramps and heat exhaustion are other heat illnesses that may result in serious
complications. Heat cramps occur when the body sweats vigorously, increasing heart
rate, and causing muscular pain due to loss of body salt. Heat exhaustion, similarly,
increases heart rate and is characterized by symptoms of nausea. If left untreated, it may
develop into heatstroke.

Those most at risk for heat illnesses include those who work outdoors and the very young
and old. Infants and children are at greater risk than adults for dehydration and heat
illnesses as they have fewer fluid reserves in their body and a greater ratio of body
surface area to overall body weight. The elderly are at greater risk than other adults
because they are more likely to be ill and on medications, such as diuretics,
anticholinergics, and tranquilisers, that suppress the body’s thermoregulation. Living
alone is another identified risk factor.

Exacerbation of Pre-existing Illnesses

Heatwaves cause mortality and morbidity by aggravating medical conditions that are
heat-sensitive, such as cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, renal, respiratory, and mental
diseases. This type of indirect effect is typically even more common than the direct effect
of heat illnesses. During exposure to high ambient temperatures, strain on cardiac output
from excessive sweating, which in turn causes blood clots, may lead to fatal outcomes.
Also due to excessive sweating, the body loses the salts that help regulate heart, kidney,
and brain functions. Finally, and when high temperatures are accompanied by dry
conditions, lung tracts are more easily irritated.

Some studies have investigated lower physical performance and increased medical
complications in patients with cardiovascular diseases during exposure to high
temperatures. During the 17 heatwaves that occurred in the Czech Republic from 1982 to


                                                                                                 31
2000, there was an average total increase of 13.6% in cardiovascular mortality (Kyselý
2004).

When comparing ischemic heart disease patients exposed to comfortable summer
temperatures (18-24 oC) to high summer temperatures (25-30o C) in Uzbekistan,
Zummonov (1998) found significantly reduced physical performance by those in
uncomfortable temperatures. The Urgent Medicine Institute of Zagreb in Croatia
reported That during periods of high temperatures, especially those that last for several
days, there is increased incidence of neurovegetative disorders in patients with
cardiovascular disease (Croatia Communication Report under UNFCCC 2006).

     Box 3: Urban Heatwaves
     Heatwave location also plays a role in heatwaves; land cover and use may exacerbate
     temperatures. In the “urban heat island effect,” cities show a 5-6o C greater average
     temperature than rural areas, most likely due to practices such as: dark asphalt cover
     and lower vegetation cover, which decrease albedo; high rise buildings, which create
     imbalanced wind turbulence, and crowdedness and traffic, which create heat. The
     effect can worsen a heatwave and raise temperatures by 3-12 oC (Kovats et al. 2005).
     Type of housing and ventilation also makes a difference; one of the most effective
     ways to reduce health impacts during heatwaves is to use air conditioning (Bouchama
     et al 2008). Heavy and widespread use of air conditioners also, however puts a strain
     on power supplies and may lead to outages.

Additional Risk Factors

Overburdening Infrastructure

Heatwaves often affect mortality or morbidity rates because of the pressure they place on
electricity and water systems. Water hydrates and cools the body, and its use goes up
during heatwaves, reducing available quantities. Some rural areas in ECA rely on wells,
which dry up during heatwaves12. In Bosnia, the government provided water, but many
could not afford to travel to the free cisterns (IFRC 2007a).

The electricity shortages experienced during heatwaves affect water pumps. During the
2007 heatwave in Albania, an electricity shortage affected water supply for two weeks
(IFRC 2007b). This was the result of several years of low precipitation, such that
hydroelectric power generation was unequal to the sudden increase in demand.

Behavioural components

Heatwaves may result in mortality or morbidity through individual responses associated
with risky behaviour – or maladaptive strategies. During the 2007 summer heatwave in

12
  As was reported in the 2007 heatwaves in Romania and Bosnia-Herzegovina (Salzmann 2007, IFRC
2007a)


                                                                                                 32
Moscow13, citizens swam in open canals, city fountains, and other non-designated sites to
cool off. At least 28 drowning deaths were reported. In most cases, the victims were not
sober (Baltantis 2007). Similarly, during the 2007 heatwave in Sakarya province in
Turkey, two young boys drowned while attempting to cool off in a lake (Grohmann
2007). This type of death during a heatwave is absolutely avoidable through improved
public swimming facilities and avoidance of individual risky behaviour.

Smog and Fire

Finally, heatwaves may result in mortality or morbidity by contributing to environmental
conditions, such as air pollution or the outbreak of fires14, which increase adverse health
impacts in the population.

Any study on the effects of temperature on mortality should consider pollution as a
potential confounder or modifier. A study in Sofia, Bulgaria found that particulate matter
(TSP, or total suspended particulates) is a significant confounder for
temperature/mortality models; for every increase of 1 μg/m3 in TSP, there was an
increase of 0.06% (0.03-0.10) in mortality (Pattenden et al. 2003). Ozone and other air
pollutants are clearly aggravated by high ambient temperatures (IPCC Human Health 4th
Assessment Report). Air pollution has been found to be higher during the summer season
in many areas in Europe (Michelozzi et al. 2007).

This intensified pollution raises mortality figures. According to a study by Alebić-Juretić
et al. 2007, 50% of the excess deaths observed during the 2003 heatwave in Croatia were
attributed not to the heat exposure, but to air pollution by ozone and particulate matter. In
the summer of 2002, excessive heat and dry conditions in Moscow, an anticyclone, fires,
and industrial and vehicle emissions created a smog event. An increase in cardiovascular
and respiratory mortality and hospitalizations were noted as a direct result of increased
exposure to ozone15 (Kislitsin et al. 2005). The IPCC also reports health impacts from
particulate matter (IPCC, 2007).

Box 4: Fires
According to USAID, during the months of July-September 2007, extreme hot
temperatures and reduced rainfall across southeast Europe led to wildfires in many
countries in the region. These were associated with reduced firefighting capabilities and




13
   Temperatures reached 32.7° C, the highest temperature recorded in the month of May since 1891.
Temperatures were above 30+ for 5 consecutive days. Increased demand for air-conditioning forced the
electricity grid into a state of emergency (WMO).
14
   IPCC 4th Assessment Report, Human Health
15
  Ozone mean daily concentration went from 0.034 to 0.042 g /m3. The study also examined the health
effects of carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, PM2.5 and PM10 during the smog event, concluding with
the greatest health effects from particulate matter (PM).


                                                                                                       33
life losses of 15; 1; 12; 76 and 1 in Albania; Bulgaria, Croatia; Greece; and Macedonia
respectively16. Together with loss of life was a massive devastation of forest and non-
forest lands.

Recent heatwaves in Europe have been blamed for the 2006 fires in Turkey, and the 2007
fires in Albania, Bulgaria17, Croatia, and Macedonia (Turkish Daily News, ReleifWeb).
In summer 2007, heatwaves hit southern and central Europe. Dry conditions helped
trigger fire breakouts throughout the region, and several people were reported dead
directly from the fire, including 12 fire fighters encircled by flames in Croatia (USAID).

Others experienced health effects from smoke. In Albania, 60 people sought medical
attention as a direct result of smoke inhalation (IFRC, 2007). Smoke affects health by
irritating lungs and eyes, and aggravating cardiovascular and respiratory diseases such as
asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (CDC). Wildfire smokes contain
chemicals, gases and fine particulate matter that can be easily inhaled. Turqeuty et al.
2008 tracked pollutant transfer from the fires through satellite observations and identified
carbon monoxide and ozone, both presenting a health burden.


1.2.3 Droughts

Drought, defined as decreased precipitation over an extended period, results in water
shortages associated with a number of direct and indirect health impacts, including: direct
loss of human life as a result of heat stress or suicide; mental and physical stress, such as
anxiety, depression and domestic violence; malnutrition as a result of limited or
unaffordable food supply; increased respiratory-related sicknesses; diminished sewage
flows; increased concentrations of pollutants, and jeopardized fire-fighting capacity.

Data scarcity, particularly in ECA, makes it difficult to specify the exact health impacts
of droughts. In 2004, an extensive literature review on the health impact of droughts
revealed that impacts on the Canadian Prairies ranged from respiratory illnesses as a
result of inhaling dust or smoke, to mental health concerns arising from economic stress,
particularly among farmers18. The review organized the health outcomes associated with
droughts into four categories: farming and mental health; dust and respiratory health;
fires and respiratory health; and other health outcomes.

While large agricultural enterprises normally have the resources to mitigate the impact of
drought, small household farmers experience a great deal of pressure and insecurity
during droughts, making them vulnerable to stress diseases, such as heart disease.
16
   US Agency for International Development-Bureau for Democracy, conflict and Humanitarian
Assistance- ffice of the U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance-Southern Europe. Wildfires and Drought Fact
Sheet #1, Fiscal Year (FY) 2007 September
17
    In Bulgaria, despite the forest cover, fire-fighters have no basic equipment, such as planes, and were not
prepared for the approximately 1,800 fire breakouts during the 2007 heatwave. The country was forced to
declare a state of emergency and seek foreign aid (Salzmann 2007).
18
   Karen et al. (2004). Health Consequences of Drought on the Canadian Prairies. EcoHealth 1 (Suppl. 2),
144–154


                                                                                                          34
The review found that agricultural activities coupled with dry weather conditions
generate dust, which can contain molds, pollen, plant materials, animal-derived particles,
bacterial, fungi, mites and aerosolized particulate matter. When inhaled, the dust and
particulate matter inflame bronchioles, causing asthma and bronchitis.

Forest fires also tend to increase during drought, with attendant symptoms and illnesses
associated with inhalation, as discussed in previous sections.

Other health outcomes observed during drought include injuries as a result of diving in
shallow waters; child diarrhea as a result of restricted water access; gas exposures from
grain fermentation, and increased mycotoxins in human food and animal feed.

Other impacts are indicated in the fourth assessment report of Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), which suggested that the impact of drought on human health
include malnutrition, infectious and respiratory diseases. Droughts can reduce protein
and micronutrient intake, leaving the body vulnerable to diseases like diarrhea and
meningitis.

In addition, loss of livelihoods due to drought triggers population movement from rural to
urban areas, where overcrowding, unsafe drinking water and compromised shelter
conditions present disease risks. These indirect effects will be treated in depth below.
Drought is also associated with increases in incidence of food poisoning, particularly
salmonellosis and shellfish reactions.

Drought Health Impacts in ECA

Due to climate change, rising temperature and reduced rainfall, many ECA countries are
witnessing droughts that vary in severity, frequency and duration. The duration of a
drought plays an important role in its health impacts , because of its potential to disrupt
livelihoods (e.g. in Tajikistan –where 80% of the population lives below the poverty line-
an estimated 1.2 million people are at risk of famine through food shortages and loss of
livestock).

A June 2007 report from the Directorate General of Environment of the European
Commission made an in-depth assessment of water scarcity in the EU and found that
while 6% of all EU members were affected by drought between 1976 and 1990, 13%
were affected between 1991 and 2006.

The economic impact of all of these droughts together was estimated at €100 billion over
the thirty years. The annual average impact doubled between the two periods, reaching an
average of €6.2 billion/year in recent years. The report did not calculate environmental,
social, or health-related costs due to lack of available data.19


19
  Directorate General of Environment – European Commission (June 2007). Water Scarcity and Droughts.
Second Interim report- In-depth assessment


                                                                                                 35
During 2000 and 2001, the lack of rainfall and the melting of glaciers affected the water
flow of the Amu Darya River, which flows from Tajikistan to Uzbekistan, resulting in a
severe drought and reduced availability of drinking and irrigation water. Within
Uzbekistan, the regions of Khorezm and Karakalpakstan were heavily affected because of
their reliance on agriculture. Although at the time, health impacts were not considered
severe, as assessed by low rates of communicable disease and acute malnutrition, chronic
forms of malnutrition were reported among children of poor households,20 who were
forced to drop meat and dairy.21 The same drought severely affected Azerbaijan. While
no health impacts were reported, the FAO suggested that crop loss presented malnutrition
risks.

The health outcomes related to drought exposures during 2001-03 in some countries in
ECA are featured in detail in Annex 3, and include decreased immunity; dehydration;
malnutrition; iodine deficiency; acute intestinal and respiratory tract infections; cholera
risk (Uzbekistan); mental health problems (Georgia), and food shortages (Uzbekistan,
Tajikistan; Armenia; Georgia and Azerbaijan.) The impacts of the latest 2007 drought in
Moldova are featured separately, in Box 5.




20
   The exact types of food consumed in Uzbekistan during the drought are not known, however alteration
in dietary intake during drought is well established. During the 2000 drought that affected most of the states
of the Indian sub-continent, daily consumption of cereals and millets remained well above the
Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) of 460 g/person/day. However, intake of income-elastic foods,
such as pulse, milk and fat was lower than the RDA. A similar shift in dietary intake, from reasonably
nutritious to less so, was noticed during the drought period of 1999-2003 in Pakistan, where most of
households went from a staple diet of Roti - lentils with bread- to Lassi - a yogurt drink and pickle of red
chilies. (Ref?)
21
    World Health Organization/Regional Office for Europe. Emergency Preparedness and Response
Program
  (2001). Health aspects of the drought in Uzbekistan 2000-2001Technical Field Report Series


                                                                                                          36
Box 5: Moldova’s 2007 Drought

Background
Reduced rainfall and elevated temperatures during the summer of 2007 led to a severe drought that hit
almost all of Moldova’s 32 regions. A joint assessment between the World Food Program and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimated that the drought impacted 84% of Moldova's
arable land, leading to national economic losses of approximately $406.7 million in failed crops and
livestock deaths.

Health, Nutrition, Water and Sanitation Impacts
During September-October 2007 a survey to assess the social impacts of the drought was conducted by
UNICEF in which 148 local experts and 1,114 households — covering all regions in the country — were
interviewed. According to the survey the main effects of the drought were as follows:
                                                    The Main Effects of the Drought
                According to Local Leaders                                    According to Households
Food            “For now nutrition is within normal parameters due to the     When asked if they were worried they
availability    availability of fruits and vegetables in the market. The      wouldn’t have enough food, 72% of
and nutrition   most difficult period will be from the spring of 2008 until   households said yes — 76% in rural areas,
                the 2008 harvest.”                                            71% in towns and 64% in Chişinău and
                                                                              Bălţi.

                                                                              When asked if they were unable to eat the
                                                                              kinds of food they used to eat because
                                                                              they were no longer available, 54% of the
                                                                              households said yes — 59% among
                                                                              households with three children and 61%
                                                                              among households with four or more
                                                                              children.

                                                                              When asked if they ate fewer meals than
                                                                              they felt they needed because there wasn’t
                                                                              enough food, 50% of households said yes
                                                                              — 59% of those answering yes were
                                                                              households with three children and 67%
                                                                              were households with four children or
                                                                              more.
Health          Poorer nutrition will lead to weakened immune systems         11% of families with children said the
                and to an increase in the incidence of diseases. Currently,   drought had affected their ability to take
                80% of respondents believe that the health of the             their children to the doctor when there
                population had already been affected; doctors believe that    was a need to go.
                the health of 91% of the population has been negatively
                affected.
Water supply    58% of localities were affected — 62 % in the south; 50% in   39% of all households surveyed said their
                the north; 56% in the center; 68% in rural areas; 44% in      potable water source had either been
                urban areas.                                                  damaged or had dried up — 45% in rural
                                                                              areas; 43% in towns; 18% in Chişinău and
                                                                              Bălţi.
Sanitation      The drought negatively affected sanitation in 60% of the
                localities surveyed.
Changes in      Doctors said that the stress people are under due to the
behavior        drought has lead to aggressive behavior which will have
                an impact on the health of the population. Most affected in
                this respect will be the elderly and retired people.




                                                                                                                   37
1.3    Changing Average Temperatures & Impacts on Health in ECA

In addition to health effects from extreme events, the more subtle change in average
temperature is projected to have health impacts. Observed long term average warming of
the Earth during the 20th century has been attributed with high confidence to
anthropogenic activity of greenhouse gas emissions (IPCC 2007). The effects of changing
average temperatures include changing seasonal duration, an expanding tropical belt, and
a rise in sea level (Seidel et al. 2008). In Europe alone, the observed warming of 0.8oC is
higher than the global observed warming average. Under emissions scenario A1B, the
warming trend is projected to continue in ECA, with greatest increase northwards (see
Fig. 8a).

Over the past century, northern regions in ECA have experienced increased precipitation
and southern regions decreased precipitation. However, while all projection models show
consistency for the direction of change in average temperatures, uncertainty lies in
changes in average precipitation (see Fig. 8b). This is partly due to our limited
understanding of the affects of climate change on cloud formation. As Ledley et al. say
“the question of whether average cloudiness would be increased or decreased in a
greenhouse-enhanced world is not yet established.” Nonetheless, in order to fully
understand the affect of climate change on health, all climatic factors must be considered.
For example, aridity is a limiting factor for the spread of some disease vectors.

Figure 8a.




Figure 8b




Figure 8: Projected Changing Averages in ECA according to scenario A1B



                                                                                        38
Hatching indicates where at least 2/3 of the models agree with the sign of change. For temperature, all
models are in complete agreement.
Source: Michael Westphal 2008.

This chapter will focus on the impacts of changing average climatic factors on human
health. This includes the effects of changing average temperatures on seasonal and
geographical distribution of climate-sensitive diseases such as cholera, salmonella,
dengue, malaria, Lyme borreliosis, tick-borne encephalitis, as well as the effects of
climate change on pollution (and consequently on health outcomes, as noted above) and
allergies.

By no means does this imply that these diseases are solely driven by temperature.
However, because they have been associated with temperature changes, the anticipated
increase in temperatures as climate change progresses are expected to: (i) aggravate the
condition of present diseases (ii) make suitable the reemergence of diseases once known
to have occurred in an area (iii) make suitable the emergence of diseases previously not
known to have occurred in an area. This will require the reinforcement of already existing
disease control policies as well as the creation of new ones.

Vector-borne Illnesses

Temporal and Spatial Shifts of Disease Vectors in ECA

Table 7 below characterizes various diseases and their vectors that may reemerge in ECA
due to changing average temperatures. It identifies the disease, the associated vector; any
evidence for expansion of transmission in ECA, and projections for future expansion in
ECA. Table 7 also attempts to analyze what type of expansion these diseases could
expect and to project likelihood of expansion.

When considering disease expansion policies, it is important the to focus on all types of
disease vectors and not solely on one; reflecting upon the lessons of failed vector control
programs in the 1970s in the Americas, which led to a dengue epidemic, Gubler et al.
2005 comments that it was partly due a surveillance program that focused on Anopheline
mosquitoes for malaria, and neglected to pay attention to Ae. aegypti. Another reason for
the failure was a change in policy attitude that switched from preventive measures pre-
epidemic, to an emergency response method. This proved to ineffective; the main
technique applied for killing mosquitoes was low-volume, did not take into account larval
control, and did not reduce the adult mosquito population sufficiently (Gubler et al.
2005).




                                                                                                    39
Table 7
                 Evidence for expansion in                 Projection models/
   Disease       ECA? (seasonal/altitudinal                   Expectations                 Source
                      /longitudinal )                            in ECA
Bluetongue                                       Potentially expand to Albania,    Wittmann et al. 2001
virus and                                        Bosnia, Croatia, and the
African horse                                    countries of the former
sickness virus                                   Yugoslavia
Dengue and                                       Potentially expand to Turkey,     Knudsen et al. 1996
dengue                                           Albania, and the former
hemorrhagic                                      Republic of Yugoslavia.
fever
Dengue virus     Vector reported for the first                                     Second, third, and
                 time in Croatia in October                                        fourth national
                 2004.                                                             communication of the
                                                                                   Republic of Croatia
                                                                                   under the UNFCCC
Plague                                           Expected overlap of regional      First national
                                                 expansion of the two plague       communication of the
                                                 rodents (creating unpredictable   Armenian Government
                                                 epidemic conditions)              under the UNFCCC
                                                 (Azerbaijan, Turkey)              1998.
Malaria          Reports of resurging malaria    Expected altitudinal and          First national
                 strains in low-medium           horizontal expansion of           communication of the
                 elevation upland sites in       malaria vectors                   Armenian Government
                 rural areas in Turkey,                                            under the UNFCCC
                 Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and                                       1998.
                 Turkmenistan.
                                                                                   Beniston 2002
Cholera                                          Expected expansion of             First national
                                                 circulation areas.                communication of the
                                                                                   Armenian Government
                                                                                   under the UNFCCC
                                                                                   1998.
Meningoencep                                     Expected expansion of             Second, third, and
halitis virus                                    seasonal activity of vector       fourth national
                                                 (reduced altitudinal limit)       communication of the
                                                                                   Republic of Croatia
                                                                                   under the UNFCCC
Encephalitis     Disease carrying ticks have                                       Third and fourth
and Lyme         become more wide-spread                                           national communication
disease          all over Lithuania and the                                        of Lithuania under the
                 eastern Baltic region                                             UNFCCC
Lyme                                         Potentially expand to higher          Lindren et al. 2006
borreliosis                                  latitudes and altitudes in
                                             Europe
                                             Potentially increase Armenia
Table 7: Vector and Disease Projections for ECA



Malaria

Malaria, a disease whose vectors are from the mosquito genus Anopheles, is the single
most important vector-borne disease globally in terms of the number of cases, associated


                                                                                                          40
deaths, and economic impact (Gubler and Wilson 2005). Like dengue, global efforts in
the mid-20th century to eradicate the mosquito helped reduce the disease spread
significantly. However, a discontinuation of these efforts helped bring back the disease
in some parts of the world.

Today, malaria is endemic to three ECA countries: Turkey, Azerbaijan, and Tajikistan
(see Table 6). In the early 1990s, civil unrest, population movement, discontinuation of
control programs and poor health infrastructure made Tajikistan vulnerable to reemergent
malaria. Cases of local transmission were reported in neighboring Turkmenistan,
Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. Soon after, autochthonous cases of the disease were
discovered in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan (RBM 2002; WHO 2004).

In 1998, the situation reached a critical level, and the Roll Back Malaria (RBM) program
was introduced in the region. Six years after its implementation, the RBM program has
been able to reduce malaria cases in the region by fourfold (WHO 2005). Despite the
malaria situation in the region presently being termed “generally under control,”
bordering areas remain under serious threat (WHO 2005).

Table 6
                                   Incidence                       Reported cases
                                   Per 100,000 population          Number
                                   1990    1995    2000     2005   1990    1995     2000     2005
              Armenia              0       16      5        0      0       502      141      7
              Azerbaijan           0       36      19       3      24      2,840    1,526    242
              Georgia              0       0       5        3      1       1        245      155
              Kazakhstan                                    0                                6
              Kyrgyzstan           0       0       0        4      1       3        12       226
              Russian Federation                            0                                205
              Tajikistan           3       106     309      35     175     6,103    19,064   2,309
              Turkey               15      131     17       3      8,680   82,096   11,432   2,084
              Turkmenistan         0       0       1        0      1       10       24       1
              Uzbekistan           0       0       1        0      28      27       126      102
Table 6: Malaria Incidence and Reported Cases in ECA 1990-2005
Sources: WHO Global Health Atlas 2007; WHO World Malaria Report 2005; ESCAP 2007.


Climate change is one factor responsible for the ECA malaria threat. It is well-
established that temperature plays a role in both malaria vector development and parasite
development inside the vector. It is also well-established that there is a link between
malaria transmission and climatic factors, such as rainfall or El Niño.

However, evidence showing that increased long-term average temperatures have affected
vector distribution and disease spread remains unclear (NRC 2001). For example, a time-
series study on the effects of temperature change on malaria incidence in Turkey shows
that since the 1970s, there have been two peak periods of malaria in Turkey (1977-1984
and1993-1999) (Ergönül et al. 2007).

The first of these periods displays significantly higher mean temperatures in areas with
high malaria incidence when compared to baseline average temperatures from1930 to
2004. Alternatively, since 2000 malaria cases have decreased in Turkey despite no
observed decrease in temperatures (Ergönül et al. 2007). No doubt one of the biggest


                                                                                                     41
challenges in attributing observed climate change to malaria spread is “taking into
account the considerable changes in reporting, surveillance, disease control programs,
population changes, and other factors such as land-use change (IPCC 2007).

Other studies examine the potential future effect of climate change on the temporal and
spatial distribution of the disease. One such model, based on climate scenarios in which
global average land surface temperatures increase to +3.45oC and precipitation to +0.127
mm/day by 2050, shows malaria transmission season expanding by 3 months for some
ECA regions in 2080 (Martens et al. 1999). The same group reports greatly increased
spatial transmission potential in temperate areas, especially in central Asia and northern
Europe (Martens et al. 1999).

On the other hand, a multivariate statistical model predicts smaller malaria expansion
under similar climate scenarios, and points to regions of Czech Republic, Romania,
Ukraine, Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan as potentially new areas for the disease
by 2050 (Rogers and Randolph 2000). The advantages and disadvantages of each model
should be considered prior to policy development (NRC 2001).

Dengue Fever

Dengue fever, a disease whose principle vector is the mosquito Ae. aegypti (or Stegomyia
fasciata )is one of the most important vector-borne diseases globally in terms of cases
and associated deaths (Patz et al. 1998). During the early 20th century, the Ae. aegypti
mosquito was present in the Mediterranean region and neighboring countries, with
accompanying dengue epidemics. Global programs in the 1950s to control mosquito
larvae helped eradicate the disease (Adham et al. 1998, Gublen et al. 2005). However,
the disease recurred two decades later in Jamaica and Puerto Rico, where Ae. aegypti
control programs were not fully successful (Gublen et al. 2005 ).

Today, mosquito population density is the highest on record in the Americas. The
vector’s geographic distribution has shifted, although it has not reached ECA. However,
another potential vector of the disease, Ae. Albopictus, has appeared for the first time in
Europe, in 1979 in Albania, and has become established since then (Adham et al. 1998).
In 2004, Croatia reported the first appearance of Ae. albopictus (Croatia under UNFCCC
2006).∗

Factors that may contribute to the distribution of mosquitoes include decreased public
health measures, increased human migration, urbanization, and increased travel (Gublen
et al. 2005). Another potential risk factor is increased average temperatures.
Temperature plays a role in the all the stages of vector development. It also plays a role in
the extrinsic incubation period, or time during which the mosquito becomes infectious
with the dengue virus. The lower the temperatures, the longer incubation periods last, and
the lower the chance that mosquitos will become infectious (NRC 2001). Concomitant
with climate change, the expected extension of warmer periods and reduction of colder
periods may increase the abundance of infectious vectors.




                                                                                          42
Patz et al. 1998 show that with higher temperatures, the potential for a dengue epidemic
increases – until about 40o C, after which the potential declines. Patz et al. also examine
the added risk of climate change on dengue transmission assuming an average global
mean temperature increase of 1.16 oC by 2050, as generated by three climate general
circulation models (GCMs). The results show an average increase of disease epidemic
potential in areas already at risk by 31-47% (range 24%-74%), compared to baseline
climatic conditions from 1930-1980.

The models also show the greatest area change for potential epidemic in temperate zones.
This includes areas in Central Europe, Southeast Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia.
The model does not take precipitation changes into account; whereas some studies have
demonstrated that disease transmission is associated with high rainfall, others have
demonstrated that it could also be associated with periods of drought - partly driven by
the increased use of domestic water storage sites suitable for breeding (NRC 2001, IPCC
2007).

Although today dengue is not endemic in Europe, it is endemic in more than 100
countries, many of which (South America and Southeast Asia), are tourist destinations for
Europeans (ECDC 2007). Since 1999, there have been 1,117 reported cases of dengue in
Europeans, acquired during their travels to endemic areas.

Other

Lyme borreliosis

Lyme borreliosis, a disease whose main vectors are the tick genus Ixodes, is the most
important vector-borne disease in temperate zones of the northern hemisphere in terms of
number of cases. The primary vector is I. ricinus in Europe, except in Eastern Europe
where it is I. persulcatus - also found in Russia and Central Asia.

In Europe, at least 85,000 cases are reported every year and prevalence is greater
eastwards (Lindgren et al. 2006, EUCALB 2008). The disease is prevalent in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, and Montenegro. Countries with annual incidences of over 20 per
100,000 include Lithuania, Estonia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, and the Czech Republic
(Lindgren et al. 2006). Factors such as changing land use practices and vegetation cover
affect human-tick encounters and the incidence of the disease. Because seasonal
occurrence of the disease is closely linked to tick activity, climatic factors play a role in
the spread of this disease.

Temperature plays a role in all the developmental stages of Ixodes (Lindgren et al. 2006).
Recent changes in temperature due to climate change have been linked to changes in tick
abundance and incidence of disease in Central Europe. Based on several studies22, the
known upper limit of I.ricinus populations in mountainous regions of the Czech Republic
was between 700-800 meters above sea level (Daniel et al. 2003). However, in the 1990s,

22
  By the Institute of Parasitology, Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences in 1957, by the Czech Government
in 1960-1962, and by Daniel et al. in 1981-1983


                                                                                                   43
it was reported by the health services of the Czech Republic that I.ricinus were being
found in greater abundance, even in high altitudes.

In 2001, Daniel et al. performed a study and discovered that the upper limits of I.ricinus’
distribution had shifted up to 1,000 meters above sea level (Daniel et al. 2003). In 2004,
Danielová et al. performed a study that identified changes in temperature as one of the
primary reasons for the changes in I.ricinus’ distribution; increased average temperatures
in the spring and autumn extended the seasonal activity (Danielová et al. 2006). During
the same period, countries in Northern Europe such as Sweden experienced a latitudinal
shift in tick distribution, which was also attributed to changes in the climate (Daniel et al.
2003).

It is anticipated that future climate change will continue to facilitate the distribution of
ticks to higher latitudes and altitudes, and further extend their seasonal activity in Europe
(Lindgren et al. 2006). In Germany, during the winter of 2006-2007, tick host-questing
activity was reported for the first time due to a warm winter (Süss et al. 2008). In places
with expected lower humidity, tick habitats are expected to diminish, as aridity is a
limiting factor for tick growth (Lindgren et al. 2006).

Tick-borne Encephalitis

Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is the most common tick-transmitted arbovirus in Europe
and Russia, accounting for 3000-4000 and 6000-8000 cases per year, respectively
(Daniel et al. 2006b). Like Lyme borreliasis, it is transmitted mostly through the tick
I.ricinus in Europe. During the 1990s, TBE became more widespread, emerged, and re-
emerged in some parts of the Czech Republic, causing a twofold increase in national
incidence as compared to the 1980s (Daniel et al. 2003).

Since the observed shift in the upper limit altitudes of I.ricinus habitat, two cases of TBE
have been reported as a consequence of tick bites at altitudes previously known as disease
risk-free ( Daniel et al. 2003). Daniel et al. 2006 also performed a study on TBE
occurrence 1993-2002 in the Czech Republic that shows a significant positive correlation
with ambient temperatures ( r 2 = 0.95, n= 5,873). All this suggests that climate change
may be responsible for the increasing incidence of the disease in Central Europe. In the
Baltics, climate change is explained as only one of the many factors affecting the
increased incidence of disease (Sumilo et al. 2007).

Other tick-borne diseases

I. ricinus is a transmitter of many other diseases, including human granulocytic
ehrlichiosis. The ticks’ increased range may pose the risk of spread of new diseases; in
2006, three patients met the criteria for a clinical diagnosis of anaplasmosis, a tick- borne
disease, for the first time in Croatia (Misić-Majerus et al. 2006).




                                                                                           44
Water-borne and food borne diseases

Cholera

Cholera, a diarrheal disease caused by the ingestion of water contaminated with the
bacertia Vibrio cholera, is the most common vibrio disease in humans (NRC 2001).
Improvements in water sanitation through chlorination and filtration helped eradicate the
disease in many countries. However, in 1961 the most recent pandemic began in
southeast Asia, spreading to Africa in the 1970s, and to Central America in the 1990s
(Giffith et al. 2006).

During 1998, a year that coincides with high temperature records, the number of cases
worldwide almost doubled (NRC 2001). Recent cases in ECA include an outbreak in
Armenia in 1998 and in Russia in 2001 (WHO, BBC 2001). In Europe, a total of 8
outbreaks were reported between 1995 and 2005 (Giffith et al. 2006). The cholera
situation remains unstable in Azerbaijan, Russia, and Kazakhstan, due to imported cases
and the isolation of infective agents (Onishchenko et al. 2005). Climate change may
exacerbate these factors.

Temperature plays a role in the abundance of vibrio in the ocean, freshwater, or estuaries,
while precipitation plays a role in intensity. V. cholera attaches and feeds on the polymer
chitin (Bartlett et al. 2005). Warm sea surface temperatures increase phytoplankton
blooms, which in return, increase zooplankton and shellfish – two sources of chitinous
substrate for V. cholera.

The relationship between sea surface temperatures and cholera prevalence has been
suggested in collected data from in Issyk-Kul Lake, Kyrgyzstan (Kokorin 2008). Other
studies have also shown a relationship between sea-surface height and cholera outbreaks
(Lobitz et al. 2000), and epidemics in Bangladesh have been attributed to seasonality of
sea surface temperature during El Niño events (Rodó et al. 2002). Hence there is concern
that increased sea surface temperatures, caused by climate change, may create favorable
conditions for cholera outbreaks.

In its national communication report to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change [UNFCCC], the Armenian government raises a flag of concern that
climate change may have already begun affecting the incidence of cholera outbreaks in
the country. According to the report, this is due to 1) expansion of El Tor strain
circulation areas and 2) temperature increases -that will optimize the
transmitter’s enzymatic activity- in places such as reservoirs of drinking water. Both of
these possibilities have been detected as potential causes of the aggravation of cholera in
Armenia (Armenia UNFCCC 1998).

Similarly, in its national communication report to the UNFCCC, the government of
Tajikistan reports a concern about cholera outbreaks related to climate change, stating:
“Alterations in the hydrological cycle will lead to a water shortage and an increase of
water temperature in the rivers. This favors the formation of potential choleric water



                                                                                        45
reservoirs, especially in the lower reaches of the rivers Vakhsh, Kafirnigan, Syrdarya, and
others” (Tajikistan UNFCCC 2002).

Salmonellosis

Salmonellosis, a diarrheal disease caused by the ingestion of the bacteria Salmonella, is
the most important foodborne disease in Europe, accounting for 71% of all laboratory
confirmed foodborne diseases (Kovats et al. 2004). Food handling behavior, especially
during storage and cooking, are important factors in disease spread. While there are
policies in place to effectively control salmonella outbreaks, there is a need for policies
that specifically target climate-attributable salmonella cases (Kovats et al. 2004).

Temperature plays a role in the development of salmonella in food, and cases are more
often reported during the summer season than any other season (D’Souze et al. 2004). A
time-series study23 tested for a relationship between salmonella cases and ambient air
temperatures. After accounting for a 0-9 week lag and controlling for season and
holidays, the results showed the % change of Salmonella cases per oC above common
threshold temperature of 6 C. Temperature did in fact have a significant influence,
reinforcing the concern that increased average ambient temperatures may create favorable
conditions for salmonella outbreaks.

In a report by Kendrovski to the UNFCCC on the effects of climate change on health in
Macedonia, the results show that the % change of Salmonella cases per oC above
common ambient temperature of 5 C is 5-10%. In addition, Kendrovski’s study projects
that the seasonal index for salmonella in Macedonia will shift in 2030, as compared to
1980-2005 with greater seasonal duration and intensity.

Allergies

There is evidence that links climate change to increased incidence of allergies. For
example, the observed onset of pollen season during earlier times in the spring has been
linked to climate change (IPCC 2007). Experimental studies have also demonstrated
pollen concentration increases with temperature and CO2 concentration (IPCC 2007).

In ECA, one of the main sources of pollen allergies is the ragweed Ambrosia. In Central
Europe, the concentration of ragweed is higher than in many other regions of the world
(Kasprzyk 2007). In Croatia, approximately one-tenth of the population suffers from
pollen allergy by Ambrosia. The government of Croatia predicts a greater number of
people becoming “sensitized to and affected by respiratory allergies: seasonal allergic

23
   The study was by Kovats et al. 2004 for 10 European countries, including the Czech Republic (1993-
2001), Estonia (1990-2001), Poland (2000-2002), and the Slovak Republic (1983-2000). Changes were as
follows: for the Czech Republic, 9.2 (7.8-10.7), for Estonia 9.2 (– 0.9-20.2), for Poland 8.7 (4.7-12.9), and
for the Slovak Republic 2.5 (–2.6-7.8). Temperature appears to significantly influence transmission of
infection in the Czech Republic (% Population Attributable fraction 29.1 (37.4-33.4)) and Poland ( %
Population Attributable fraction 33.8 (20.2-45.1), with positive but non-significant results for Estonia and
Slovak Republic.



                                                                                                         46
rhinitis and allergic asthma caused by pollen from the trees, grasses and weeds,” as
consequence of changing summer average temperatures and vegetation (Croatia
UNFCCC 2006).




                                                                                       47
Box 5: Eutrophication and Human Health

The Baltic Sea

Climate change will have a singular indirect impact on health near the Baltic Sea. Eutrophication refers to an increase in
nutrients, usually nitrogen and phosphorus. It is commonly a trigger for algal blooms, which often lead to hypoxy or anoxic
conditions and to a degradation of environmental quality. Cyanobacteria can naturally fix nitrogen, contributing directly to
eutrophication (HELCOM, 2007).

Extensive blooms of cyanobacteria (Nodularia spumigena, Aphanizomenon sp., Anabaena sp.) have been reported in the
Baltic since the 19th century, but in the last decades they have increased in duration, frequency and biomass (Bianchi et al.
2000). Nodularia spumigena produces toxins called nodularins that have hepatotoxic effects, causing gastrointestinal
illnesses, and liver damage in cases of persistent exposure (Hallegraeff et al. 2003). Cattle and pets have been reported dead
after ingestion of water or scum containing Nodularia (WHO 2003).

Although there are no reported cases of human poisoning by N. spumigena to date, the possible increase of Nodularia blooms
represents a hazard to human health, and the risk of exposure could be particularly high for children (WHO 2003). It is
hypothesized, for example, that “cyanobacterial toxins are part of a complex of risk factors” that determine the high incidence
of human hepatocellular carcinomas registered in China (WHO 1999).

By the end of the century, freshwater run-off into the Baltic Sea is predicted to increase due to enhanced precipitation related
to climate change (HELCOM 2007). ECA countries south of the Baltic basin are expected to be exposed to a higher risk of
flooding, which will contribute to leaching of nutrients into the sea. Because run-off accounts for up to 97% of Baltic Sea
nutrient influxes (HELCOM 2007), it is possible that increased run-off will translate into a greater input of nutrients and
exacerbate eutrophication events - excessive growth of algae and other plants resulting depletion of oxygen and consequent
extinction of animal life.

In addition, surface sea water in the Baltic has been warming for the past fifteen years and the trend is projected to continue
over this century (HELCOM 2007; Alcamo et al., 2007). The growth of diatoms and dinoflagellate species is optimal only at
temperatures just above the freezing point, while blooms of cyanobacteria occur only at temperatures higher than 16ºC.
Temperature increases alone may enhance the frequency and intensity of these blooms, exerting selective pressure and
limiting the growth of cold-water species while favoring warm water species like the toxic Nodularia. The combination of the
two factors – run-off and surface warming - may result in an enhancement of phytoplankton growth, see Table 9, below.




                                                                                                                 48
1.4    Other Impacts of Climate Change: the migration-health nexus

Evidence shows that severe weather events and an increase in the average
temperature due to climate change have an impact on livelihoods, and can become
push factors for communities to leave resource-dependent rural areas and create
new migration patterns (Koziell and Saunders, 2001). Especially in rural areas,
households rely heavily on climate sensitive resources, such as water, and feel the
impacts of severe weather events in farming and other activities on which they
depend for livelihood. Migration caused by increase in average temperature tends
to be permanent, especially for those dependent on subsistence agriculture
(Raleigh et. al, 2007).

Economic and Distress Migration

Drought, the direct impacts of which are discussed in full above, decreases the
amount of land that can be cultivated and makes self-sustainability through
agricultural production limited. Individual family members may then migrate to
urban or other rural areas in order to seek seasonal work while the rest of the
family stays behind. This type of migration is known as economic migration.
Economic migration can be internal or cross-border, depending on where
economic opportunities appear.

Disasters such as floods cause distress migration, in which an entire population is
forced to leave an affected area and seek temporary asylum at relief sites. Distress
migration may cause internal or international displacement of people.

Migration in ECA

Migration in ECA has been historically high. ECA accounts for more than one
third of total world emigration and immigration, if movement between industrial
countries is excluded. The breakup of the Soviet Union triggered a large increase
in migration in ECA, including internal movement, cross-border movement
within the region, emigration from ECA and a small amount of migration into
ECA from other regions (Mansoor and Quillin, 2006).

ECA consists of two main migration streams. One links the eastern part of the
region to Western Europe (42 percent of total migration) and the other flows
within the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (80 percent of
total migration), with Russia being the primary destination country (Mansoor and
Quillin, 2006).

Between 1989 and 2004, the top three receiving countries in the region, relative to
their population size, were Russia with a net migration of 3.9%, Belarus with a
net migration of 0.3%, followed by the Czech Republic and Hungary with a net
migration of 0.2% each.




                                                                                       49
The top three countries in terms of outward flow of migrants, relative to their
population size, were Albania, with a net migration of -23.9%, Kazakhstan, with a
net migration of -20.7%, and Georgia, with a net migration of -20.4% (Mansoor
and Quillin, 2006).

Figure 9 shows major migration patterns in ECA from 1989 to 2003. The sizes
and directions of the arrows represent the sizes and directions of the migration
streams they indicate. Most of the flows go to Russia, however Germany is the
main receiving country for Russian migrants. The largest stream of migrants (1.7
million persons), coming to Russia, originates in Kazakhstan (Mansoor and
Quillin, 2006).

Figure 9




Figure 9a: Largest Migration Flows Involving Major Migrant Stocks from Western ECA Countries




                                                                                               50
Figure 9b: Major Migration Partners of Russia, 1989-2003
Figure 9: Migration Patterns in ECA
Source: Mansoor and Quillin, 2006

ECA has clearly been experiencing a considerable amount of displacement. The
main migration patterns within and from outside ECA are labor or economic
migration, ecological migration, and conflict-related migration24. Conflict can be
a cause of both economic and environmental disruption.

Internal migration due to damaged environment has continued to increase in the
ECA region and is predicted to further increase in future (IOM, 2002; Christian
Aid, 2007). Analyses of the future sensitivity of ground water recharge to climate
change for three time periods (2020s, 2050s and 2080s) imply that southern
Europe will experience a potential decrease in groundwater recharge that will
seriously impact the availability of fresh water resources for drinking and
agricultural cultivation (Hiscock et al., 2008). Such a scenario may force
communities that had been self-sustaining to migrate (Hunter, 2007).

Since there are already many different migration patterns within and from outside
the ECA region, migration due to climate change may overstretch receiving
countries’ capacities, especially in the health sector, and may lead to greater social
vulnerability of migrants. Note, of course, that the EU 15 countries have more
capacity to absorb migrants than do the countries of Central Asia. Although ECA
migration flows have tended to decrease25, the importance of identifying the
effects of climate change on migration cannot be dismissed.
24
   Azerbaijan and Georgia experienced the largest flows of internal displacement due to conflict (Mansoor
and Quillin, 2006). However, migration flows have continued to decrease compared to the period
immediately following the political transition. In 2000 there was 40 per cent less migration than in 1997
within the region, and 25-33 percent less to countries outside the region (IOM, 2002).
25
   In 2000 there was 40 per cent less migration than in 1997 within the region, and 25-33 percent less with
countries outside the region (IOM 2002)


                                                                                                         51
Box 6: Case study
Drought and Migration (Republic of Moldova)

Between 1990 and 2007, the Republic of Moldova experienced nine years of
droughts due to heatwaves. Between May and July 2007, Moldova experienced
36-45 days with temperatures higher than 30° C, which is three times higher than
the norm, and 10-12 days of temperatures higher than 35° C, which is 11-12 times
higher than the norm. These heatwaves had a severe impact on agricultural
production through scarcity of water. This pushing factor caused people, mainly
from rural areas, to migrate, predominantly to Russia (59%) and Italy (17%).
Migrants moved to large cities such as Moscow and Rome (IOM, 2007).

Box 7: Case study
Floods and migration (Kazakhstan)

During the last several years, Kazakhstan has been experiencing intense flooding
in the southern part of the country. In February 2008, sudden increase in air
temperature and heavy rains caused flooding in 48 settlements in the south of
Kazakhstan, displacing more than 13,000 people. The majority of the people were
evacuated to nearby camps or to stay with relatives and friends. The flooding also
had a negative impact on agriculture. In several villages, the floods covered
agricultural land and irrigation canals with mud and sand, making future
agricultural production difficult. In addition, the flooding remains a concern, since
additional floods in the south are expected, and might displace over 250,000
people.


The Impact of Migration on Health
The figure below (Fig. 10) goes beyond the livelihood impact of climate change
to show the links between climate change, migration and health. Migration
impacts health outcomes of migrants as well as of the host population in three
dimensions. First, the vulnerability of migrants’ health is affected by limited
access to drugs, medical services, water and sanitation. Second, the spread of
disease within and across countries and the reappearance of disease are often
facilitated by migration. Third, migration places a burden on health system
capacity due to limits on financial resources for service provision. Each of these
three dimensions have direct impact on the health outcomes of migrants and host
populations.




Figure 10


                                                                                        52
Figure 10: The links between climate change, migration and health outcomes


The following sections will discuss the three different dimensions of impacts of
migration on health outcomes of migrants and host populations in more detail.

Vulnerability of Migrants

Migrant vulnerability to disease can often begin in the country of origin; migrants in the
European Union often contract diseases in their home country (Hamers et al. 2006).
After a stressful journey to the new host country, migrants remain vulnerable due to
limited access to medial services and drugs, lack of clean water and the inadequate
sanitation infrastructure associated with new migrant living conditions, as well as lack of
health insurance. Migrants often work in unskilled but high-risk jobs in dangerous and
unhealthy conditions. Evidence shows that rates for work accidents are two or three
times greater for migrants than for the native-born population (Bollini and Siem 1995).

Migrants can also struggle with psychological stress. They are constantly exposed to
stress due to culture shock, language barriers, fear about work insecurity and deportation,
homesickness and racism (Carballo, 2007). Employment and income are often unstable.
In addition, illness is very costly for migrants in terms of lost time at work and treatment
costs (Carballo 2005). The adaptation to a new culture can include poor knowledge of


                                                                                          53
the local language, which leads to challenges in obtaining appropriate health care.
Furthermore, cultural differences in terms of what health care should look like and at
what point in time it should be sought may present as a barrier to access.

Incidence and Spread of diseases

Migrants seem to be more vulnerable to certain diseases, such as Type 2 diabetes, and
cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and stroke (Carballo 2007). The spread of
respiratory diseases, such as tuberculosis, is a greater risk (Carballo and Mboup 2005).
Migration within and across countries may lead to the spread of these diseases from other
regions. According to the European Society for Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases (ECSMID), several large European cities have been experiencing tuberculosis
epidemics. These epidemics are related to increased migration from Asia, Africa and
Latin America.

Portugal has the highest incidence of tuberculosis (31 per 100,000 inhabitants) in Europe.
The average in central and eastern EU countries is 12.8 per 100,000 inhabitants. The
urban epidemiology of tuberculosis is influenced by the same socio-economic factors that
migrants face in host countries (EMD 2007). A survey conducted between 2004 and
2005 in Greece and found that 96 out of 1,460 legal Athens immigrants from Albania,
Bulgaria, Romania, former Soviet Union countries, Africa and Southeast Asia, were
positive to tuberculin skin tests (Antypa et al. 2005).

Some low incidence countries in Europe also report infections such as hepatitis B and C,
and HIV/Aids to be more frequent in migrants than in the native population (Gushulak
and MacPherson 2006). In 2005, in the European Union, 46% of HIV/Aids infections
were diagnosed in immigrants, and most of these infections were acquired outside the EU
(Hamers et al. 2006).

In addition, migrants are often carriers of malaria. Evidence from Spain shows that all of
the 24 children admitted to hospitals with malaria between 1997 and 2005 were children
of immigrants (Martinez-Baylach et al. 2007). In Albania, between 1992 and 2001, 114
cases of malaria were reported. All of these cases were immigrants who acquired the
disease before they arrived in Albania (WHO 2002).

This evidence speaks to the urgent need to make access to health care easier for migrants,
not only to decrease migrant vulnerability through early detection and treatment, but also
to limit the spread of diseases throughout the country.

The Burden on the Health System

Migration across regions with different health and disease conditions has a strong impact
on the public health systems of countries receiving migrants. The global dispersion of
disease influences a country’s local burden of disease cases. Hence, when examining the
spread of diseases through migration, the impact of sick and vulnerable migrants on local
health systems is an important factor to consider.



                                                                                         54
Migration in low-incidence countries has immediate effects on local health systems.
Data from hospitals in Spain and Denmark show that immigrants prefer to use
Emergency Rooms (ER), rather than other health care services, as access points to
primary health care. The study found that there was no cost difference between migrant
and native populations for treatments sought, so socio-economic factors were not
considered explanations for increased ER use in migrant populations. Rather, the reasons
are assumed to be: lack of information about local health care systems, barriers of access
to primary care, and delay in seeking medical help until it is unavoidable (Cots et al.
2007; Norredam et al. 2007).

Migration also has long-term effects related to health. A study conducted in Germany
shows that health care expenditures for migrants up to the age of 40 are higher than for
Germans. Reasons for higher health care expenditures in migrants under the age of 40
include bad work conditions, often difficult manual labor, more work-related accidents,
and higher fertility rates, which produces more co-insured family members (Sinn et al.
2001). In the other hand, above the age of 40, health care expenditures are higher for
Germans than for migrants.

In order to be able to cope with increasing migration due to climate change, host
countries will be forced to consider certain policy steps. There is an intermediate
enhanced need for clinical/laboratory capacities for imported disease. This capacity
includes the provision of services and facilities for exotic or uncommon diseases, training
in low probability but high impact diseases, and education of healthcare providers for
competency in treating global health issues.

Several countries in Western Europe, such as Denmark, Greece, Norway, Germany,
France, Belgium and others conduct screening tests for immigrants arriving from
countries with a high incidence of tuberculosis. However, there appear to be no
systematically applied screening policies across Western Europe (Carballo and Mboup
2005).

The health system of a host country must also respond to a growing number of
immigrants in the long-term. This can be done through modification of training
programs for health providers to focus on the diseases that migrants bring with
them, increasing migration of health professionals from migrant source regions in
order to obtain firsthand disease knowledge, and promotion of sensitivity training
and cultural awareness campaigns in order to eliminate social and cultural barriers
for migrants to health care (Gushulak and MacPherson 2006).

Examples of the Climate Change-Migration-Health Link

Table 8 shows direct and indirect health impacts of climate change related to
extreme weather events, and the type of migration that is triggered, with real life
examples. Many of these have already been discussed above.




                                                                                        55
    Table 8
 Climate       Direct Impact        Impact on       Indirect Impact on             Type of       Migration
 Change          on Health          Livelihood            Health                  Migration      Time Span
                                                                                   Caused
Drought       Decrease in          Decline in     Lack of water, and            Labor           Seasonal
such as in    water availability   agricultural   therefore lack of             migration
Moldova       for households,      production     sanitation facilities,        from rural to
              increase in          leads to       increases likelihood of       urban areas
              health burden        famine         diarrheal diseases
              due to diarrheal
              diseases
Floods        Foster water-        Destruction    Urban slams and               Distress        Temporary or
such as in    borne outbreaks      of homes       squatter settlements/         migration       permanent
Kazakhstan    of diarrheal         and            camps with lack of                            depending on
              diseases or          agricultural   water and sanitation                          intervention
              cholera              lands leads    facilities cause difficulty
                                   to mass        controlling disease
                                   displacement   reservoirs
Heatwaves     Causes severe         Decline in        N/A                       Permanent       Lifetime
such as in    breathing and         agricultural                                migration
Hungary       heart problems        production
              for elderly, poor,
              and homeless
    Table 8: Climate change health impacts and migration
    (based on Kothari, 2002:20; Raleigh et. al, 2007)




                                                                                                      56
            Section Two
Country-Level Climate Change-Health
      Vulnerability Assessment




                                      57
                                  Section Two
          Country-Level Climate Change-Health Vulnerability Assessment

2.1    Overview

The Vulnerability Assessment Toolkit was developed with the findings of this report in
mind and is designed to evaluate countries’ vulnerability to climate change based on
future projections and status of countries’ current adaptive capacities. In other words,
vulnerability is assessed assuming that climate continues to deteriorate and national
adaptive capacities remain at current levels.

Exposure, sensitivity and the various aspects of adaptive capacity (such as infrastructure,
human capital, institutions, etc.) should be questioned on four counts: floods, heatwaves,
droughts and changing averages. The tool operates as a sophisticated checklist in which
data on climate can be correlated with data such as demographic and inventory statistics.
Experts wishing to assess breaches in preparedness for a given country can use it to flag
potential gaps in a country’s readiness, suggest areas for improvement, and help define
sound policies.

Methodology

The toolkit is based on the Climate Change, Risk and Vulnerability report by the
Australian Government, which defines vulnerability of a system as a function of three
elements: 1) exposure 2) sensitivity and 3) adaptive capacity. Furthermore, the toolkit
builds on the Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment Framework for human health
developed by the WHO, by adapting its components and their applicability to the context
of this report. As used in this document:

Exposure refers to the projected likelihood and/or probability of the occurrence of a
Climate Change related event in a particular country.

Sensitivity includes current factors that influence the magnitude of a given Climate
Change impact on health. It would be equivalent to the role of effect modifiers or
confounders in epidemiology in the relationship between exposure and outcome. As used
in the toolkit, sensitivity generally refers to a set of underlying characteristics or
circumstances of the population that makes them more likely to suffer health impacts
from Climate Change-related factors.

Adaptive capacity is the current capacity of the health sector to take effective actions to
cope with projected locally relevant impacts of Climate Change on Health. It is the
function of the health system in delivering not only curative care services but also
providing public health services including preventative and promotive services both at
the community and individual level. Adaptive capacity will differ according to the
climate change event in question, that is to say, the different capacities are needed to deal
with extreme weather events compared with changing averages.




                                                                                           58
The determinants of adaptive capacity taken into account in this report concern:
           Economic Resources
           Technology
           Human Capital
           Access to risk-spreading mechanisms
           Access to and ability to manage information
           Institutions, and
           Equity Issues.

Influence of these determinants is examined in this section through a set of quantitative
and/or qualitative indicators that are consistently reported at the national level, mainly by
the World Bank, various United Nations Agencies, or other relevant International
Organizations. A balanced compromise was crafted, for each indicator, between
descriptive value and present or future availability, in order to maximize the usefulness of
the tool in the context of a broader assessment.

As mentioned, the toolkit incorporates both quantitative and qualitative indicators (in the
absence of any quantitative measures). For the latter, the authors developed suggestions
for wording and banding of indicators in a qualitative questionnaire to assist clients in
undergoing a self-assessment on the proposed dimensions (see Annex 4 for details).


2.2    Toolkit proposal and rationale for indicators

Regarding the Health Sector Vulnerability Assessment toolkit, the dimensions considered
are Exposure, Sensitivity and Adaptive capacity of the health sector. Economic
Resources, technology, Infrastructure, Human Capital, Risk-Spreading mechanisms,
Information Management and Institutional issues were considered as determinants for
adaptive capacity. The choice of indicators reflected in the table was driven by
prioritizing quantitative parameters reported periodically by international organizations or
other highly reliable sources. Where no quantitative indicators were available, qualitative
ones were proposed. An example for use of the reader and suggestions for banding are
made available in Annex 4.

In the toolkit table, exposures have been classified as within Extreme events (floods,
heatwaves, droughts) or in Changing Averages. Given the unpredictable nature of most
extreme events, exposure is given in terms of probabilities and likelihood. The indicators
of choice to reflect the long-term change in temperatures and precipitation are the change
in average temperatures and precipitation in the last two decades. The rationale is that
many climate-sensitive diseases are determined in part by the humidity and temperature
for the viability of the pathogen or vector involved. The twenty year period of study is the
minimum considered by IPCC in its fourth assessment.

As used in the toolkit, sensitivity generally refers to a set of underlying characteristics or
circumstances of the population that makes them more likely to suffer health impacts
from Climate Change-related factors. For Floods, the coastal population and past



                                                                                            59
occurrence are considered. For heatwaves, urbanization, age and diabetes are included as
evidence-based risk-factors for heat-related mortality and morbidity. For droughts,
sensitivity issues were related to dependence on agriculture and access to safe water
supplies. The incidence of foodborne diseases was chosen as an (partial) indicator for
sensitivity to changing averages mainly due to its easy availability and reliability.

Determinants of the adaptive capacity:

Because of institutional, economic and other constraints and obstacles, countries’ Health
Systems often lack the capacity to effectively take action towards adapting to impacts of
Climate Change. In the case of the least developed nations, a substantial “adaptation
deficit” to today’s conditions adds a component of urgency to the general need to build
adaptive capacity. Hence, it is useful to look at adaptive capacity building in terms of
different determinants or streams affected by cross-cutting issues. The determinants
considered in this toolkit and the rationale for their chosen indicators are explained
below:

Economic Resources: Public expenditure on health as % of GDP was considered a good
indicator for constraints in healthcare financing, given the mostly publicly paid healthcare
systems and public forms of insurance in many ECA countries.

Technology: the presence of a country-wide Health Technology Assessment System
implies a concern about the adequacy of technological assets within health systems, as
well as a baseline benchmark to track progress in adaptation.

Infrastructure: for the extreme events, indicators relate to “hardware” in terms of supplies
for an adequate Emergency Response and management. For health outcomes derived
from Changing Averages, however, indicators relate to the routine reality of Access to
and Structural Quality of Health Care. This is so because of the progressive and/or
cyclical nature of said health outcomes, which distinguishes them from the emergency
character of extreme events.

Human Capital: indicators for this dimension relate to the availability of personnel and
professional standards of health practitioners, as well as research efforts and availability
and implementation of continuing education that is relevant for climate change impacts
(emergency response, on the one hand, and emerging or expanding infectious diseases)

Access to Risk-Spreading mechanisms: this dimension refers broadly to the risk of
financial losses associated with health outcomes brought about by Climate Change. The
amount of population insured thus plays a large role in the individual minimization of this
risk by decreasing out or pocket expenditures on healthcare services, but so does the
comprehensiveness of the Basic Benefits packages. For instance, if the BBP includes
Public and Environmental Health services, minimization of risk is much larger on a
population basis.




                                                                                           60
Access to and ability to manage information: this dimension has proved of key
importance in multiple settings for effective decision-making and taking action in both
emergency health crises and on a routine health practice. Hence, the comprehensive array
of indicators ranging from basic health data transmission, public health surveillance (case
reporting, etc), physical emergency communications systems and pre-set arrangements
for the circulation and use of information. For the health outcomes expected from
changing averages, the availability of clinical guidelines for practitioners on Neonatal and
Childhood illness and malnutrition was judged a better indicator for the usual top-down
flow of information.

Institutions: among other considerations, the institutional aspect of adaptive capacity for
the health sector involves a body of standard procedures implemented in the form of
clinical guidelines and performance or quality assessment protocols at various levels of
government. The presence and functionality of a national emergency preparedness plan
involves a certain degree of institutional capacity, as does the proactive, planned action
on vector control.

Equity: though a general index for inequality (e.g. Gini) was considered for this
dimension, the proportion of household out-of-pocket expenditure on health is probably
more descriptive, given the complex systems of subsidies and differences between
countries. The Urban:rural ratio reflects the fact that access and opportunity costs may
differ substantially for different settings.




                                                                                          61
       2.3      Climate Change-Health Sector Vulnerability Assessment Toolkit

                                                   Floods                               Heatwaves                                   Droughts                                  Changing Averages

Exposure                                                                                                                                                             - Average increase in minimum and
                                                                                                                                                                     maximum temperatures in the last two
                                      - Increased likelihood of event (based on standard definitions)                                                                decades
                                      - Probability density functions                                                                                                - Average increase in minimum and
                                                                                                                                                                     maximum precipitation in the last two
                                                                                                                                                                     decades
Sensitivity                                                                                                        - % of rural population
                                      - % of population on coasts            - % of urban population               -% of people working in the agricultural sector   - Microbiological foodborne diseases per
                                      - Number of floods in the last 9       - % of population over age 75         - % of population whose homes are connected       100,000 inhabitants
                                      years                                  - % of population with diabetes       to a water supply system
                                                                                                                   - Presence of a safe water source
Adaptive      Economic Resources      - Public expenditure on health as % of GDP
Capacity          Technology          - Is a Health Technology Assessment System in place?
of Health                                                                     - Nursing and elderly home beds
 Sector                               - Emergency rooms (per capita)          per 100,000 inhabitants                                                                Physical Access:
                                                                                                                   - Emergency rooms (per capita)
                                      - Ambulatory vehicles (air, water,      - Emergency rooms (per capita)                                                         - Outpatient contacts per person per year
                                                                                                                   - Ambulatory vehicles (air, water, and land)
                                      and land)                               - Ambulatory vehicles (air, water,                                                     - Average waiting time at emergencies
                 Infrastructure                                                                                    - Supplies
                                      - Supplies                              and land)                                                                              Quality (structural):
                                                                                                                   - Emergency power generators for health
                                      - Emergency power generators for        - Supplies                                                                             - Maintenance of health facilities
                                                                                                                   facilities
                                      health facilities                       - Emergency power generators for
                                                                              health facilities
                                      - # of physicians per 1,000 inhabitants
                                      - # of nurses per 1,000 inhabitants
                Human Capital         - Total gross domestic expenditure on R&D as % of GDP                                                                          - Health professional preparedness for
                                      - Health professional preparedness for extreme weather event emergencies                                                       emerging or expanding infectious diseases
                                      - Provider accreditation
                 Access to risk-
                                      - % of insured population
                   spreading          - Comprehensiveness of the Basic Benefits Package
                  mechanisms
                                      - Functionality of HIS in terms of quality of data flow
              Access to and ability   - Functionality of the public health surveillance system                                                                       - Presence of IMNCI guidelines
                  to manage           - Presence of infrastructure for health emergency communication system (hardware)                                              - Presence of guidelines for treatment of
                 information          - Presence of coordination mechanisms for effective function of the health emergency communication system (software and        malnutrition
                                      facilitating factors)
                                      - Availability and use of clinical guidelines
                                                                                                                                                                     - Presence & functionality of a vector
                  Institutions        - Availability of protocols to monitor clinical quality
                                                                                                                                                                     management program
                                      - National plan for health sector emergency preparedness, management, and response




                                                                                                                                                                                                    62
           Equity        - Out-of-pocket expenditure as % of total household expenditure (urban : rural ratio)

Key: Indicators in green are qualitative indicator proposed by team (see annex 4 for detailed question and banding).




                                                                                                                       63
             Section Three
Climate Change-Health Adaptive Strategies




                                            64
                                   Section Three
                      Climate Change-Health Adaptive Strategies

3.1    Overview

Irrespective of future developments in climate conditions and efforts to mitigate the
emission of greenhouse gas, the formulation of health-specific adaptive strategies that
enhance the resilience of human populations is likely to prove important. The IPCC has
flagged the need for both anticipatory and responsive strategies, in which the roles of the
different stakeholders are clearly identified and cross-sector collaboration is imperative,
and it presents a generic framework for recommended adaptive strategies (see Matrix).

Responsive and Anticipatory Strategies

The two clusters of health-specific adaptive strategies needed according to the IPCC’s
Fourth Assessment Report, are “responsive” and “anticipatory.” The responsive strategies
would aim at reducing current vulnerabilities to the climate change that has already
occurred, while the anticipatory strategies would aim at addressing health outcomes
associated with future projections of climate change. Both strategies would be
implemented by a variety of stakeholders, including: regional and national governments;
health institutions and professionals, and the general public.

Roles and responsibilities

Each adaptive strategy suggested by the IPCC, has a corresponding set of general roles to
be played by different implementing stakeholders. Governments’ role should be to focus
on building environmental and climatic forecast systems that are able to predict diseases
outbreaks. It is also a government’s responsibility to convey to its Ministry of Health and
other ministries, as well as to the general public, the information relevant to predicted and
expected disease outbreaks. Government’s role also includes: design and implementation
of emergency preparedness polices and plans; resource allocation, and public awareness.

The major responsibility of health institutions is to strengthen their capacities and build
systems that function effectively - providing primary health care and education to all
citizens through a network of well-qualified and trained health professionals who
understand the health impacts and outcomes of climate change. In short, this role is
suggested to involve capacity building, public health surveillance, provision of services
and drugs, and mobilization of human capital.

Individuals and the general public are expected to respond appropriately to government
alerts about predicted health hazards and emergencies. This role is suggested to involve
awareness development, behavior-change campaigns, advocacy, and social mobilization.




                                                                                          65
Cross-sectoral Collaboration

Developing health-specific strategies is by no means inclusive of only the health sector,
and integration of strategies across different sectors will be necessary. For example,
preparedness of the energy sector to increase power surge capacity in order to facilitate
appropriate ventilation in the event of heatwaves, is as important as having a rapid
response medical team to react to the medical emergencies that occur during heatwaves.

Likewise, in drought preparation, mainstreaming climate change considerations into
national water and sanitation planning is as important as the stocking of medical supplies
such as water purifiers and oral dehydration solutions. Another example is the
cooperation between the health sector and other ministries, such as Water, Natural
Resources, Meteorology, and Environment, that will be required for conducting
environmental risk assessments to monitor environmental threats to public health during
floods events.

Development of a Framework

The following tables represent the efforts of the team to develop event-specific adaptive
strategies, using both the generic framework mentioned above and the disease matrix
(Fig. ??), in which the relationship between different climate events and health outcomes,
as evidenced in ECA, is summarized. As does the IPCC framework, the framework
adopted here organizes the health adaptive strategies into anticipatory and responsive
strategies. The developed strategies also benefited from close attention to the lessons
learned in previous responses to events that took place in ECA, such as the heatwaves in
France and southern Europe and the drought events in the UK and other countries.




                                                                                       66
      3.2      Adaptive Strategies for Extreme Weather Events

Table 10
Floods
                                 o Within broader disaster preparedness planning, design and implement systems to communicate with the general public and health
                                 professionals/emergency responders.
                                 o Design education campaigns for at-risk populations on floods and evacuation processes.
                 Government
                                 o Set up flood-resilient emergency information systems (i.e. recursive, does not require electricity, etc.).
                                 o For countries where multiple languages are spoken, prepare multilingual materials and make arrangements to deliver information in
                                 these languages.
                                 Design and test Institution-specific disaster preparedness and response plan provisions:
                                 o Waterproof supply repositories.
                                 o Store sensitive medical equipment in protected areas rather than basements.
                                 o Continue training of medical staff for emergency situations including evacuation of hospital patients and working under emergency
                                 conditions.
                    Health       o Install flood-resilient communication systems to use during emergency (i.e. does not require electricity, reaches all ward sections in
Anticipatory     Institutions/   a hospital, etc.).
                 Professionals   o Store back-up files of patient records in a secure computer server outside the hospital, and identify a reliable source that may deliver
                                 hard copies upon request.
                                 o Back-up clean water supply in hospitals, and means of purification.
                                 o Design and implement procedures and systems for a timely and effective notification of evacuation.
                                 o Ensure provisions for enabling a surge in supplies and human resources upon occurrence of a flood.
                                 o Put in place systems for coordination and organization of all stages of medical care (including EMS) in the event of a flood.
                                 Get educated and stay informed on:
                                 o Safety procedures; prioritization in the event of a flood (ensure safety of self and others before property, ensure basic needs, avoid
                                 mind-altering substances, etc.).
                    Public       o Insurance provisions or risk-spreading mechanisms against losses due to floods.
                                 o Inducing action from policy and decision-makers on flood control policies and infrastructures with mid- and long-term planning
                                 considerations.




                                                                                                                                                         67
                             o Deliver educational tools to increase public awareness.
                             o Work with the media and health institutions to deliver useful information post-event.
                             o Take measures to ensure public hygiene is maintained.
             Government      o Increase levels of annual vaccination of infectious diseases of national concern during year(s) of major flood event(s).
                             o Conduct environmental risk assessments to monitor environmental threats to the health of the public, e.g. up-to-date information of
                             any contaminants in water systems.
                             o Divide regions into “risk-zones” for environmental health based on historical trends, vectors numbers, or other determining factors.


                             o   Detect and contain epidemic clusters through increased surveillance of infectious diseases.
                             o   Increase lab diagnostic capacity by introduction of express methods (ELISA, IF, PCR).
                             o   Periodically educate and increase awareness about emerging or recurring vector-borne diseases.
                             o   Organize a functional post-event epidemiological monitoring and surveillance system.
                             o   Forecast epidemic processes for specific diseases using locally relevant tools.

                             To reduce consequences of stress-related diseases in the population:
                Health
                             o Apply suitable psychological tools and tests for the early detection of stress-related diseases.
             Institutions/
                             o Provide social support for vulnerable groups (e.g. pregnant women, the poor, etc.).
             Professionals
Responsive
                             Further recommendations for health specialists and database centers:
                             o Expansion of Information: Include epidemiologically relevant data (non-immediate cause of death, observable risk factors) when
                             reporting deaths during floods in order to better identify vulnerable groups and causes of death. This information may be synthesized to
                             create education on safety and appropriate actions to reduce the number of deaths.
                             o Standardization of Approach: Adapt a standardized reporting technique so information across time and different regions may be
                             compared and combined into national/continental reports.

                             o Drink only from designated safe water supplies.
                             o Boil water before consumption. Chlorinate/boil tap water
                             o Discard food that is susceptible of contamination.
                             o Clean up quickly (e.g. dead animals in or around the house) and disinfect.
                             o During cleaning, avoid contact with mud or corpses by wearing gloves and protective gear.
                             o Get educated on safety cleaning procedures to avoid accidents such as electric shock or displaced wild animal attacks.
                Public
                             o Treat furniture and rooms for vectors (mainly rodents and insects).
                             o Ensure that flooded basements are cleared in a timely fashion and dried on a longer time scale so as to reduce risk of mosquito
                             viruses and mold attacks.
                             o Avoid mosquito bites by wearing insect repellent, wearing long sleeves, and having screens at home.
                             o For those involved in recreational activities or work related to water: minimize contact with water or mud that may be
                             contaminated with rodent urine and wear protective clothing such as waterproof boots.
                             o Seek social support if feeling stressed or depressed.



                                                                                                                                                    68
Heatwaves

                               o   Future housing and urban planning takes into account natural ventilation systems.
                               o   Landscape planning takes into account climate factors (e.g. xeriscaping, etc.).
                               o   Increase power surge capacity for the event of heatwaves.
                               o   Plan for arrangements of easily accessible back-up supplies of water in the event of a heatwave.
                               o   Coordinate weather forecast institutions and health institutions to create an early warning system.

                               Adaptive strategies to avoid aggravating heat-sensitive illnesses and health effects related to air pollution and forest fires:
               Government      o Initiate and maintain dialogue with employers to facilitate selective condition-based absenteeism in the event of an officially
                               declared heatwave.
                               o Inform and reach out to general public and particularly vulnerable populations, through radio, TV, internet, etc., about the risks of
                               excessive heat, summer time ozone and particulate matter levels and what they can do to avoid adverse health effects.
                               o Put in place the regulatory and physical resources to a) warn sensitive populations to restrict their outdoor activities upon excessive
                               levels of ozone, PM or other pollutant during a heatwave and b) restrict emissions of in-city stationary sources or trucks/general traffic if
                               need be.
Anticipatory                   o Develop a tracking system of fire in the country or neighboring countries and satellite system of smoke travel.


                               o Develop a heatwave early warning system with help from weather forecasting institutions, allocating budgetary and human
                               resources to its operation and maintenance.
                  Health       o Collaborate with government agencies and media in developing strategies for risk communication to the public.
               Institutions/   o Ensure a satisfactory number of staff to provide services if needed, including provisions for staff surges on short notice (retired
               Professionals   doctors and other health practitioners in the area on call).
                               o Provide a heatwave hotline and web-based service systems to answer heat-related inquires.
                               o Develop outreach programs (including health practitioners and volunteers) targeted towards vulnerable populations
                               o Stay alert about weather conditions forecast in the hot season.
                               o Get educated and stay informed about the health risks of excessive heat, and how to protect self and family.
                               o Get informed about how temperature can affect your medical condition.
                  Public
                               o Agree in advance on possible leaves for medical reasons with employer.
                               o Induce action from policy and decision-makers on the design and implementation of heatwave plans and provisions, including early
                               warning systems.
                               o Provide continuous electricity for the city during heatwaves, with provisions for prioritization of healthcare facilities.
 Responsive                    o Keep health agencies and general public informed about government activities related to heatwaves, status of forest fires, and
               Government
                               actions taken.




                                                                                                                                                          69
Responsive                     o Monitor health status of patients within healthcare facilities, nursing homes, outpatient settings, the chronically ill, and the elderly at
                  Health       home.
               Institutions/   o Work with media to develop useful messages and inform the public on ways to stay healthy during heatwaves; health officials can
               Professionals   deliver agreed message if deemed appropriate.
                               o Work with media to inform the public on ways smoke and smog can affect health and ways to reduce exposure.
                               o Avoid strenuous activities.
                               o Stay indoors/under shade during peak heat hours of the day.
                               o Use a fan or air conditioning to keep cool.
                               o Stay hydrated by drinking lots of fluids and avoiding alcohol and caffeinated drinks
                               o Cool down with extra showers.
                  Public       o Avoid sunburns as they affect the skin's ability to cool itself.
                               o Reach out to vulnerable individuals (elderly, isolated, chronically ill, homeless, etc.).
                               o Reduce vehicle use to the extent possible.
                               o Use public transport or carpooling to reduce exhaust.
                               o Refuel cars at night to reduce the input of gas vapor in photochemical smog.
                               o Minimize the risk of forest fires (e.g. camp fire safety, throwing cigarettes when in forest areas).


Droughts
                               o Formulate a multi-stakeholder preparedness plan, including an information dissemination strategy for preparedness and response
                               measures.
               Government
                               o Educate the public about the importance of water and energy conservation.
                               o Mainstream climate change considerations into current national hydrologic planning.
Anticipatory      Health       o   Stock means for water purification.
               Institutions/   o   Stock oral re-hydration solutions for treatment of dehydration.
               Professionals   o   Ensure storage of clean water reserves for healthcare facilities.
                               o   Create community organizations to raise awareness about the importance of water and energy conservation.
                  Public
                               o   Induce action from policy and decision-makers on assurance of water supplies and climate-appropriate water policies.
                               o   Provide clean water sources and food supplies; enforce hydrologic regulations.
               Government      o   Restrict non-essential water uses.
                               o   Promote interagency coordination to prioritize uses and allocate water supplies.
                               o   Provide mental health care and counseling services.
Responsive
                               o   Provide malnutrition and diarrheal treatment centers.
                  Health
                               o   Remind the public of the importance of consuming only safe water.
               Institutions/
                               o   Provide emergency response treatments for fire induced burns.
               Professionals
                               o   Provide means for water purification.
                               o   Provide oral re-hydration solutions (ORS) for treatment of dehydration.




                                                                                                                                                          70
                                  o Stock nonperishables, crops, food, and water in clean containers.
                                  o Give community support to people who are struggling with impacts on their livelihood.
Responsive         Public
                                  o Run community campaigns to raise awareness of safe drinking water sources.
                                  o Self-restrict non-essential uses of water supplies.
      Matrix xx: Adaptive Strategies for Extreme Weather Events


3.3 Adaptive Strategies for Changing Averages

Table 11
                                   Adaptive strategies for water-borne and food-borne diseases:
                                   o Create strict water run-off regulation measures and protect drinking water sources from pollution.
                                   o Provide adequate sanitation and supplies of clean drinking water to the population.
                                   o Continuously survey related diseases accompanied with meteorological data in order to better link any associations and make
                                   appropriate policies as well as increase public awareness.
                                   o Use technology such as remote sensing to predict outbreaks of disease.
                                   o Update, issue, and enforce regulations in food handling, hygiene in restaurants, caterers, street food stands, etc.

                  Government       Adaptive strategies for vector-borne and air-borne diseases:
                                   o Redefine risk zone areas where climate has made disease transmitter habitats more suitable. This includes revising altitudinal
                                   distributions and latitudinal distribution.
                                   o Redefine high-risk seasons.
                                   o Report emerging or recurring vector-borne infectious disease cases.
                                   o Become a member of a bigger umbrella of efforts to reduce disease spread and monitor vector distribution throughout the continent.
Anticipatory                       o Standardized surveillance measures should be applied, information coordinated, and annual progress reports exchanged on local,
                                   national, and international levels.

                                   Adaptive strategies for water-borne and food-borne diseases:
                                   o Increase general awareness of diseases among practitioners and the public.
                                   o Where applicable, offer vaccinations to the public (e.g. polio).
                                   o Prepare increased diagnostic tools and treatment supplies during “high” seasons.
                     Health
                  Institutions/    Adaptive strategies for vector-borne and air-borne diseases:
                  Professionals    o Expect diseases in areas previously not recorded and for longer seasons during the year.
                                   o Use GIS and remote sensing to make predictive maps of high risk zones in order to advise the public on outdoor activities and
                                   preventive measures.
                                   o Health practitioners should be more aware of the symptoms of all possible diseases, so that in the case of an outbreak patients are
                                   treated more efficiently, and cases are reported early for an alarm system.




                                                                                                                                                         71
                                Adaptive strategies for water-borne and food-borne diseases:
                                o Sanitary activities at the household level include filtering or boiling drinking water.
                                o Stay informed and practice proper food handling, cooking, and food storage practices.
Anticipatory       Public       Adaptive strategies for vector-borne and air-borne diseases:
                                o Travelers to endemic areas should be more aware of risk factors for acquiring diseases and ways of prevention.
                                o Increase knowledge on ways to decrease vector exposure, and for some diseases, take preventative measures such as vaccinations.

                                o   Ensure adequate funding, staffing, and timely implementation of vector control programs.
                                o   Choose environmental management over pesticide application where feasible.
                Government
                                o   Increase resources for sanitary inspection and public health surveillance efforts during high-risk seasons.

                                o Collaborate with government and the media in preparing and delivering messages on food and water safety, as well as vector-borne
                   Health       diseases and how to avoid the health effects from these hazards.
 Responsive
                Institutions/   o Implement continuing education programs and emerging diseases awareness campaigns.
                Professionals   o Ensure the functionality of mandatory reporting systems and surveillance programs.
                                Get educated and stay informed on:
                   Public       o Food and water safety, and the role of enforcing agencies.
                                o Behavioral and other risk factors related to vector-borne diseases.

3.4 Adaptive Strategies for Migration-Related Health Effects
Table 12
                                o Establish systematic screening policies for immigrants from countries with high tuberculosis incidences.
                Government
                                o Develop information campaigns about health care possibilities for migrants.
                                o Develop sensitivity trainings and cultural awareness campaigns for health care providers to eliminate social and cultural barriers for
Anticipatory                    migrants.
                  Health
                                o Modify training programs for health providers to focus on diseases from migrant source countries.
               Institutions/
                                o Increase in-country migration of health professionals from migrant source regions.
               Professionals
                                o Provide services and facilities for exotic or uncommon diseases.


                Government      o   Inform arriving migrants about local health care possibilities.

                  Health
 Responsive                     o   If there is acute migrant flow, locate more health professionals in needed capacities.
               Institutions/
                                o   Screen migrants for tuberculosis
               Professionals

                   Public       o   Provide outreach community services for migrants.



                                                                                                                                                       72
3.5 Adaptive Strategies for Eutrophication Health Effects

Table 13
                               o Perfect a forecasting system to predict algal bloom events. This should be based on monitoring of environmental parameters that
               Government      could favor specifically toxic algae, and on knowledge of the geographic and temporal distribution of nutrients.
                               o Establish a warning system based on threshold levels to alert both practitioners and the public in case of major algal blooms.
Anticipatory
                  Health
                               o Further disseminate knowledge about the possible increase in cases of exposure to toxic algae. Educate both practitioners and the
               Institutions/
                               public about the possible effects of climate change on toxic algae blooms.
               Professionals
                               o Develop an integrated coastal management plan covering different watersheds and specifically aimed at reducing the input of
Responsive        Region
                               nutrients into the Baltic basin.




                                                                                                                                                     73
                                    Annex 1: Summary Table for Flood-Related Health Outcomes
     Reference             Location (Year)               Design                  Population               Exposure             Disease/Outcome               Measure of Effect
                                                                                                                                                               (+/-95% CI)
Han et al. 1999           Bucharest, Romania       Matched case control   24 asymptomatically            Flooded           West Nile virus infection        WNV was associated
                          (1996)                                          infected persons and 37        apartment         (likely vector Cx. pipiens)      with having flooded
                                                                          uninfected persons, all        building                                           apartments; OR = 3.94
                                                                          apartment residents            basements                                          (1.16-13.7).
Hubálek and Halouzka      Southern Moravia,                                                                                West Nile virus
1999                      Czech Republic (1997)
Hubálek et al. 2005       Central Bohemia,         Cohort                 497 participants of all ages   Flooded areas     Tahyna virus (largely from       Infection with Tahyna
                          Czech Republic (2002)                           who lived in flooded areas     with risk-zone    vectors Oc. sticticus, Oc.       was associated with
                                                                          (includes 437 who lived in a   ranking           cantans, Ae. vexans, and Ae.     living in a flood risk zone
                                                                          flood risk zone and 60 in a    according to      cinereus)                        (RR = 3.61).
                                                                          control zone).                 mosquito                                           Seroprevalence of
                                                                                                         quantities                                         neutralizing antibodies to
                                                                                                                                                            Tahyna increased with
                                                                                                                                                            increased risk-zone
                                                                                                                                                            ranking and was
                                                                                                                                                            significantly higher than
                                                                                                                                                            in the control zone (χ2 =
                                                                                                                                                            14.57; p = 0.002). Within
                                                                                                                                                            risk zones,
                                                                                                                                                            seroprevalence also
                                                                                                                                                            increased as residence
                                                                                                                                                            distance to floodplain
                                                                                                                                                            forests decreased (χ2 =
                                                                                                                                                            8.51; p = 0.003).
Zitek and Benes 2005      Czech Republic (1997,    Cohort                 7,156 subjects in 1997 of      Flood (residual   Leptospirosis                    Half the cases of
(in Czech)                2002)                                           which 94 were diagnosed        water, mud in                                      leptospirosis were
                                                                          infected; 4,999 subjects in    cellars, etc.)                                     directly associated with
                                                                          2002 of which 92 were                                                             floods. Pre-post analysis
                                                                          diagnosed infected                                                                RR = 3.
Peresta et al. 2006 (in   Zakarpattya, Ukraine                            General population             Flood             Gastroduodenal ulcer disease,    An increase in the
Ukrainian)                (1998, 2001)                                                                                     including perforation            number of patients with
                                                                                                                                                            GUD during the flood
                                                                                                                                                            years was observed. In
                                                                                                                                                            2001, the number of
                                                                                                                                                            patients admitted to
                                                                                                                                                            hospitals with late stages
                                                                                                                                                            of the disease doubled.
Neuberg et al. 1998       Kotlin Klodzki, Poland   Cohort                 47 pregnant women injured      Flood             Pregnancy loss and disorders     Psychosocial stress
(in Polish)               (1997)                                          from the flood event and                         including premature delivery,    observed during the flood
                                                                          exhibiting psychosocial                          missed abortion, birth           event was associated with
                                                                          stress, and a random control                     asphyxia, premature rupture of   pregnancy loss and
                                                                          group of 100 pregnant                            membranes, intrauterine          perinatal complications.
                                                                          women                                            growth retardation               (55.3%)
Neuberg et al. 1999       Koldzko region,          Cohort                 17 female adolescents                            Hypogonadotropic                 Psychosocial stress
(in Polish)               Poland (1997)                                   injured from the flood event                     hypogonadism amenorrhea          observed during the flood



                                                                                                                                                                                   74
                                                      with secondary amenorrhea                                                     disaster was associated
                                                      and 17 controls                                                               with hypogonadotropic
                                                                                                                                    hypogonadism
                                                                                                                                    amenorrhea.
Norris et al. 2002   Opole and neighboring   Cohort   285 adults living in        Trauma (injury   Post-traumatic stress disorder   PTSD was diagnosed in
                     villages, Poland                 apartment buildings with    or life                                           % of participants. Older
                                                      signs of flood damage one   threatening)                                      Poles were more
                                                      month post-event            during flood                                      symptomatic than
                                                                                                                                    younger poles. Trauma,
                                                                                                                                    an indicator of flood
                                                                                                                                    severity, was associated
                                                                                                                                    with PTSD symptoms
                                                                                                                                    (increasing in trauma).




                                                                                                                                                         75
                          Annex 2: Summary Table for Heatwave-Related Health Outcomes
  Reference           Location           Design           Population           Exposure           Disease/Outcome              Measure of Effect
                       (Year)                                                                                                     (+/-95% CI)
Revich and         Moscow,           Time-series       All non-accidental   - High               Overall non-            Temperatures 18-25 °C were
Shaposhnikov       Russia (2000-     covering 2,251    death cases.         temperatures         accidental mortality.   associated with increased
2007               2006)             consecutive       -     General        defined as 18 >                              average non-accidental
                                     days from Jan     population living    T > 25 °C in         - Also assessed         mortality of 2.8 % (2-3.6) per
                                                                                                                         °
                                     1, 2000 to Feb    in Moscow            average daily        cause-specific           C (p<0.001) and
                                     27, 2006          -     Also           ambient air          mortality related to    temperatures above 25 °C
                                                       separately           temperature          respiratory disease,    were associated with 11.2%
                                                       considered elderly                        ischemic coronary       increase per °C (p=0.001).
                                                       age 75+              - Extreme air        heart disease, and
                                                                            temperature          cerebrovascular         Temperatures 18-25 °C were
                                                                            defined as T >       disease                 associated with increased
                                                                            25 °C                                        average respiratory mortality
                                                                                                                         of 8.7% (0.7-16.7), ischemic
                                                                                                                         coronary heart mortality of
                                                                                                                         2.7% (1.7-3.7), and taking a
                                                                                                                         one day lag into account, an
                                                                                                                         increased average
                                                                                                                         cerebrovascular mortality of
                                                                                                                         4.7% (3.5-5.9) per °C
                                                                                                                         increase.
Pattenden et al.   Sofia, Bulgaria   Time-series       All deaths in the    - High               Increased all cause     A 1 °C increase over 2 days
2003               (1996-1999)       covering the      general              temperatures         mortality               above 21.55 °C, increases
                                     period of 1996-   population living    defined as the                               total mortality by 3.49 %
                                     1999 for both     in Sofia.            90th percentile of                           (2.23-4.76). This is
                                     mortality and                          two day mean                                 calculated adjusting for PM,
                                     temperature                            temperatures.                                humidity season, and other
                                                                            Determined cut                               potential confounders. Not
                                                                            off point of                                 taking into account PM
                                                                            21.55 °C.                                    increases the result for the
                                                                                                                         heat effect slightly. The
                                                                            - Separately                                 estimated PM effect on
                                                                            examined the                                 mortality was significant: a
                                                                            role of                                      0.06% (0.03-0.10) increase in
                                                                            particulate                                  mortality per 1 g/m3
                                                                            matter (PM)                                  increase in TSP.



                                                                                                                                                    76
Alebić-Juretić   Zagreb and        Time-series       800,000 people of   Air pollution        Increased all cause   Air pollution during heatwave
et al. 2007      Rijeka, Croatia                     Zagreb and          (PM and ozone)       mortality             contributed to 50% of excess
                 (August 8-14,                       150,000 people of   exposure during                            deaths. Taking threshold
                 2003)                               Rijeka              a heatwave                                 value of 100 g/m3 of ozone
                                                                                                                    into account, the combined
                                                                                                                    effects of PM10 and ozone,
                                                                                                                    were associated with 14
                                                                                                                    excess deaths in Zagreb and
                                                                                                                    1.6 excess deaths in Rijeka
                                                                                                                    during the heatwave period.
                                                                                                                    The estimated PM effect on
                                                                                                                    mortality in Zagreb: a 2%
                                                                                                                    increase in average monthly
                                                                                                                    mortality per 10 g/m3
                                                                                                                    increase in PM10.

Páldy et al.     Budapest,         Time-series       General             6 heatwaves          Excess total          - All 6 heatwaves showed an
2005             Hungary (1993-    (identified       population in       defined as 3 days    mortality             increase in excess mortality.
                 2000)             heatwaves and     Budapest            or longer with
                                   then quantified                       mean                                       - Exposure to heatwaves was
                                   the excess                            temperature (lag                           associated with a 25 % mean
                                   mortality)                            0-2 days) above                            increase in total mortality (SD
                                                                         99th percentile of                         = 14.35).
                                                                         daily mean
                                                                         temperature
                                                                         (26.6 °C) from
                                                                         1990 to 2000
Páldy et al.     Budapest,         Time-series       General             High                 Excess total,         - A 5 °C increase in daily
2005             Hungary (1993-                      population in       temperature          cardiovascular, and   mean temperature above 18
                                                                                                                    °
                 2000)                               Budapest            defined as > 18      respiratory disease    C increases the risk of total
                                                                         °
                                                                          C in average        mortality             mortality by 10.6 % (96 % CI
                                                                         daily                                      9.7-14.0), cardiovascular
                                                                         temperature                                mortality by 18 % (96% CI
                                                                                                                    11-29), and respiratory
                                                                                                                    disease mortality by 8.8 %
                                                                                                                    (96 % CI 5.4-23).




                                                                                                                                                77
Zunnunov 2000      Uzbekistan                     General              Summer heat         Ischemic heart          Heat was observed to
                                                  population                               disease                 aggravate cases of IHD.
                                                                                                                   During the period of heat,
                                                  -Also separately                                                 there was an increased
                                                  examined the                                                     frequency in angina attacks,
                                                  elderly (70+) and                                                episodes of arrhythmia, and
                                                  migrants                                                         coronary failure; especially in
                                                                                                                   elderly and the migrants.
Mirić D et al.     Dalmatia,                      1,306 AMI            Air temperature     Acute myocardial        Increased incidence of AMI
1993               Croatia                        patients admitted                        infarction (AMI)        was associated with increased
                                                  to the two Split                                                 ambient temperatures (p<
                                                  hospitals in 1981-                                               0.05).
                                                  1987
Kyselý 2004        Czech Republic                 All inhabitants in   17 heatwaves        Excess total            After taking a one day lag
                   (1982-2000)                    the Czech            defined as 3        mortality and excess    into account, exposure to
                                                  Republic,            consecutive days    cardiovascular          heatwaves was associated
                                                  approximately 10     with daily          (CVD) mortality         with a 12.9% (SD = 6.6)
                                                  million              maximum                                     mean increase in total
                                                  individuals          temperature at or                           mortality and 13.6% (SD =
                                                                       above 30.0 °C                               7.8) mean increase in CVD
                                                                                                                   mortality. Total relative
                                                                                                                   mortality increase and mean
                                                                                                                   temperature during heatwaves
                                                                                                                   display Pearson correlation
                                                                                                                   coefficient = 0.55.
Kislitsin et al.   Moscow ,         Time-series   Moscow residents     Selected air        Total cardiovascular    PM2.5 and PM10 were
2005               Russia (2002)                                       pollutants:         and respiratory         probably the most hazardous
                                                                       carbon              mortality, acute        exposures of the selected
                                                                       monoxide,           myocardial              pollutants causing the greatest
                                                                       ozone, nitrogen     infarctions, and        number of total,
                                                                       dioxide, PM2.5,     hospitalizations with   cardiovascular, and
                                                                       and PM10 during     respiratory disease     respiratory mortality cases. A
                                                                       summer smog                                 few AMI cases were caused
                                                                       event                                       by exposure to CO and NO2,
                                                                                                                   and hospitalization with
                                                                                                                   respiratory disease by NO2
                                                                                                                   and ozone.




                                                                                                                                               78
                                Annex 3: Summary Table for Drought-Related Health Outcomes
 General       Reference             Synopsis               Country,      Design/   Population   Exposure        Outcome         Measure     Comment/link
 Category                                                   Location,     Report                                                 of Effect
                                                             Year(s)                                                             (+ 95%
                                                                                                                                    CI)
Immunity       UNICEF         “Their illnesses are       Uzbekistan,      Survey    Children     Drought      3 out of 4                     http://www.uni
                              largely due either to      Khorezm,                                             children                       cef.org/infobyc
                              the decline in the         20001                                                reported sick                  ountry/uzbekis
                              quality of drinking                                                                                            tan_1296.html
                              water, which is a result
                              of the worsening
                              ecological situation, or
                              to a general decline in
                              living and nutritional
                              standards due to the
                              current drought.”
Malnutrition   Small et al.   WHO & MSF                  Uzbekistan,                             Drought      Levels of acute                13 million
                                                         Karakalpkstan,                                       malnutrition for               people were
                                                         2001                                                 children under                 affected by the
                                                                                                              5 did not                      drought — 6
                                                                                                              exceed 5% yet                  million of
                                                                                                              food                           them were
                                                                                                              accessibility                  children under
                                                                                                              was reduced,                   the age of 14
                                                                                                              aggravating                    years.
                                                                                                              malnutrition
                                                                                                              among
                                                                                                              children.
               UNICEF                                    Uzbekistan,      Report    General      Drought      Iodine                         http://www.reli
                                                                                    population   and          deficiency and                 efweb.int/rw/r
                                                         2001-2002                               shrinkage    tripled rates of               wb.nsf/db900si
                                                                                                 of Aral      goiter in some                 d/ACOS-
                                                                                                 sea          provinces                      64C9TY?Open
                                                                                                 reduced                                     Document
                                                                                                 the
                                                                                                 amount
                                                                                                 of food in




                                                                                                                                                    79
Malnutrition                                                                                the local
                                                                                            market
                                                                                            with
                                                                                            naturally
                                                                                            occurring
                                                                                            iodine.

                                                   Moldova (see
                                                   Box 3 and Box 4)
Diarrheal      WHO                                 Uzbekistan,        Report   General      Drought     Increased cases     Muynak was
diseases       Europe                              Muynak,                     population               of acute            the exceptional
               2001                                2000                                                 intestinal          district where
                                                                                                        infections in       cases
                                                                                                        2000                increased.
                                                                                                                            Overall,
                                                                                                                            “According to
                                                                                                                            the
                                                                                                                            conclusions
                                                                                                                            arrived at by
                                                                                                                            experts, the
                                                                                                                            decreased
                                                                                                                            availability of
                                                                                                                            water had no
                                                                                                                            major impact
                                                                                                                            on the
                                                                                                                            communicable
                                                                                                                            disease
                                                                                                                            situation in
                                                                                                                            Uzbekistan.”
                                                                                                                            (p. 6)
Diarrheal      WHO      UNCIEF provided a          Uzbekistan         Report   General      Drought     Acute lower
disease and    Europe   twelve month supply                                    population               respiratory tract
respiratory    2001     of essential drugs to 17                                                        infection risk
disease                 primary health care
                        units (SVAs and
                        FAPs) in Takhtakupyr
                        for respiratory
                        infection/diarrheal
                        disease case
                        management.


                                                                                                                                   80
Dehydration   WHO           UNICEF donated one        Uzbekistan        Report   General       Drought   Dehydration
              Europe        million ORS packs to                                 population              risk
              2001          the Ministry of Health
Water-borne   WHO           UNICEF donated            Uzbekistan        Report   General       Drought   Cholera risk
diseases      Europe        drugs for the treatment                              population
              2001          of cholera for
                            emergency
                            preparedness
Mental        Sharashidze   Listed as one of the      Georgia,                   General                                   Drought
Health        et al. 2004   environmental             2000                       population.                               devastated
                            influences on mental                                                                           most of the
                            health of the country.                                                                         country and
                                                                                                                           reduced the
                                                                                                                           capacity of the
                                                                                                                           hydroelectric
                                                                                                                           power stations,
                                                                                                                           simultaneously
                                                                                                                           reducing the
                                                                                                                           country’s
                                                                                                                           energy supply.
Other         MSF-                                    Uzbekistan,       Report   General       Drought   Migration         Displacement,
              Holland                                 Karakalpakstan             population                                crowding,

                                                      Turkmenistan,
                                                      Northern region
Other         OCHA                                    Armenia           Report                 Drought   Food shortages/   http://www.reli
                                                                                                         emergencies       efweb.int/rw/r
                                                      Azerbaijan                                                           wb.nsf/db900si
                                                                                                                           d/OCHA-
                                                      Georgia                                                              64D8K2?Open
                                                                                                                           Document
                                                      Tajikistan

                                                      Uzbekistan.




                                                                                                                                  81
                                                           Annex 4: Qualitative Indicators
The following are examples of qualitative indicators that may be used to assess adaptive capacity in certain determinants within the
Vulnerability Assessment Toolkit. These are only suggestions, and by no means a comprehensive, fully developed set of indicators.
Such set would have to be fitted to the local context according to country-specific health priorities and institutional/economic
constraints. The banding of all suggested indicators has been fitted to five categories for consistency. The questionnaire to assess these
indicators would ideally be responded by one or more key informants at different levels of governance.

1-         Infrastructure Qualitative indicators
a.                Access

     Waiting time at Emergencies                Very Good                 Good                Medium                     Bad                Very Bad
How much is the average waiting                     <30’                 30’-60’               60’-90’                 90’-120’               > 120’
time at an emergency room?                                                                                                                  

b.                  Quality


       Maintenance of health facilities              Very good               Good               Medium                     Bad              Very Bad

                                                  Yes, all providers   Yes, the majority   Yes, some providers     Yes, but only for very   Not at all
       Do providers have adequate budget                                 of providers                                 few providers
       for capital investment?
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                            
                                                 Yes:                  Yes:                Yes:                    Yes:                     Not at all
                                                 - Present at both     - Present at both   - Present, but not at   - Present, but not at
                                                 central and           central and         both levels             both levels
       Is there a plan for maintenance of        provider levels       provider levels     - Both short and        - ONLY short term
       health facilities26?                      - Both short and      - ONLY short        long term
                                                 long term             term
                                                                                                                                           

26
     Maintenance of both infrastructure and medical devices




                                                                                                                                                         82
      2-      Human Capital Qualitative indicators

      a.           Health Professionals Preparedness for Extreme Weather Events Emergencies

      Health Professionals
Preparedness for Extreme Weather                Very good                  Good                   Medium                      Bad                     Very Bad
       Events Emergencies
                                           - There is a relevant    - There is a relevant   - There is a relevant    - There is a relevant       - There is no relevant
                                           training plan            training plan           training plan            training plan               training plan
                                           - A curriculum for the   - A curriculum for      - A curriculum for the   - A curriculum for the
                                           plan has been            the plan has been       plan has been            plan has not been
Are health practitioners trained to deal   developed                developed               developed                developed
with the expected health effects and       - The plan has been      - The plan has been     - The plan has not
challenges of extreme weather events?      implemented              implemented             been implemented
                                           - All health             - Access is limited
                                           professionals have       to some health
                                           access                   professionals
                                                                                                                                                       

      b.           Provider Accreditation


       Provider Accreditation                   Very good                  Good                   Medium                      Bad                     Very Bad
                                                 Yes, fully          Not yet, but it is a     Not yet, but it is a   Not yet, but it is a long      No, and currently
Is provider accreditation implemented                                 short term goal         medium term goal             term goal              there are no plans to
in your country?                                                     (within next 2 yrs)      (within next 5 yrs)     (within next 10 yrs)             implement
                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                               83
      c.            Health Professionals Preparedness for Emerging or Expanding Infectious Diseases

      Health Professionals
  Preparedness for Emerging or                       Very good                     Good                     Medium                         Bad                     Very Bad
  Expanding Infectious diseases
                                               - There is a relevant       - There is a relevant     - There is a relevant       - There is a relevant       - There is no relevant
                                               training plan               training plan             training plan               training plan               training plan
                                               - A curriculum for the      - A curriculum for        - A curriculum for the      - A curriculum for the
                                               plan has been               the plan has been         plan has been               plan has not been
Are health practitioners trained to deal       developed                   developed                 developed                   developed
with the expected effects of climate           - The plan has been         - The plan has been       - The plan has not
change on infectious diseases?                 implemented                 implemented               been implemented
                                               - All health                - Access is limited
                                               professionals have          to some health
                                               access                      professionals
                                                                                                                                                                   

      3-       Access to Risk-Spreading Mechanisms Qualitative indicators
      a.          Basic Benefits Package

   Basic Benefit Package (BBP)                       Very good                     Good                     Medium                         Bad                     Very Bad
                                               Yes:                        Yes:                      Yes:                        No:                         No:
                                               - Fully                     - But needs minor         - But more funds            - Current BBP too           - BBP should be
Do you think the current BBP27 is                                          reforms to ensure         necessary to ensure         generous for available      reduced and funds
adequate for a fair, accessible and                                        sustainability            sustainability              funds (which should not     should be increased
sustainable healthcare system?                                                                                                   be increased)               to attain sustainability
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              

      27
        The BBP is the list of services of guaranteed entitlement. In some countries, it has a negative form (exceptions being family planning and plastic surgery, all
      the rest being covered) and in others, it has a positive form (an explicit list of interventions and services specifying the level of coverage by the public insurance).
      Countries with too generous a BBP typically face financial sustainability problems.




                                                                                                                                                                            84
      4-         Access to and Ability to Manage Information Qualitative indicators

      a.              Functionality of Health Information System


           Functionality of HIS                        Very good                     Good                    Medium                     Bad                  Very bad
How do you consider the quality of data
flow among providers, MoH, Public
Health Agency and Statistical Office?
                                                                                                                                                             

      b.              Functionality of the Public Health Surveillance System

 Functionality of PH Surveillance
                                                       Very good                     Good                    Medium                     Bad                  Very bad
              System
                                                           28               - Active                            29             - Passive                - Passive
                                                 - Active                                             - Passive
                                                 - Efficient data           - Efficient data          - Efficient data         - Inefficient data       - Inefficient data
How is the public health surveillance            collection & reporting     collection & reporting    collection & reporting   collection & reporting   collection & reporting
system for communicable diseases?                - Timely response          - Response action         - Timely response        - Response action        - Response action
                                                 action                     relatively efficient      action                   relatively efficient     slow & inadequate
                                                                                                                                                             

      c.              Health Emergency Communication System

      The team is developing 2 qualitative indicators to account for the presence and functionality of a health emergency communication
      system. The following are being considered:

      -        Presence of infrastructure for health emergency communication system (hardware)

      28
           Data are actively sought out by the agency.
      29
           Data are reported in such a way that the receiving agency waits for data reports to be sent in.




                                                                                                                                                                     85
      This indicator will capture the physical infrastructure of the system, and its capacity to send/receive information, including the
      recursiveness of the system and resilience in the event of surges, emergencies, etc. (call centers and others)

      -     Presence of coordination mechanisms for effective functionality of the health emergency communication system (software
      and facilitating factors)
      This indicator will relate to the timeliness and accuracy of information delivered to decision-makers in the event of a health
      emergency or situation of concern, the channels through which it flows and how it spreads to other relevant players (including
      interagency coordination). Furthermore, it will account for the presence of proper delegation of authority, clear roles and
      responsibilities, assurance of transparency and accountability, etc. (possible use of governance indicators)

      4-         Institutions Qualitative indicators

      a.              Availability and Use of Clinical Guidelines

                                                       Very good                    Good                 Medium                    Bad              Very bad
                                                  Yes, for all specialties   Yes, for the majority      Yes, for some      Yes, but only for very   Not at all
Are clinical guidelines available AND                                            of specialties          specialties          few specialties
USED in your country?
                                                                                                                                                   

      b.              Availability of Protocols to Monitor Clinical Quality

                                                       Very good                    Good                 Medium                    Bad              Very bad
                30
Do providers have clear protocols to                Yes, all providers       Yes, the majority of    Yes, some providers   Yes, but only for very   Not at all
monitor clinical quality of their                                                  providers                                  few providers
healthcare professionals?                                                                                                                          




      30
           This includes primary, specialist outpatient and inpatient providers.




                                                                                                                                                           86
      c.           National Health Emergency Preparedness, Management, and Response Plan

                                                   Very good                    Good                    Medium                       Bad                     Very bad
                                             There is a plan, it has    There is a plan and it   There is a plan and it     A Plan is in place*.       There is no plan.
                                             been tested through a      has been tested          has been tested through
Is there a functional National Health        field exercise and         through a field          a tabletop exercise.
Emergency Preparedness, Management           revised in the last 3      exercise.
and Response Plan?                           years.
                                                                                                                                                             
      * Either a stand alone plan or a part of broader National Health Policies or provisions

      d.           Presence and Functionality of a Vector Management Program

           Vector Management
                                                   Very good                    Good                    Medium                       Bad                     Very bad
                Program
                                                                     - There is an                                                                     - There is no vector
                                             - There is an           Integrated Vector           - There is a pesticide     - There is a pesticide     control program.
                                             Integrated Vector       Management                  application only vector    application only vector
                                             Management Program*.    Program*.                   control program.           control program.
                                             - Vector management     - Vector                    - Vector management        - Vector management
                                             activities are conductedmanagement                  activities are conducted   activities are conducted
Is there an adequate Vector                  in all at-risk areas.   activities are              in endemic/enzootic        in endemic/enzootic
Management Program?                          - Vector control is     conducted in                disease areas only.        disease areas only.
                                             conducted by trained    endemic/enzootic            - Vector control is        - Vector control is
                                             personnel.              disease areas only.         conducted by trained       conducted by untrained
                                                                     - Vector control is         personnel.                 personnel.
                                                                     conducted by trained
                                                                    personnel.                                                       
                                                                     -                                                                                          
       * As defined by WHO in “Global Strategic Framework for Integrated




                                                                                                                                                                     87
                                      References

Adham, J. and P. Reiter. 1998. “Introduction and establishment of Aedes (Stegomyia)
Albopictus Skuse (Ditera: culicidae) in Albania.” Journal of the American Mosquito
Control Association 14 (3): 340-343.

Ahern, M. et al. 2005. “Global health impacts of floods: epidemiologic evidence.”
Epidemiol. Rev. 27: 36–46.

Alcamo, J. et al. 2007. “Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.” In Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability ed. M. L. Parry et al., 541-580. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.

Alebić-Juretić, A. et al. 2007. “Atmospheric particulate matter and ozone under heat-
wave conditions: do they cause an increase of mortality in Croatia?” Bull. Environ.
Contam. Toxicol. 79 (4): 468-471.

Antypa, A. et al. 2005. Tuberculosis among immigrants: our experience.

Armenia National Communication Report under UNFCCC. 1998.
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/armnc1e.pdf.

Bakonyi T. et al. 2005. “Novel Flavivirus or New Lineage of West Nile Virus, Central
Europe.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 11 (2).

Baltlantis News Archive. 2007. “Heatwave, drinks, drunks, drowning.”
http://www.baltlantis.com/?id=12842.

Barredo, José I. 2006. “Major flood disasters in Europe: 1950–2005.” Natural Hazards:
125-148.

Bartlett, D. H. and F. Azam. 2005. “Chitin, Cholera, and Competence.” Science 310:
1775–1777.

BBC. 2000. “Dozens die in Balkan heatwave.”
http://72.14.235.104/search?q=cache:w5C6nDGPIVEJ:news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/8218
14.stm+ambulance+and+heat+wave+turkey&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=3.

BBC. 2001. “Cholera outbreak in Tatarstan.”
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/1466715.stm, July 31.

Beniston, M. 2002. “Climate change: possible impacts on human health.” Swiss
Medical Weekly 132: 332-337.




                                                                                        88
Bianchi, T. S. et al. 2000. “Cyanobacterial blooms in the Baltic Sea: natural or human-
induced?” Limnol. Oceanogr. 45: 716-726.

Bokszczanin, A. 2000. “Psychological consequences of floods in children and youth.”
Psychol. Wychowawcza 43: 172–181.
Bokszczanin, A. 2002. “Long-term negative psychological effects of a flood on
adolescents.” Polish Psychological Bulletin 33: 55-61.

Bokszczanin, A. 2003. “The role of coping strategies and social support in adolescent's
well-being after a flood.” Polish Psychological Bulletin.

Bokszczanin, A. 2007. “PTSD symptoms in children and adolescents 28 months after a
flood: age and gender differences.” J. Trauma Stress 20 (3): 347-351.

Bouchama et al. 2007. “Prognostic Factors in Heatwave-Related Deaths A Meta
Analysis.” Arch. Intern. Med. 167 (20): 2170-2176.

Carballo, Manuel. 2005. “Migration and Maternal and Child Health, International
Migration and the Millennium Development Goals”. Selected papers on the UNFPA
Expert Meeting.

Carballo, Manuel. 2007. “The challenge of migration and health, International Centre
for Migration and Health.”

Carballo, Manuel and Mboup Mourtala. 2005. Paper prepared for the Policy Analysis
and Research Programme of the Global Commission on International Migration.

CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). “Wildfires Emergency Preparedness
& Response.” http://emergency.cdc.gov/disasters/wildfires/.

Croatia National Communication Report under UNFCCC. 2006.
unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/hrvnc4.pdf.

D’Souza, R. M. et al. 2004. “Does Ambient Temperature Affect Foodborne Disease?”
Epidemiology 15: 86-92.

Daniel, M. et al. 2003. “Shift of the Tick Ixodes ricinus and Tick-Borne Encephalitis to
Higher Altitudes in Central Europe.” Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 22: 327–328.

Daniel, M. et al. 2006a. “Risk assessment and prediction of Ixodes ricinus tick questing
activity and human tick-borne encephalitis infection in space and time in the Czech
Republic.” International Journal of Medical Microbiology 296 (Supplement 1): 41-47.

Daniel, M. et al. 2006b. “Tick-borne Enceohalitis.” In Climate Change and Adaptation
Strategies for Human Health ed. B. Menne and K. L. Ebi. Darmstadt: Steinkopff.
WHO Regional Office for Europe.



                                                                                       89
Danielová V. et al. 2006. “Extension of Ixodes ricinus ticks and agents of tick-borne
diseases to mountain areas in the Czech Republic. International Journal of Medical
Microbiology 296 (S1): 48–53.

DHPE (Directors of Health Promotion and Education). “Leptospirosis.”
http://www.dhpe.org/infect/Lepto.html.

Directorate General of Environment – European Commission. 2007. Water Scarcity and
Droughts. Second Interim report — In-depth assessment. June.

DPA (Deutsche Press-Agentur). 2007. “Europe News: Heatwave causes problems in
Bosnia-Herzegovina.”
http://news.monstersandcritics.com/europe/news/printer_1332796.php, July 20.
ECDC Diseases of Environmental and Zoonotic Origin Team. 2007. “Dengue worldwide: an overview of the current situation and the implications for
Europe.” Euro. Surveill. 12 (6): E070621.1.   http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ew/2007/070621.asp#1.

EEA (European Environment Agency). 2003. “Technological and Natural Disasters.”
In Europe’s Environment: The Third Assessment, 213-229.
http://reports.eea.europa.eu/environmental_assessment_report_2003_10/en/kiev_chapt_1
0.pdf.

Ergönül, Ö. et al. 2007. “Malaria cases in Turkey: do climatic changes play any role?”
Paper presented at 17th European Congress of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases ICC, Munich, March 31-April 4.

ESCAP. 2007. “Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific.”
http://www.unescap.org/stat/data/syb2007/.

EUCALB. 2008. “Epidemiology of European Lyme Borreliosis.”
http://meduni09.edis.at/eucalb/cms/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=29&
Itemid=99 (accessed April 13, 2008).

Githeko, A. K. and A Woodward. 2003. “International consensus on the science of
climate and health: the IPCC Third Assessment Report.” In Climate Change and Human
Health Risks and Responses ed.McMicheal, A. J. et al. World Health Organization.

Gol'denshteĭn, Z. A. et al. 2001. [Causes of leptospirosis morbidity in Krasnodar
region]. Zh. Mikrobiol. Epidemiol. Immunobiol. (6 Suppl.): 77-79.

Granberg, I. et al. 2008. “Abrupt weather changes and atmospheric pollution influence
on sickness and death rates (for Moscow and Caucasian Mineral Waters regions).”
Geophysical Research Abstracts: 101-102.

Gratz, N. 2006. The vector-and rodent-borne diseases of Europe and North America:
their distribution and public health burden. World Health Organization.


                                                                                                                                            90
Griffith, D. C. et al. 2006. “Review of reported cholera outbreaks worldwide, 1995-
2005.” Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 75 (5): 973-977.
Grohmann, K. 2007. “Death toll rises from southeast Europe heatwave.” Reuters
Foundation AlertNet. http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/L27773607.htm, June
27.

Gubler, D.J. and M. L. Wilson. 2005. “The global resurgence of vector-borne diseases:
lessons learned from successful and failed adaptation.” In Integration of Public Health
with Adaptation to Climate Change, lessons learned and new directions ed. K. L. Ebi et
al. London: Taylor and Francis Group.

Hajat, S. et al. 2002. “Impact of hot temperatures on death in London: a time series
approach.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 56: 367-372.

Hajat, S. et al. 2003. “The human health consequences of flooding in Europe and the
implications for public health: a review of the literature.” Applied Environmental Science
and Public Health 1: 13-21.

Hajat, S. et al. 2006. “Impact of High Temperatures on Mortality: Is There an Added
Heatwave Effect?” Epidemiology 17 (6): 632-638.

Hallegraeff, G. M. et al. 2003. Manual of Harmful Marine Microalgae. Paris:
UNESCO Publishing.

Hamers, F. F. et al. “HIV/Aids in Europe: trends and EU wide priorities.”
Eurosurveillance. www.eurosurveillance.org/ew/2006/061123.asp.

Han, L. L. et al. 1999. “Risk factors for Nile River virus infection and
meningoencephalitis, Romania, 1996.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 179: 230-233.

HELCOM. 2007. Climate change in the Baltic Sea Area - HELCOM Thematic
Assessment in 2007. Balt. Sea Environ. Proc. No. 111.

Hubálek, Z. and J. Halouzka. 1999. “West Nile Fever—a Reemerging Mosquito-Borne
Viral Disease in Europe.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 5 (5): 642-650.

Hubálek, Z. et al. 2005. “Mosquitoborne viruses, Czech Republic, 2002.” Emerging
Infectious Diseases 11 (1): 116- 118.

IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies). 2007a.
“Bosnia and Herzegovina: Heatwave.” www.ifrc.org/docs/appeals/07/mdrba001.pdf.

IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross And Red Crescent Societies). 2007b.
“Central Europe: Heatwave Information Bulletin no. 2.”
http://www.ifrc.org/docs/appeals/rpts07/HeatwaveCEIB2.pdf.



                                                                                       91
International Organization of Migration. 2007. Migration as it is, an overview of
migration in the Republic of Moldova.

IPCC. 2007. “Human Health.” Fourth Assessment Report.

Jonkman, S. 2005. “Global Perspectives on Loss of Human Life Caused by Floods.”
Natural Hazards 34 (2): 151-175.

Jonkman, S. and I. Kelman. 2005. “An analysis of the causes and circumstances of flood
disaster deaths.” Disasters 29 (1): 75-97.

Kalashnikov et al. 2003. [Features of leptospirosis in the Krasnodar Territory]. Zh.
Mikrobiol. Epidemiol. Immunobiol. 6: 68-71.

Karen et al. 2004. “Health Consequences of Drought on the Canadian Prairies.”
EcoHealth 1 (Suppl. 2): 144–154.

Kasprzyk, I. 2007. “Non-native Ambrosia pollen in the atmosphere of Rzeszów (SE
Poland); evaluation of the effect of weather conditions on daily concentrations and
starting dates of the pollen season. International Journal of Biometeorology DOI
10.1007/s00484-007-0129-0.

Keatinge, W. R. 2003. “Death in heatwaves, simple preventive measures may help
reduce mortality.” British Medical Journal. 327 (7414): 512-513.

Kendrovski, V. 2006. “The condition with vulnerability analyze in health sector and
proposed adaptational measures due to expected climate change in the Republic of
Macedonia.” www.unfccc.org.mk/documents/vuln%20report%20Health.pdf.

Kislitsin, V. et al. 2005. “Moscow Smog of Summer 2002. Evaluation of Adverse
Health Effects.” In Extreme Weather Events and Public Health Response ed. W. Kirch et
al. Springer-Verlag.

Knudsen, A. B. et al. 1996. “Occurrence and spread in Italy of Aedes albopictus, with
implications for its introduction into other parts of Europe.” J. Am. Mosq. Control Assoc.
12: 177-183.

Koppe, C. et al. 2004. “Heat-waves: risks and responses.” World Health Organization.
www.euro.who.int/document/E82629.pdf.

Kosatsky T (2005). The 2003 European heatwaves. Euro Surveill. 10 (7): 148-9.

Kovats, R. S. and C. Koppe. 2005. “Heatwaves: past and future impacts on health.” In
Integration of Public Health with Adaptation to Climate Change, lessons learned and
new directions ed. K. L. Ebi et al. London: Taylor and Francis Group.



                                                                                       92
Kovats, R. S. and S. Hajat. 2008. “Heat Stress and Public Health: A Critical Review.”
Annual Review of Public Health 29: 41-55.

Kovats et al. 2004. “The effect of temperature on food poisoning: a time-series analysis
of salmonellosis in ten European countries.” Epidemiol. Infect. 132: 443-453.

Ledley, T. S. et al. 1999. “Climate Change and Greenhouse Gases.” EOS 39: 453- 458.

Lindgren, E. and T. G. T. Jaenson. 2006. “Lyme Borreliosis in Europe: Influences of
Climate and Climate Change, Epidemiology, Ecology and Adaptation Measures.” In
Climate Change and Adaptation Strategies for Human Health ed. B. Menne and K. L.
Ebi. Darmstadt: Steinkopff. WHO Regional Office for Europe.

Lithuania Third and Fourth National Communication Report under UNFCC. 2005.

Lobitz, B. et al. 2000. “Climate and infectious disease: Use of remote sensing for
detection of Vibrio cholerae by indirect measurement.” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 1438-
1443.

Magdzik, W. and M. P. Czarkowski. 2004. [Changes in endemicity of hepatitis A in
Poland]. Przegl. Epidemiol. 58 (1): 3-8.

Martens, P. et al. 1999. “Climate change and future populations at risk of malaria.”
Global Environmental Change 9: S89-S107.

Martinez-Baylach, J. et al. 2007. Malaria importada.

Meusel, D. and W. Kirch. 2005. “Lessons to be Learned from the 2002 Floods in
Dresden, Germany.” In Extreme weather events and public health responses ed. W.
Kirch et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

Misić-Majerus, L. et al. 2006. [Human anaplasmosis (ehrlichiosis)]. Acta. Med.
Croatica 60 (5): 411-419.

Michelozzi et al. 2007. “Assessment and prevention of acute health effects of weather
conditions in Europe, the PHEWE project: background, objectives, design.”
Environmental Health 6: 12.

Näsman, U. et al. 2007. “KAMEDO Report No. 88: Floods in the Czech Republic and
Southeastern Germany, 2002.” Prehospital and Disaster Medicine 22 (1): 1-3.

National Report on the State of the Environment in Ukraine. 1998.
http://enrin.grida.no/htmls/ukraina/soe98/health/6_3.htm.




                                                                                        93
Neuberg, M. et al. 1998. [The analysis of the course of pregnancy, delivery and
postpartum among women touched by flood disaster in Kotlin Kłodzki in July 1997].
Ginekol. Pol. 69 (12): 866-870.

Neuberg, M. et al. 1999. [Repeated amenorrhea in an adolescent girl[s] in the course of
flood disaster in Kłodzko Region, July 1997]. Ginekol. Pol. 70 (5): 378-382.

Noji, E. K. 1991. “Natural disaster.” Crit. Care Clin. 14: 271-292.

Norredam, M. et al. 2007. “Motivation and relevance of emergency room visits among
immigrants and patients of Danish origin.” European Journal of Public Health 17 (5).

Norris, F.H. et al. 2002. “Placing age differences in cultural context: a comparison of
the effects of age on PTSD after disasters in the United States, Mexico, and Poland.”
Journal of Clinical Geropsychology 8: 153-173.

NRC (National Research Council). 2001. Under the Weather, Climate Ecosystems and
Infections Disease. Washington DC: National Academy Press.

Onishchenko, G. G. et al. 2005. [Cholera at the beginning of the XXI century.
Prognosis]. Zh. Mikrobiol. Epidemiol. Immunobiol. 3: 44-48.

Páldy, A. et al. 2005. “The Effect of Temperature and Heatwaves on Daily Mortality in
Budapest, Hungary, 1970-2000.” In Extreme Weather Events and Public Health
Response ed. W. Kirch et al. Springer-Verlag.

Pattenden, S. et al. 2003. “Mortality and temperature in Sofia and London.” J. Epidmiol.
Community Health 57: 628-633.

Patz, J. A. et al. 1998. “Dengue Fever Epidemic Potential as Projected by General
Circulation Models of Global Climate Change.” Environmental Health Perspectives 106
(3): 147-153.

Patz, J. A. et al. 2005. “Impact of regional climate change on human health” . Nature
438: 310-316.

Płonka, W. and T. H. Dzbeński. 1999. [The occurrence of intestinal parasites among
children attending first classes of the elementary schools in Poland in the school year
1997/1998]. Przegl. Epidemiol. 53 (3-4): 331-338.

Revich, B. and D. Shaposhnikov. 2007. “Temperature-induced excess mortality in
Moscow, Russia.” Int. J. Biometeorol.

Robine, J.M. 2007. “The excess mortality in summer 2003, results from the Canicule
Project.” http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_projects/2005/action1/action1_2005_full_en.htm.




                                                                                          94
Rodó, X. et al. 2002. “ENSO and cholera: a nonstationary link related to climate
change?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99: 12901–12906.

Rogers, D.J. and S. E. Randolph. 2000. “The Global Spread of Malaria in a Future,
Warmer World.” Science 289: 1763-1765.

Salzmann, M. 2007. “Hundreds die in eastern Europe heatwave.” International
Committee of the Fourth International. http://www.wsws.org/articles/2007/jul2007/heat-
j28.shtml (World Socialist Web Site; accessed July 28 2007).

Seidel, D. J. et al. 2008. “Widening of the tropical belt in a changing climate.” Nature
Geoscience 1: 21–24.

Sinn et al. 2001. EU-Erweiterung und Arbeitskraeftemigration. Institut fuer
Wirtschaftsforschung.

Smith, R. et al. 2006. “Lyme borreliosis: European-wide coordinated survelliance and
action needed?” Eurosurvellience 11 (6).
http://www.eurosurveillance.org/ew/2006/060622.asp.

Sumilo, D. et al. 2007. “Climate Change Cannot Explain the Upsurge of Tick-Borne
Encephalitis in the Baltics.” PloS 1 (5): e500.

Süss, J. et al. 2008. “What Makes Ticks Tick? Climate Change, Ticks, and Tick-Borne
Diseases.” J. Travel. Med. 15: 39–45.

Tajikistan National Communication under UNFCCC. 2002.
unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/tainc1.pdf.

Tarr, P. E et al. 1999. “Considerations regarding mass vaccination against typhoid fever
as an adjunct to sanitation and public health measures: potential use in an epidemic in
Tajikistan.” Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 61 (1): 163–170.

Turkish Daily News. 2006a. “Heatwave fries Turkey’s towns.”
http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/article.php?enewsid=51615 (accessed August 16,
2006).

Turkish Daily News. 2006b. “Turkey battles forest fires amid heatwave.”
http://www.turkishdailynews.com.tr/article.php?enewsid=52064 (accessed August 22,
2006).

Turquety, S. et al. 2008. “Analysis of pollution transport from forest fires in the
Mediterranean during the summer 2007.” Geophysical Research Abstracts 10: 1.

UNDP. “The United Nations Development Program Country Disaster Risk Index and
Vulnerability.” http://gridca.grid.unep.ch/undp/.



                                                                                       95
UNHCR. 2004. “Profile of Internal Displacement: Georgia.” Global IDP Database of
the Norwegian Refugee Council. http://www.unhcr.org/home/RSDCOI/406424744.pdf.

US Agency for International Development (USAID) — Bureau for Democracy, Conflict
and Humanitarian Assistance — Office of the U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance-Southern
Europe. 2007. Wildfires and Drought Fact Sheet #1, Fiscal Year (FY) 2007 September.

US Department of Agriculture Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/air/smoke.htm.

WHO. “Armenia Cholera Outbreak.”
http://www.who.int/csr/don/archive/country/arm/en/.

WHO. 1996. “Typhoid outbreak in Tajikistan.”
http://www.who.int/csr/don/1996_08_02/en/index.html.

WHO. 1999. Toxic Cyanobacteria in water: A guide to their public health
consequences, monitoring and management. Geneva.

WHO. 2003. “Flooding and Communicable Diseases Fact Sheet.”
http://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/ems/FloodingandCommunicableDiseasesfactsheet.
pdf.

WHO. 2003. Guidelines for safe recreational water environments. Geneva.

WHO. 2002. Epidemiological surveillance of malaria in countries of Central and
Eastern Europe and selected newly independent status. Report on a WHO intercountry
meeting.

WHO. 2004. “Central Asian countries to face public health problems unless serious
commitments to malaria control are made.” Copenhagen: World Health Organization
Regional Office for Europe Media Centre.
http://www.euro.who.int/mediacentre/PR/2004/20080228_3 (accessed February 23,
2004).

WHO. 2005. “Experts say WHO European region ready to move from malaria control.”
Copenhagen: World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe Media Centre.
http://www.euro.who.int/mediacentre/PR/2005/20051020_2 (accessed October 20, 2005).

WHO Regional Office for Europe. RBM (Roll Back Malaria) in Central Asia and
Kazakhstan. Project documents 2002-2005. www.euro.who.int/document/e76332.pdf
(accessed January 2005).

WHO Regional Office for Europe Emergency Preparedness and Response Program.
2001. Health aspects of the drought in Uzbekistan 2000-2001. Technical Field Report
Series.



                                                                                      96
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2007.
http://www.wmo.ch/pages/publications/meteoworld/_archive/en/june2007/wmo_activitie
s.html.

World Bank. 2008. Expected Impact on the Changing Climate on Russia and Central
Asia Countries, by A. Kokorin. Report no. 2.

Zitek, K. and C. Benes. 2005. “Longitudinal epidemiology of leptospirosis in the Czech
Republic (1963-2003).” Epidemiol. Mikrobiol. Imunol. 54 (1): 21-26.

Zunnunov, Z. R. 1998. [The reserve potentials of patients with ischemic heart disease
who live under the conditions of an arid zone]. Ter. Arkh. 70 (8): 14-17.

Zunnunov, Z.R. 2000. [Meteopathogenic mechanisms of exacerbating ischemic heart
disease in an arid zone]. Vopr. Kurortol. Fizioter. Lech. Fiz. Kult. 5: 17-21.




                                                                                        97
