DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ......................................................................................................... 4
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................................................... 5
PREFACE ..................................................................................................................................................... 6

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................................................. 7
     Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 14
     Financial Sector ............................................................................................................................. 14
     Financial Education ........................................................................................................................ 17

FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION AND FINANCIAL LITERACY ................................... 19
     A. Institutional Arrangements ......................................................................................................... 19
     B. Legal and Regulatory Framework ............................................................................................. 25
     C. Transparency and Consumer Disclosure .................................................................................. 31
     D. Business Practices .................................................................................................................... 33
     E. Dispute Resolution Mechanisms ............................................................................................... 37
     F. Consumer Awareness and Financial Literacy ........................................................................... 41

APPENDIX. LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................................... 43




Table 1. Summary of Main Recommendations ........................................................................................... 12
Table 2. Regulatory, Supervisory, and Market Conduct Authorities ........................................................... 20
ADPI    Asosiasi Dana Pensiun Indonesia (Indonesian DPPK Pension Funds Association)
ADR     Alternative Dispute Resolution
AKKI    Asosiasi Kartu Kredit Indonesia (Indonesian Credit Card Association)
ASEAN   Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BAMI    Indonesian Mediation Board
BAPMI   Badan Arbitrase Pasar Modal Indonesia (Indonesian Capital Markets Arbitration Board)
BI      Bank Sentral Republik Indonesia (Bank Indonesia)
BIK     Biro Informasi Kredit (Credit Information Registry at BI)
BKK     Badan Kredit Kecamatan (Sub-district level MFIs in Central Java)
BMT     Baittul Maal wa Tamwil (Savings and Loan Sharia Institution )
BPD     Bank Pembangunan Daerah (Regional Development Bank)
BPSK    Badan Penyelesaian Sengketa Konsumen (Consumer Dispute Settlement Board)
BRI     PT. Bank Rakyat Indonesia (Bank Rakyat Indonesia)
CPFL    Consumer Protection Financial Literacy
DB      Defined benefit
DC      Defined contribution
DPLK    Dana Pensiun Lembaja Keuangan (Financial Institution Pension Funds)
DPPK    Dana Pensiun Pemberi Kerja (Employer Sponsored Pension Funds)
FCP     Financial Consumer Protection
FISF    Financial Inclusion Support Framework
GA      Government Agency
GDP     Gross Domestic Product
IDI     Individual Debtor Information
IDR     Indonesian Rupiah
IDX     Indonesia Stock Exchange
KSEI    Kustodian Sentral Efek Indonesia (Indonesian Central Securities Depository)
LPD     Lembaga Perkreditan Desa (Village Credit Institutions in Bali)
LT      Long Term
MC      Ministry of Cooperatives and SMEs
MFI     Microfinance Institution
MoT     Ministry of Trade
MT      Medium Term
MCIT    Ministry of Communication and Information Technology
NBCI    Non-Bank Credit Institution
NCPC    National Consumer Protection Council
NGO     Non-Governmental Organization
OECD    Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OJK     Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (Financial Services Authority of Indonesia)
ST      Short Term
TNP2K   Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan Kemiskinan (National Team for the Acceleration
        of Poverty Reduction, the Office of the Vice President)
WB      World Bank
This report contains the findings and recommendations from a World Bank mission to Indonesia between
October 21 and November 6, 2013, which took place for the purposes of a Diagnostic Review on Financial
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy. The banking, non-bank credit institutions, securities,
insurance, pension, and credit reporting sectors were considered during the mission as well as financial
literacy strategies and programs. The review was undertaken in response to a request from Otoritas Jasa
Keuangan (OJK) and Bank Indonesia (BI) for the purposes of Indonesia’s Financial Inclusion Strategy and
was a critical component in the design of the support program for Indonesia under the Financial Inclusion
Support Framework (FISF) program of the World Bank (WB). The report also reflects discussions and
research which took place following the mission.

The mission team was led by Ros Grady (Task Team Leader, Senior Financial Sector Specialist and
Insurance Expert, GFMDR). The mission team included Eric Haythorne (Consultant, Banking Expert), Juan
Carlos Izaguirre (Consultant, Non-Bank Credit Institutions Expert), Richard Symonds (Consultant,
Securities Expert), Fiona Stewart (Senior Financial Sector Specialist and Pension Expert, GFMDR), Fredes
Montes (Financial Infrastructure Specialist and Credit Reporting Expert, GFMDR), Dan Iannicola
(Consultant, Financial Literacy Expert), and Sarah Fathallah (Financial Sector Analyst, GFMDR). Guidance
and support was provided by the Jakarta World Bank office including Carlos Pinerua (Country Manager,
ECCHR), I Gede Putra Arsana (Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani (Senior
Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), Djauhari Sitorous (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR),
Kiyotaka Tanaka (Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), Frans Wiyono (Consultant, GFMDR), Neni Lestari
(Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), Chitra Buscoti (Consultant, GFMDR) and Pamitra Wineka
(Consultant, GFMDR).

The mission held meetings with representatives of relevant stakeholders, including from OJK and BI, the
Ministry of Cooperatives and SMEs, financial institutions, industry associations, a consumer association
and industry associations. The mission team is grateful for the support and collaboration of all with whom
they met and who have contributed to this report. The team particularly wishes to express its
appreciation to the authorities for their assistance during the Review.

Peer review comments on this report were received from Samuel Munzele Maimbo (Lead Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR), Nataliya Mylenko (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR) and Rekha Reddy
(Senior Economist, GFMDR) and overall guidance was provided by Douglas Pearce (Acting Practice
Manager, GFMDR). The mission team is grateful for their valuable contributions.


---

Currency and Equivalent Units
(As of December 2014)
Currency Unit = Indonesian Rupiah (IDR)
US$ 1 = IDR 12,820.00

Government Fiscal Year
January 1 – December 31
The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental to increasing
access to and usage of financial services, and the quality of those financial services, along with
supporting further financial sector deepening. Financial consumer protection is a necessary precursor
to building trust in the formal financial sector and thus in encouraging financial inclusion. Further,
consumer protection helps ensure that expanded access benefits consumers and the economy as a
whole. This is because, while increased access can result in significant economic and societal benefits, it
can be neutral or even harmful if consumers are not able to (i) exercise their rights as consumers, (ii)
select the financial products that suit them best; and (iii) be protected from mis-selling, fraud and other
market abuses.

The World Bank has developed the Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection as an
assessment tool for diagnostic reviews of a country’s consumer protection and financial literacy
framework for the financial sector (Good Practices). The Good Practices were developed using
international benchmarks, such as the principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO and IAIS and
OECD recommendations for financial literacy and awareness on pensions, insurance and credit products.
The Good Practices incorporate provisions of laws, directives, regulations and codes of business
                                                                   1
practices from the EU and both developed and developing countries.

The main objective of a review based on the Good Practices (CPFL Review) is to assess the legal,
regulatory and institutional frameworks for financial consumer protection in a country, with
reference to international practices. The review addresses the following areas: (i) Institutional
Arrangements, (ii) the Legal and Regulatory framework, (iii) Transparency and Disclosure, (iv) Business
Practices, (v) Complaints Handling and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and (vi)Financial Literacy. All
parts of a financial sector can be considered including: (i) Banking, (ii) Securities, (iii) Insurance, (iv) Non-
Bank Credit Institutions, (v) Private Pensions and (vi) Credit Reporting. CPFL Reviews against Good
Practices have been conducted by the World Bank in more than 30 countries worldwide, including many
                                    2
middle and low-income countries. A CPFL Review results in a detailed assessment of each relevant
financial segment consistent with the Good Practices and a report summarizing the key findings for the
assessment and prioritized recommendations.




1
  Examples include the United States, Australia, Canada, France, Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and
South Africa.
2
  As well as Indonesia, relevant countries include: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kyrgyz Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Romania, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, South Africa,
Slovakia, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Ukraine, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
The findings and recommendations presented in this report cover six sectors of the financial
system in Indonesia, namely (1) Banking, (2) Securities, (3) Insurance, (4) Non-Bank Credit Institutions,
(5) Private Pensions, and (6) Credit Reporting. The assessment of each one of these sectors covers six
areas: (a) Institutional Arrangements, (b) the Legal and Regulatory framework, (c) Transparency and
Disclosure, (d) Business Practices, (e) Complaints Handling and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and (f)
Consumer Awareness and Financial Literacy. The report reflects the legal and regulatory framework and
relevant aspects of the financial sector at the time of the CPFL Review, with significant changes noted in
footnotes.




The finance sector is highly complex with a wide diversity and large numbers of institutions. The
banking industry is the largest part of the financial system accounting (it accounts for around 75% of the
assets) and at the time of the mission consisted of 120 commercial banks and 1,837 rural banks. The
non-bank credit sector is composed of multiple categories of institutions: 202 multi-finance companies,
one state-owned pawnshop with 4,631 branches and 108,066 savings and loan cooperatives and several
savings and loans units within multi-purpose cooperatives. There are also several types of community-
based institutions or village credit providers in different provinces. The total number of formal and semi-
                                                                                 3
formal providers in the non-bank sector is estimated at more than 220,000. The insurance industry is
small and highly concentrated but with a significant diversity of insurers and a growing Sharia insurance
market. As of the end of 2012, there were 140 insurance and reinsurance companies, and 258
insurance-related entities (agents, brokers, loss adjusters, actuarial consultants). The private pensions
market is very small, representing only around 1% of the population and assets under management
constitute only 2% of GDP. Market capitalization in the securities market has grown since the 2008 crisis
yet the number of equity issuers and retail investors has remained relatively stable. Credit reporting
services are primarily provided by the credit registry operated by Bank Indonesia (BI), although the
industry is likely to be opened up in the future to the private sector.

The Indonesian authorities have demonstrated a strong focus on financial education and
consumer protection. This has been shown by (amongst other things) the emphasis on consumer
                                                                                       4
protection in the 5 Pillars of Indonesia’s National Strategy for Financial Inclusion, Bank Indonesia’s
commitment to develop and implement nationwide financial literacy programs through the Maya
Declaration, the fact that OJK has a specific consumer protection function, the publication of the Financial
Services Sector Consumer Protection Regulation No. 1 of 2013 (FCP Regulation), and the recent launch
of the National Financial Literacy Blueprint.

OJK has primary responsibility for consumer protection in the financial sector. Created in 2011,
Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (the Financial Services Authority) (OJK) is now the principal prudential and
consumer protection regulator and supervisor responsible for the financial sector. Specifically, OJK is



3
  This includes BKDs, LDKPs, BDs, LDs, cooperatives, sharia MFIs, multi-finance companies and self-help
associations but does not include the many informal providers such as ROSCAs and purely Indonesian savings clubs
called "arisans”.
4
  The five pillars of the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion are: Financial education; Financial eligibility;
Supportive regulation; Facilitating intermediation; and Distribution channels.
responsible for the banking sector, the insurance sector, capital markets, pension funds, and other
                                                                        5
financial institutions (such as pawn shops and multi-finance companies). Importantly, OJK’s objectives
expressly include consumer protection and its enabling law provides that the OJK Board of
                                                                                      6
Commissioners must include a member in charge of education and consumer protection.

There are however other regulators who share consumer protection responsibilities who operate
without the benefit of a formal coordination arrangement. They include Bank Indonesia (BI) in
relation to the payments system, the Ministry of Trade (MoT) who supervises the Consumer Law (which
appears to apply to financial services as well as all other services and products), the National Consumer
Protection Council (NCPC) which has broad policy responsibilities for consumer issues, the Ministry of
Cooperatives and SMEs (MC) who regulate cooperatives, with provincial authorities having other
responsibilities. At the time of the mission there are no formal coordination mechanisms between these
different regulators and supervisors. While institutional arrangements are expected to change once the
                                                                                7
Cooperatives Law and the Microfinance Institutions Law are fully implemented, there still remains a need
for coordination (see Table 2).

Across the financial sector, the non-bank credit sector presents the most complex landscape in
terms of institutional arrangements, with remaining uncertainty for the supervision of
microfinance institutions that operate as cooperatives. Institutional arrangements are expected to
change once the Cooperatives Law and the Microfinance Institutions Law are fully implemented, but there
is still some uncertainty about the responsibilities for supervision of microfinance institutions that operate
as cooperatives. In the context of the Cooperatives Law enacted in 2012, the MC is setting up the
Monitoring Institution for Savings and Loan Cooperatives (the deadline for implementation of this law is
October 2014). At the same time, the Microfinance Institutions Law enacted in 2013 requires all
institutions specialized in providing financial services targeted to the poor and low-income communities to
be licensed as microfinance institutions by OJK by 1 January 2015 (with exception of village credit
institutions recognized by customary law). It is not entirely clear at this moment how both laws will be
implemented in the case of cooperative microfinance institutions. In any case, the provincial authorities
are still expected to play a key role in the supervision and regulation of non-bank credit institutions. They
will supervise microfinance institutions (under a delegation from OJK), as well as supervising and
regulating village credit providers.

There is not an oversight arrangement for the credit reporting system as a whole. Although BI has
responsibility for licensing private credit bureaus, and OJK has responsibility for regulating and
developing the interbank information system, there is not a specific regulator with overall responsibility for
                 8
credit reporting. This is a concern is given the multiplicity of regulators overseeing financial institutions
which provide credit to consumers (BI, OJK and MC) and the need for consistency in protecting
consumers whose data is held in the credit reporting system. OJK’s role in this regard is unclear




5
  Article 1(10) of the OJK Law
6
  Articles 4(1) and 10 (4)(g) of Law No. 21 of 2011 establishing Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (Financial Services Authority
of Indonesia) (OJK Law)
7
  OJK will supervise microfinance institutions (per the Microfinance Institutions Law of 2013) starting from 2015, whilst
MC will regulate savings and loan cooperatives (per the Cooperatives Law of 2012). Both institutions will delegate
supervision of these institutions to the provincial government authorities, who will continue to regulate the small
village credit providers.
8
  Article 69(1)(a) of the OJK Law and Article 32 of Law No. 23 of 1999 concerning Bank Indonesia (BI Law).
notwithstanding that OJK Law specifically provides that OJK has power “to regulate and supervise bank
                                                                                    9
soundness that includes: … (iii) Debtor information system; (iv) credit testing;…”.

Although OJK has a strong policy focus on consumer protection, it does not separate its
prudential and consumer protection (market conduct) supervisory arrangements. The policy focus
is demonstrated, for example, by the making of the Financial Consumer Protection Regulation (FCP
Regulation) as the first OJK regulation and the 2013 launch of the National Financial Literacy Blueprint,
as well as the request for the review the subject of this report. However, individual staff members perform
both prudential and consumer protection supervisory functions and do not appear to have a particular
focus on consumer protection issues. Such arrangements can in principle give rise to conflicts between
supervising financial institutions and protecting the interests of their customers. Further, staff do not use,
in any systematic way, many of the specific tools relevant to this area (such as mystery shopping,
customer focus groups and surveys, review of advertising materials or a systematic analysis of customer
complaints made to the various mediation services on offer).

There are also concerns as to whether regulators have adequate resources for supervision of
consumer protection laws. OJK’s Consumer Protection and Education Commission has less than 10
staff and the staff currently looking after prudential supervision are unlikely to have sufficient time (or the
expertise) to take on supervision of consumer protection matters in a comprehensive way. This issue will
be exacerbated in 2015 when OJK becomes responsible for supervising microfinance institutions. The
lack of resources is particularly acute for MC which supervises savings and loan cooperatives and does
not appear to have the resources or the expertise to deal with consumer protection issues.

The new FCP Regulation covers an impressive range of consumer protection issues but there are
still important consumer protection matters to be addressed. On the one hand, the new FCP
Regulation will apply to all OJK regulated entities once it comes into force in August 2014. However, the
FCP Regulation is a broad, principles based regulation and there is much detail still to be included in
guidelines to be issued by OJK. For example, there is an urgent need for further detail on the consumer
protection rules relating to product – specific disclosures, product suitability assessments (including
responsible lending standards), advertising, staff training, bundling of insurance and loan products,
standard contracts and financial literacy programs. An additional concern is that the FCP Regulation will
not apply to financial services that are not regulated by OJK (such as financial cooperatives, small village
credit providers and third-party dealers in the multi-finance sector) and in relation to which there are very
limited existing consumer protection provisions.

It is also not clear how the new FCP Regulation will interact with existing laws and regulations.
Examples of existing general and sector specific laws and regulations are the Consumer Law of 1999
(Consumer Law), the Bank Transparency Regulation of 2006 and the Insurance Good Corporate
Governance Regulation of 2012. The FCP Regulation provides that existing consumer protection laws
and regulations remain valid as long as they are “not contrary” to the FCP Regulation. The difficulty is that
it is not clear what this term means in practice. Existing laws and regulations contain some provisions
which are not included in the FCP Regulation (such as the Consumer Law), some which are inconsistent
with the FCP Regulation and others which, while not being entirely inconsistent, are worded differently. In
any event, the provisions of a regulation such as the FCP Regulation cannot override the provisions of a
law approved by Parliament (such as the Consumer Law), and there is doubt as to whether the general




9
    Article 7(b)
consumer protection provisions of the FCP Regulation could override sector specific regulations (such as
                                          10
the Bank Transparency Regulations).           This overlap and ambiguity in the consumer protection
framework is likely to be of concern to relevant financial institutions seeking to comply with the differing
regimes, as well as creating legal uncertainty. The additional complexity is that the existing regulatory
regime is very fragmented and appears to have been issued to address particular issues (this is
especially the case with the banking, insurance and securities sectors).

There are other sector specific issues which also need to be addressed. For example: provisions
need to be introduced for specialized disclosure requirements for credit, debit and insurance products, to
require total cost of credit disclousures and to facilitate switching of bank account providers; the capacity
of the new Investor Protection Fund for the capital markets sector needs to be developed as does that of
statutory mangers and the bankrupty trustee; a specific consumer protection framework for the pensions
sector should be introduced as the market develops and standardized reporting of performance and fees
and a centralized comparison site is needed and there is a particular need for consolidation of consumer
protection laws and regulations relating to the securties and insurance sectors. Further, the consumer
protection regime relating to credit reporting needs to be enhanced and consolidated so that consumers
have similar rights regardless of whether their information is held by BI, OJK, an LPIP or an informal
credit information sharing arrangement such as that maintained by multi-finance companies through
AAPI.

The consumer protection regulatory regime for innovative products and distribution channels is
also incomplete. At the time of the mission, there were no provisions for consumer protection issues
specifically associated with electronic funds transfer channels and products offered by banks and other
institutions in the financial system. Specific issues in this context include safeguarding client funds, data
privacy, electronic contracts and disclosures and liability for unauthorised and mistaken payments,
system malfunctions, and lost or stolen devices. Further, OJK does not appear to have the power to ban
products which are not considered suitable for offering to retail clients (such as complex derivative
          11
products ).
There are only limited Codes of Conduct in place for the financial sector. There is a Code for the
Life Insurance Industry and a Code of Ethics for General and Life Insurance Agents, but there are no
Codes of Conduct for the banking sector (which has 6 industry associations). Non-bank credit institutions
have an industry association for multi-finance companies and one for Sharia-based savings and loan
cooperatives. However there are no industry-based codes of conduct in place for the multi-finance,
savings and credit cooperatives, village credit or BMT segments. In the capital markets sector, there are
several industry associations, but they do not have a Code of Conduct. Industry Codes of Practice, if well
drafted and widely disseminated to consumers and enforced, can be helpful in building trust in the
financial system and hence assist in financial inclusion.

There are requirements of general application relating to internal complaint resolution processes
and procedures and specific requirements relating to the banking and credit reporting industries.
However there are still gaps and a lack of consistency. Banks must have a policy and written
procedures dealing with complaints under BI Regulation No. 7 of 2005 . There are also complaint
resolution provisions applicable to BIK and private credit bureaus but there are concerns about the extent




10
   See FCP Regulation, Article 55
11
   See IOSCO Report on Suitability Requirements with respect to the Distribution of Complex Financial Products:
http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD373.pdf
of consumer rights (for example, in relation to correction of credit reports) and the consumer protection
rules are undesirably different for BIK and a private credit bureau. There are also general provisions in
the Consumer Law relating to entrepreneurs obligations to deal with customer complaints. Further, once
the new FCP Regulation comes into effect, all financial services providers (including banks) will be
required to have and implement detailed mechanisms for consumer complaint resolution and consumers
                                                                                               12
will have the right to compensation for the faults or failures of financial services providers. An important
gap is that complaints handling rules are nonexistent for financial cooperatives or small village credit
providers. In summary, there is not a common set of rules relating to how financial institutions are
required to deal with consumer complaints.

The current system for the resolution of external disputes in the financial system is fragmented
and overlapping, with various gaps. At present there are two statutory dispute settlement systems: the
Consumer Dispute Resolution Board (BPSK) (which is supervised by MoT) and the BI mediation service
for consumers. Further, as from 7 August 2014, OJK will provide a facilitation service under Articles 40 to
46 of the FCP Regulation, but this service is not clearly transparent, accessible, or binding on the
financial institutions. OJK also has advocacy powers under the FCP Regulation. There are also dispute
resolution industry schemes within the insurance, pensions and capital markets industries, although only
the insurance scheme appears to be operational. It is understood that the multi-finance industry is also
currently evaluating the establishment of an ADR system for its members but for the present customers
appear to complain to OJK or other regulators of government agencies. In the cooperative and village
credit segments, the most common way to solve disputes seems to be through informal consensus –
based discussions. This patchwork of industry schemes and associations is a concern given the current
proposal to have industry associations providing ADR services for consumers of financial services.

The publication of OJK’s Financial Literacy Blueprint is an important step toward building
Indonesia's financial literacy infrastructure, especially when coupled with the new obligation on
financial services providers to carry out financial literacy programs pursuant to Article 14 of the
FCP Regulation. However much still remains to be done. In particular, there is a need for
development of targeted financial literacy programs, development of the OJK financial literacy website,
guidance for industry in relation to their obligations under Article 14 and coordination between relevant
stakeholders. An example of the current lack of coordination is that both BI and OJK are working on
financial literacy data collection as well as program development and implementation. For example, BI
has a school-based curriculum and OJK is planning to develop one soon; this presents a timely
opportunity for cooperation for greater impact. Similarly BI and OJK have each performed their own
financial literacy survey in the last couple of years. Ideally, data collection methods, analysis and results
should be compared to determine if there is an opportunity to eliminate redundancy and increase
efficiency.


Key
Table 1 below lists the main recommendations and priority actions. A comprehensive list of
recommendations (including cross cutting recommendations and recommendations by sector) is
presented in the Annexure, which should be read in conjunction with Table 1. The complete
assessment is presented in two documents: the first document (Volume I) presents a summary of the key




12
     Articles 29 and 32 to 38
findings and recommendations, and the second document (Volume II) is presented in the form of a
background technical note that assesses each sector against the Good Practices for Financial Consumer
Protection developed by the World Bank.




Recommendation                                                              Responsibility*           Term**


Consider separating the prudential and market conduct supervisory
                                                                            OJK                       ST
functions within OJK
Develop CPFL specific resources, tools and capacity within OJK for
implementing financial consumer protection/market conduct                   OJK                       ST
regulations and related supervisory activities
Establish coordination and consultation arrangements between key
                                                                            OJK / BI / MC / MoT /
consumer protection regulators (e.g. though a Memorandum of                                           ST
                                                                            NCPC
Understanding)
Design and implement a financial literacy technical working group as        OJK / BI / Ministry of
                                                                                                      ST
a coordination mechanism involving all relevant stakeholders                Finance + GAs
Develop guidelines for provincial authorities with delegated
                                                                            OJK                       MT
supervision of savings and loan cooperatives and MFIs
Develop the capacity of the Investor Protection Fund                        OJK                       MT
                                                                            OJK / BI / MC /
Enhance the oversight framework for credit reporting                                                  MT
                                                                            NCPC / MCIT


Eliminate / minimize overlap between the FCP Regulation, the
Consumer Law and other existing consumer protection laws and
regulations and consolidate the consumer protection regime (pending         OJK / BI / MC / MoT /
                                                                                                      LT
development of a comprehensive Financial Consumer Protection                NCPC
Law, in interim provide guidance in Circulars under the FCP
Regulation)
Develop guidelines for financial institutions who are required to have
                                                                13          OJK                       ST
financial literacy programs under Article 14 of FCP Regulation
Provide the regulatory flexibility to deal with consumer protection
                                                                            OJK / BI                  MT
issues relevant to innovative products and distribution channels
Enhance the legal and regulatory framework applicable to consumer           OJK / BI / MC /
                                                                                                      MT
protection issues relevant to credit reporting                              NCPC / MCIT
Develop consumer protection laws (or regulations) for private pension
                                                                            OJK                       LT
products




13
  After theCPFL Review , OJK Circular Letter No. 1/SEOJK.7/2014 concerning the Education Implementation Plan to
Enhance Financial Literacy towards the Consumer and/or Society was issued, but was not the object of the mission
team’s analysis.
Recommendation                                                                 Responsibility*            Term**


Develop specific disclosure requirements for different types of
                                                   14                          OJK / MC                   ST
financial products, including Key Facts Statements
Develop total cost of credit interest rate requirements                        OJK / MC                   ST
Introduce standardized reporting for private pension funds and
                                                                               OJK                        MT
centralized comparison web site


Strengthen obligations for product suitability / affordability
assessments (e.g. by issuing a Circular under Article 16 of the FCP            OJK / MC                   ST
Regulation)
Prohibit unreasonable insurance forcing practices relating to bundling
and tying of credit and insurance products and introduce
                                                                               OJK / MC                   MT
requirements for disclosure of insurance details and rebates for tied
insurance policies where the loan is paid out early
Introduce standardized training requirements for staff and
                                                                               OJK / MC                   LT
intermediaries of financial services providers
Develop training on the sale of pension products by agents                     OJK                        LT
Support the development of industry Codes of Practice through
                                                                               OJK / MC                   LT
providing guidance on minimum content and principles


Review the ability of industry associations to provide ADR services            OJK                        ST
Develop complaint handling rules for cooperatives which are
                                                                               MC                         MT
consistent with those applicable to OJK regulated entities
Develop options for a single, independent ADR scheme covering
                                                                               OJK / MC                   LT
entire financial sector


Develop a national website and public awareness campaign, launch               OJK / TNP2K / BI +
                                                                                                          ST
targeted financial literacy programs, conduct outreach                         GAs
Conduct a public awareness campaign around the benefits and risks
                                                                               OJK / BI / MC / MCIT       ST
of the Credit Reporting System
Consider a National Pension Awareness Campaign for social security
                                                                               Government / OJK           MT
reforms and role of voluntary pensions in the future

* GAs: (other) relevant Government Agencies.
**ST: Short-term; MT: Medium Term; LT: Long Term




14
   After the CPFL Review , OJK Circular Letter No.12/SEOJK.07/2014 concerning the Delivery of Responsible
Information on Financial and Marketing Products and/or Services was issued, but was not the object of the mission
team’s analysis.
The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental to increasing
both access and usage of financial services, the quality of those financial services, and
supporting further financial system deepening. Financial consumer protection is a necessary
precursor to building trust in the formal financial system and hence in encouraging financial inclusion.
Further, consumer protection will help ensure that expanded access benefits consumers and the
economy as a whole. This is because, while increased access can result in significant economic and
societal benefits and enhance financial stability, it can be neutral or even harmful if consumers are not
able to: (i) exercise their rights as consumers; (ii) select the financial products that suit them best and (iii)
be protected from mis-selling, fraud, and other market abuses. In addition, it is a necessary compliment to
such a consumer protection framework that consumers have the levels of financial literacy necessary to
access the benefits of the framework.

The Indonesian authorities have demonstrated a strong focus on consumer protection and
financial literacy. This has been shown by (amongst other things) the emphasis on consumer protection
in the 5 Pillars of Indonesia’s National Strategy for Financial Inclusion, Bank Indonesia’s commitment to
develop and implement nationwide financial literacy programs through the Maya Declaration, the fact that
OJK has a specific consumer protection function, the publication of the Financial Services Sector
Consumer Protection Regulation No. 1 of 2013 (FCP Regulation), and the recent launch of the National
Financial Literacy Blueprint.




The financial sector has room for growth in the coming years. Indonesia’s GDP for 2012 is estimated
                    15
at US$878.2 billion and the financial sector is estimated to account for a little over 58% of GDP at
                                                  16
approximately IDR 5,691 trillion (US$512 billion). The growth potential of the financial sector is notable
considering that, for example, domestic credit provided by the private sector represents 43% of GDP in
2012, whereas in neighboring countries like Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam, that indicator is
                                            17
135%, 100%, 169% and 115%, respectively.

Over the past few years, the financial supervisory and regulatory landscape has been going
through a number of reforms aimed at shifting all responsibilities under one entity. Prior to 2011,
Bank Indonesia (BI) and the Ministry of Finance (MoF) shared responsibility for financial sector. BI
regulated and supervised deposit-taking institutions (i.e. commercial banks and rural banks), while the
MoF, through Bapepam-LK, regulated and supervised capital markets, as well as supervised multi-




15
   http://data.worldbank.org/country/indonesia#cp_wdi
16
   Figure based on total assets for commercial banks of IDR 4,314 trillion and a share of 75.8% in assets of the
financial sector as per Bank Indonesia. Data as of March 2013.
17
   http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FS.AST.DOMS.GD.ZS
finance companies, leasing companies, insurance, and pension funds. In late 2011, Indonesia
established OJK, intended to become the sole regulatory body for all financial services institutions,
including banks. As such, all the regulatory and supervisory functions of Bapepam-LK and the MoF were
transferred to OJK by 1 January 2013, and OJK took over all banking regulatory and supervisory
functions from BI by 1 January 2014.

As a result of these reforms, OJK is the principal prudential and consumer regulator and
supervisor responsible for the financial system. OJK is responsible for the banking sector, the
insurance sector, capital markets, pension funds, finance institutions and “ other finance institutions” as
defined (such as pawnshops, deposit insurance institutions, the Indonesia credit export agency,
secondary mortgage companies, and institutions that provide management of mandatory public funds).
OJK’s statutory objectives expressly include consumer protection in the financial system.

However other authorities retain responsibilities relevant to consumer protection in the financial
sector. BI retains responsibility for the payments sector as well as monetary policy and has recently
established a division devoted to consumer protection matters that arise from the operation of the
payments system. Following the mission, BI also made BI Regulation No. 16 of 2014 Protection for the
Consumer of Payments Services. Other regulators with relevant functions and powers include the MoT,
the NCPC, MC and the provincial authorities.




The banking industry at the time of the mission consisted of 120 commercial banks and 1,837
rural banks, accounts for around 75% of the assets of the financial system, with the top 5 banks
accounting for approximately 50% of the market. Both commercial banks and rural banks provide
services based either on conventional and/or Sharia principles but a rural bank cannot provide payment
transaction services, accept deposits in the form of demand deposits or conduct business in foreign
exchange. Taken together, the assets of all of these banks, estimated as of October 2013 at 4,716.8
trillion IDR, account for more than 75% of the assets of Indonesia’s entire financial system . There is
significant concentration in the banking industry with the top 5 banks accounting for just under 50% of the
sector’s assets.




The non-bank credit sector is composed of multiple categories of institutions regulated and
supervised by OJK, the Ministry of Cooperatives and SMEs and provincial authorities. At the time
of the mission there were 202 multi-finance companies (with total assets of IDR 342 trillion as of
December 2012); one state-owned pawnshop with 4,631 branches (with total assets of IDR 29 trillion as
of December 2012); and 108,066 savings and loan cooperatives and several savings and loans units
within multi-purpose cooperatives, which are currently regulated and supervised by MC (if they operate
nationally) and by the provincial and district authorities if they operate locally. There are also several
types of community-based institutions or village credit providers in different provinces, with the most
important category being the village credit institutions in Bali (LPD), of which there were 1,351 as of
December 2012. LPDs are regulated by provincial governments and subject to delegated supervision of
Bank BPD Bali, the Bali regional development bank. Further, there are savings and loan sharia
institutions (BMTs), which offer different types of Sharia – compliant financing agreements, savings and
term deposits, and even shares. Finally, there are also self-help groups and non-government
organizations providing local financial facilities, in many cases as distribution channels for government
programs.



Market capitalization in the securities market has grown since the 2008 crisis yet the number of
equity issuers and retail investors has remained relatively stable. These figures may improve in the
future as overall there is a dynamic movement in the industry to provide the infrastructure for a sound and
robust capital market. Market capitalization has risen from approximately IDR 1.1 trillion in 2008 to
approximately IDR 4.1 trillion in 2012. However, the number of equity issuers has only risen from 396 in
2008 to 459 in 2012. The number of securities accounts has increased from 302,447 in 2008 to 359,333
in 2012. Nevertheless, this does not necessarily reflect the number of retail investors since it includes
duplicate, dormant and institutional accounts. The number of investment fund accounts (which are usually
held by retail investors) has risen from 352,429 in 2008 to 515,714 in 2012. To encourage market
participation, the Indonesian Stock Exchange (IDX) has established representatives in 17 of the 34
provinces of Indonesia to provide information to businesses and investors and has established an
Investor Protection Fund to cover the bankruptcy of a broker-dealer. To provide further investor
protection, the Indonesian Central Securities Depository (KSEI) has established a state of the art method
of segregating customer securities accounts through sub-accounts and providing the customers with the
ability to access their accounts to verify the status of their investments.




The insurance industry is small and highly concentrated but with a significant diversity of
insurers and a growing Sharia insurance market. The sector’s total gross premium income increased
by 16.3% from IDR 153.1 trillion in 2011 and to IDR 178.1 trillion in 2012. Within the last four years, the
average annual growth for gross premiums was around 18.5%. Life insurance companies contributed to
61% of the sector’s gross premium income, while the non-life and reinsurance segments represented
25%. As of the end of 2012, there were 398 companies operating in the insurance sector, including 140
insurance and reinsurance companies, and 258 insurance-related companies (agents, brokers, loss
adjusters, actuarial consultants). Despite its diversity, the life insurance market is highly concentrated with
the top 10 insurers at year end 2012 representing 78.8% of total assets and 73.1% of premiums. The
general insurance industry is also somewhat concentrated but less so with the top 10 general insurers
representing 56.2% of total assets in 2012 and 48.4% of premiums. Sharia (Takaful) insurance is a
relatively new but growing market. As of December 2012, there was 45 sharia insurance and reinsurance
businesses, with a gross premium income of IDR 6.45 trillion in 2012. While this only represents 3.62% of
the sector’s total gross premium income, it has seen an increase of 26. 9% compared to 2011.




There are two main forms of voluntary private pension schemes. Employer pension funds (DPPK)
are run by sponsoring companies, on either a defined benefit (DB) or increasingly on a defined
contribution (DC) basis. As of 2012, there were approximately 244 DPPK funds operating in the country,
covering around 1.4 million workers. In addition, 25 financial institutions offer DC pension plans (DPLK)
either on a group basis to companies which do not wish to run their own in-house occupation fund
(approximately 1 million members), or in some cases directly to individuals (700,000 members). Together
these schemes represent only around 1% of the population and assets under management constitute
only 2% of GDP. However they may become more important in the future as the reformed social security
system will only be able to provide limited, subsistence benefits (at least if it is to be fiscally sustainable)
and the current generous severance pay system is likely to be reformed.




Credit reporting services are primarily provided by the credit registry operated by BI, although the
industry is likely to be opened up in the future to the private sector. The Biro Informasi Kredit (BIK),
which commenced operations in its current form in 2006, provides positive and negative information on
both individual and business provided by banks and other creditors. Membership in the BIK is mandatory
for commercial banks, large rural banks (assets above IDR 10 billion), and voluntary for smaller rural
banks, non-bank financial institutions, and cooperatives. The mission team was advised that there are
120 banks, 20 financial institutions and 1304 rural banks participating in the system reporting loans from
70 million individuals and 424,000 firms. As at the time of the mission there were no cooperatives
participating in the system and only about 5 multi-finance companies (who participate voluntarily). The
only product that the BIK offers is basic reports with a 24 month history known as Individual Debtor
Information (IDI) History. In addition to this system, there is a private, unlicensed credit bureau operated
by CRIF in partnership with the Association of Credit Cards (AKKI). The market will be opened to private
credit bureaus once the licensing regulation process is completed by the BI under the new Credit Bureau
Regulation No. 15 of 2013 (Credit Bureau Regulation).

An outstanding issue is the role that OJK will play in the future in relation to credit reporting. The
OJK Law specifically provides that OJK has power “to regulate and supervise bank soundness that
                                                                   18
includes: …(iii) debtor information system; (iv) credit testing;…”. The mission team was nevertheless
advised that BI intends to continue to operate BIK for at least five years, on the basis that it needs
comprehensive and reliable credit information for the purposes of its financial stability and macro
prudential role in supervising the financial sector. However BI recognizes the need for OJK to have
access to this information as well.




On 19 November 2013, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono launched Indonesia’s Financial
Literacy Blueprint which articulates OJK’s financial literacy strategy. Significantly, financial literacy
is the first pillar of Indonesia’s National Financial Inclusion Strategy which was launched by Indonesia’s
Vice President in 2012. While the financial literacy movement is in its early stages, significant pilot
projects have been ongoing for the last few years which will provide valuable insights to those leading
future efforts in the field. On the government front, BI has been leading the effort since 2008 by advancing
a multi-prong financial literacy program which includes a variety of different interventions including
integrating financial education in national curricula (primary, secondary, and high schools), launching
national campaigns (“Let’s go to the Bank” campaign, “3P” campaign, and “Saving Day” campaign), an
implementing targeted financial education interventions for migrant workers, farmers and fishers, SMEs,
rural populations, etc.) Although newer to the topic, OJK has quickly made advancing its regulatory
mandate on financial capability an organizational priority, beginning with a financial capability household
survey conducted in 2013 and other initiatives as well as the development of the National Financial
Literacy Blueprint.




18
     Article 7(b)
Importantly, Article 14 of the FCP Regulation requires financial services providers to carry out
education in order to improve the financial literacy of consumers and/or the community. OJK is in
the course of developing a Circular to provide guidance to industry on compliance with this requirement.

In addition to early government efforts in financial literacy, private sector companies and NGOs
have begun to play a role. Various financial institutions have programs focusing on financial literacy as
do some of their associations. For example, a few banks have developed financial literacy materials and
a teacher training programs while an insurance association reached out to university students through the
"Insurance Goes to Campus" program which introduces insurance as an important planning tool and
possible career. Likewise, a small number of NGOs in the last few years have begun to address financial
capability needs such as Prestasi Junior which operates entrepreneurship programs for youth in a few
schools and the Indonesian Financial Inclusion Society which helps coordinate financial capability
seminars for underserved communities. A more detailed stocktaking of current and recent financial
literacy initiatives is available in Volume II of this report.
OJK has very broad responsibilities for consumer protection in the financial sector. OJK’s
responsibility for the financial services sector is provided for by Articles 5 and 55 of the OJK Law.
Importantly, Article 5 provides that “The Financial Services Authority shall have the functions to
implement the integrated regulatory and supervisory system for the entire activities of the financial
services sector”. Article 55 provides for timing issues (in summary, as of 1 January 2014, OJK obtained
regulatory and supervisory responsibility for the banking sector, having obtained that responsibility for
the capital markets, insurance, pension funds, finance institutions, and “other financial services
institutions” on 1 January 2013. Importantly, Article 4 (c) of the OJK Law expressly provides that OJK was
established “with the objectives that the entire activities of the financial services sector: …c). can protect
the interests of Consumers and the public “.

There is currently no separation of prudential and market conduct supervisory arrangements
for the financial sector within OJK. Although OJK has a separate Commission for Education and
Consumer Protection, consumer protection supervision activities are carried out by officers who are also
responsible for prudential regulation and who report to the Commissioners with direct responsibility for
the different parts of the financial sector covered by OJK. Having consumer protection and prudential
responsibilities within the same unit may make it harder to resolve situations when conflicting objectives
arise. For example, if the consequences of sanctioning a financial institution for noncompliance of
consumer protection provisions would have an impact on the soundness (or perception of soundness) of
a financial institution, or if a requirement for a financial institution to compensate customers would have
an impact on prudential requirements, a supervisor may opt to avoid making a decision or even
considering consumer protection issues in order to minimize prudential impact. Alternatively, when there
is high political or public pressure to identify problems with consumers, the attention of supervisors may
focus too much on consumer protection rather than prudential issues.

There are also concerns as to whether OJK is adequately resourced for the broad CPFL
functions it has to carry out. OJK’s Consumer Protection and Education Commission has less than 10
staff and the staff currently looking after prudential supervision are unlikely to have sufficient time (or the
expertise) to take on supervision of consumer protection matters in a comprehensive way. This issue will
be exacerbated in 2015 when OJK becomes responsible for supervising microfinance institutions. The lack
of resources is particularly acute for MC which supervises savings and loan cooperatives and does not
appear to have the resources or the expertise to deal with consumer protection issues.

Further, OJK staff do not use, in any systematic way, many of the specific tools relevant to
monitoring market conduct. Examples include mystery shopping, customer focus groups and surveys,
review of advertising materials or a systematic analysis of customer complaints made to the various
mediation services on offer.

There appear to be overlaps in the consumer protection functions of OJK, the Ministry of
Trade (MoT), the National Consumer Protection Council (NCPC), with the Ministry of
Cooperatives and SMEs (MC) and provincial authorities also having consumer protection
functions. On the one hand, OJK has clear consumer protection functions in relation to the financial
activities it regulates under the OJK Law. On the other hand, the MoT is responsible for supervising the
implementation of general consumer protection provisions (including the Consumer Law). The NCPC
functions also cover financial products and services, including in relation to advising the government on
consumer protection policies, conducting surveys of relevant laws and consumer needs, encouraging
NGO consumer protection foundations, and working with the media on consumer issues.19 The breadth of
the definitions of “consumer”; “entrepreneur” and “services” in Article 1 of the Consumer Law support the
view that the Law applies to financial services and that the NCPC functions cover the financial system. In
addition, the MC has consumer protection functions in relation to the cooperatives it regulates and
delegates supervision to the provincial government authorities, who themselves regulate the small village
credit providers (with delegated supervision carried out by the regional development banks). As of
currently, there are no formal coordination mechanisms between these different regulators, supervisors,
and market conduct authorities. While institutional arrangements are expected to change once the
Cooperatives Law and the Microfinance Institutions Law are fully implemented,20 there still remains a
need for coordination (see Table 2).



                                                                                                Market conduct
                                            Regulator               Supervisor
                                                                                                authority
                                            Current     Future *    Current       Future *      Current      Future *
 Banks
 Commercial banks                           BI          OJK         BI            OJK           MoT          OJK
 Rural banks (BPRs)                         BI          OJK         BI            OJK           MoT          OJK
 Village credit institutions (BKDs)         BI          OJK         Bank BRI      Bank BRI      MoT          OJK
     Village banks (BDs)                    BI          OJK         Bank BRI      Bank BRI      MoT          OJK
     Rural credit institutions (LDs)        BI          OJK         Bank BRI      Bank BRI      MoT          OJK
 Formal non-bank credit institutions
 Multi-finance companies                    OJK         OJK         OJK           OJK           MoT          OJK
 State-owned pawnshop                       OJK         OJK         OJK           OJK           MoT          OJK
                                                                    MC &          MC &
 Savings and loan cooperatives              MC          MC                                      MoT          MoT
                                                                    local govt.   local govt.
 Savings and loan units of                                          MC &
                                            MC          MC                        None          MoT          None
 multipurpose cooperatives                                          local govt.
 Village credit providers (LDKPs)
                                            Prov.       Prov.       Regional      Regional
     Rural credit boards (of Bali) (LPDs)                                                       MoT          MoT
                                            govt.       govt.       banks         banks




19
   The mission team was not able to meet with NCPC and so it is not entirely clear to what extent there is an overlap
in practice with OJK’s consumer protection functions.
20
   OJK will supervise microfinance institutions (per the Microfinance Institutions Law of 2013) starting from 2015,
whilst MC will regulate savings and loan cooperatives (per the Cooperatives Law of 2012). Both institutions will
delegate supervision of these institutions to the provincial government authorities, who will continue to regulate the
small village credit providers.
                                                                                           Market conduct
                                       Regulator                  Supervisor
                                                                                           authority
                                       Current      Future *      Current      Future *    Current     Future *
  Other village credit providers       Prov.        Prov.         Regional     Regional
                                                                                           MoT         MoT
  based on customary law               govt.        govt.         banks        banks
                                                                               i) OJK &
  Other credit providers (including    Prov.        i) OJK; ii)   Regional     prov.                   OJK or
                                                                                           MoT
  district credit bodies or BKKs)      govt.        MC            banks        govt; ii)               MoT
                                                                               MC
 Other
 Capital markets                       OJK          OJK           OJK          OJK         OJK         OJK
 Insurers                              OJK          OJK           OJK          OJK         OJK         OJK
 Pension funds                         OJK          OJK           OJK          OJK         OJK         OJK

* Future refers to once the OJK Law, the Cooperatives Law, and the Microfinance Law are fully implemented. It also
needs to be noted that MoT continues to have powers under the Consumer Law in relation to financial institutions.

BI’s powers in relation to the payments system have potential to overlap with OJK’s consumer
protection responsibilities. For example BI has issued a wide ranging regulation 16/1/PBI/2014 entitled
“Protection for Consumer of Payment System Services” (BI Payment Regulation). This regulation covers
a broad range of a traditional and innovative payment services, including cover cash based deposits and
withdrawals as well as services involving the use of new technologies (such as mobile banking,
epayments systems, Internet banking and smart card based payment services). Particular principles
covered by the Regulation include fairness and reliability, transparency, data protection, and effective
complaint handling and resolution (Article 3). The mission team did not have the opportunity to assess the
extent to which the BI Consumer Protection Payment Systems Regulation deals with all relevant
consumer protection issues or how it interacts with other relevant laws or regulations (such as OJK’s FCP
Regulation). Nevertheless it is to be noted that many of the subjects covered by the BI Payment
Regulation are also covered by the FCP Regulation and OJK’s consumer protection functions.

BI and OJK are presently both working on financial literacy data collection as well as program
development and implementation. For example, BI has a school-based curriculum and OJK is planning
to develop one soon; this presents a timely opportunity for cooperation for greater impact. Similarly BI and
OJK have each performed their own financial literacy survey in the last couple of years. Ideally, data
collection methods, analysis and results should be compared to determine if there is an opportunity to
eliminate redundancy and increase efficiency.

The results of the World Bank Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
conducted in 2013 show that there are a multiplicity of institutional arrangements relating to
financial consumer protection. For example, the Global Survey showed that 82 countries out of 114
surveyed have multiple agencies involved in financial consumer protection. The 82 countries are made up
of: 53 with multiple agencies involved in financial consumer protection but not a general consumer
protection regulator, 18 with multiple agencies and a general consumer protection regulator and 11 with a
single financial services agency and a general consumer protection regulator.

The Global Survey also showed that there is an increasing trend to separate prudential regulation
and consumer protection supervision. The responses to the Global Survey showed that, in 2013, 97
countries assigned a legal responsibility for financial consumer protection to financial supervisors and, of
those 97, 70 created dedicated teams or units (both numbers increased between 2010 and 2013). To put
it another way, in 2013 72% of agencies with the responsibility for financial consumer protection had a
dedicated team or unit in place to perform this function compared to 62% of countries in 2010.




Consideration should be given to revising the supervisory structures and reporting lines within
OJK to ensure the separation of prudential and market conduct supervisory functions. Whilst
appreciating that the structure of the Board of Commissioners has been established by the OJK Law,
consideration should be given as to how the specialized supervisory arrangements for market conduct
(and consumer protection) supervision might be best managed within OJK. It is worth noting that several
countries have been evaluating their most appropriate institutional arrangements for financial consumer
                                                                   21
protection in recent years and different models are emerging. For example, so far as OJK is concerned,
options would appear to include: (i) providing the Division for Education and Consumer Protection with
the function and resources to undertake consumer protection supervision; and (ii) establishing a separate
consumer protection unit within each sector – specific Division (Banking, Capital Markets, and Non-Bank
Financial Institutions); and (iii) continuing with the current arrangement under which officers carry out both
prudential and consumer protection supervision but providing additional resources and capacity building.
Detailed consideration is required for each of these options and it is understood that OJK is currently
undertaking this exercise.

The team responsible for market conduct supervision in OJK should be resourced with adequate
tools, approaches and capacity. Consumer protection and prudential supervision require different types
of supervisory profiles, skills and approaches, with the latter focusing more on quantitative skills and
analysis of an institution’s financial soundness, and the former on qualitative skills and ass essment of
how an institution deals with consumers. Consideration should be given to train OJK staff charged with
market conduct supervision in order to utilize more systematically the tools relevant to this area, such as
mystery shopping, customer research, review of advertising materials, and analysis of available customer
complaints.

A coordination and consultation arrangement relating to consumer protection issues should be
established between key regulators. This could be achieved through the establishment of formal
coordination arrangements, including a possible Memorandum of Understanding between all relevant
bodies. For OJK and BI such consultation could occur pursuant to the OJK/BI coordination and
cooperation provisions provided for by Chapter X of the OJK Law.

There is also a need to develop an effective consultation and coordination structure for the
implementation of the financial literacy agenda. As Indonesia is presently considering a larger
coordination mechanism for financial inclusion, a specific technical working group focused on financial
literacy could be envisaged. The Financial Literacy Working Group could meet regularly (say monthly or
quarterly), and would include a broader set of stakeholder groups, from relevant ministries and
government agencies, to industry associations, consumer associations, the media, and NGOs. Formation




21
   For more examples, please refer to the World Bank technical note “ Establishing a Financial Consumer Protection
Supervision Department”:
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/TechNote-Belarus-FCP-Dept-
FINAL.pdf
of a broad-based, multi-stakeholder group of the government agencies considering financial literacy
matters could be considered as an appropriate first step.




Across the financial sector, the non-bank credit sector presents the most complex landscape in
terms of institutional arrangements, with remaining uncertainty for the supervision of
microfinance institutions that operate as cooperatives. Institutional arrangements are expected to
change once the Cooperatives Law and the Microfinance Institutions Law are fully implemented, but there
is still some uncertainty about the responsibilities for supervision of microfinance institutions that operate
as cooperatives. In the context of the Cooperatives Law enacted in 2012, the MC is setting up the
Monitoring Institution for Savings and Loan Cooperatives (the deadline for implementation of this law is
October 2014). At the same time, the Microfinance Institutions Law enacted in 2013 requires all
institutions specialized in providing financial services targeted to the poor and low-income communities to
be licensed by OJK as microfinance institutions (with exception of village credit institutions recognized by
customary law such as the LPDs). The deadline for implementation of this law is January 2015, i.e. three
months after the deadline for implementing the Cooperatives Law. It is not entirely clear at this moment
how both laws will be implemented in the case of cooperative microfinance institutions.

In any case, the provincial authorities are still expected to play a key role in the supervision and
regulation of non-bank credit institutions. Once the transitional period of the new Microfinance Law is
over, provincial authorities are expected to still fulfill the role of delegated supervisors for microfinance
institutions (under a delegation from OJK), as well as supervising and regulating village credit providers
(which are excluded from application of the Microfinance Law).




Given the multiplicity of institutional arrangements in the non-bank credit sector, efforts should
be undertaken to develop similar approaches to consumer protection supervision for similar
credit providers. In particular, guidelines should be developed for provincial authorities to undertake
delegated supervision of savings and loan cooperatives (currently) and microfinance institutions (following
on responsibilities from Microfinance Law starting in 2015); and for regional banks to undertake
supervision of village credit providers. Ideally, the approach adopted would, to the extent practical, reflect
that which applies to banks so as to avoid regulatory arbitrage between the different types of institutions.
These recommendations could be considered as part of OJK’s ongoing development of strategies and
training programs for the non-bank credit sector.




Although Indonesia has several mechanisms to handle the insolvency of market participants,
many are at an early stage of development. This is an important issue as investor protection in the
event of the insolvency of a market participant is one of the most important means of developing investor
trust in the market. A new Indonesia Securities Investor Protection Fund has been created by OJK in
                                                                  22
collaboration with IDX and is in the process of being established. Further, under the OJK Law, OJK can




22
     It is understood the Securities Investor Protection Fund commenced operations on 1 January 2014.
appoint a statutory manager for a market participant if it deems it necessary. However, it is not clear how
this provision will interact with the provisions of the bankruptcy law for the unwinding of an insolvent
company. In addition, the procedures and powers of such a statutory manager have not been developed,
although it is understood that OJK plans to do this. Finally, although investor funds are segregated at the
Indonesian Central Securities Depository and at custodian banks, an unscrupulous asset manager or
securities broker dealer can still misappropriate funds and assets by transferring them out of these
accounts.




Early work should be undertaken to develop the capacity of the Investor Protection Fund to
provide adequate customer protection. In particular, the process and basis for compensating investors
in the event of the failure of a market participant needs to be developed.

The capacity of the statutory manager or the bankruptcy trustee for capital market participants
also need to be further developed. In particular, full and effective powers should be developed for the
entity overseeing the insolvency of a company in order to allow it to fully protect investor assets, promptly
return the assets to investors and resolve creditor claims. Insolvency rules should be developed that are
specifically tailored to meet the characteristics and business activity of a market participant and to
eliminate conflicts between a statutory manager and a bankruptcy trustee. Finally, mechanisms should be
developed to prevent the misappropriation of investor funds from segregated accounts, such as
implementing affirmative duties for the custodian to monitor such accounts.




There is only a limited oversight arrangement for credit reporting. This is currently provided by BI,
which is responsible for issuing licenses regarding the operation and establishment of private credit
bureaus, whilst at the same time operating BIK. Further, the OJK Law provides that OJK has power “to
regulate and supervise bank soundness that includes: …(iii) debtor information system; (iv) credit
           23
testing;…”. . OJK is not however currently carrying out any sort of oversight function for credit reporting
and there appears to be a vacuum in this regard. This is a concern given the multiplicity of regulators
overseeing financial institutions which provide credit to consumers (BI, OJK and MC).




The oversight framework for credit reporting should be enhanced . Ideally one authority would be
                                                                           24
identified as the primary overseer of the entire credit reporting system, with the role of other authorities
clearly set out in their enabling laws (or regulations if that is possible, given the likely delays in passing
new legislation). As well as being responsible for supervision of private credit bureaus, the relevant body
should have general responsibility for:




23
  Article 7(b)
24
  So far as the interbank information system is concerned, OJK now has that responsibility (see Article 69(1)(a) of
the OJK Law and Article 32 of the BI Law).
    The institutions, rules, participants and public policy objectives regarding the flow of relevant credit
     information to creditors, financial institution supervisors and other potential users of the system,
     consistently with the relevant national strategy on credit reporting; and
    Coordination between all relevant government agencies and regulators with responsibility for any
     aspect of the credit reporting system. In particular, there should be a collaboration and coordination
     arrangement between BI, OJK, the MC and possibly the NCPC (given its consumer protection policy
     related functions).




The consumer protection legal and regulatory framework for OJK regulated entities has overlaps
as a result of the interaction between the broad – based consumer protection provisions in the
new FCP Regulation and existing laws and regulations. Examples of existing general and sector
specific laws and regulations are the Consumer Law of 1999 (Consumer Law), the Bank Transparency
Regulation of 2006 and the Insurance Good Corporate Governance Regulation of 2012. The FCP
Regulation, which will commence on 7 August 2013, also contains broadly expressed provisions for
consumer protection applicable to OJK regulated entities. The provisions relate to areas such as general
consumer protection principles (for example relating to transparency and fair treatment), the information
to be provided to consumers, financial education obligations of financial institutions, access to financial
products and services, product suitability, marketing, standard contracts, security of deposits, data
protection, conflicts of interest, internal compliant resolution processes and facilitation of disputes by OJK.

Existing laws and regulations contain some provisions which are not included in the FCP
Regulation, some which are inconsistent with the FCP Regulation and others which, while not
being entirely inconsistent, are worded differently. For example, the Consumer Law contains
provisions relating to standard contracts, complaints and harassment and which give consumers the right
to “test or try” financial products (Articles 4, 7 (e), 15 and 18), which are all issues dealt with in the FCP
Regulation (see Annex II to Volume II of this Report for further examples). Although it is understood that
there is a draft Bill which has been prepared which makes it clear that the Consumer Law does not apply
to financial services, for now the position is likely to be confusing to regulated institutions. Further
examples of overlaps with the FCP Regulation are the Bank Transparency Regulation which contain
detailed rules relating to transparency of information to be provided to bank customers and data
protection issues; the Bank Customer Complaints Regulation which contains requirements for internal
complaint resolution processes in banks and the Bank Mediation Regulation which deals with mediation
                                25
of customer complaints by BI. All these Regulations cover subjects which are also dealt with in the FCP
Regulation.

The OJK Law and the FCP Regulation have provisions relating to the overlap but uncertainties
remain. Article 70 of the OJK Law refers to the various sector specific laws (such as the Banking Law),




25
   See BI Regulation No 7/6/ 2005 concerning Transparency in Bank Product Information and Use of Customer
Personal Data ;BI Regulation No. 7/7/PBI/2005 concerning the Resolution of Customer Complaints and BI Regulation
No. 8/5/2005 concerning Banking Mediation. Subsequently to the Diagnostic Mission, new legislation has been
issued, including BI Regulation PBI No. 16/1/2014 re: Payment System Consumer Protection, along with its
implementing Circular Letter SEBI No. 16/16/DKSP dated September 30, 2014.
their “ancillary regulations” and “other laws and regulations in the financial services sector ” and then
provides that these laws and regulations “remain valid to the extent not in contravention of and not yet
replaced by this Law”. FCP Regulation further provides in Article 55 that:
“The implementation of the provisions governing the protection of consumers in the financial services
sector shall remain valid as long as not contrary to Financial Services Authority regulations .”

The mission team were advised that the intent is that the existing law and regulations should continue to
apply “except to the extent” the umbrella provisions in the FCP Regulation are clearly inconsistent and
regardless of which regulatory agency is responsible for existing regulations (such as BI or the Minister of
Finance). However, the provisions of a regulation such as the FCP Regulation cannot override the
provisions of a law approved by Parliament (such as the Consumer Law), and there is doubt as to
whether the general consumer protection provisions of the FCP Regulation could override sector specific
                                                            26
regulations (such as the Bank Transparency Regulations). This overlap and ambiguity in the consumer
protection framework is likely to be of concern to relevant financial institutions that have to consider how
they can comply with all relevant laws and regulations and work out what differences in language
between the FCP Regulation and other laws and regulations means in practice.

The current regulatory regime for the financial services sector may not contain sufficient flexibility
to deal with consumer protection issues which might arise with innovative products and
distribution channels in the future. At the time of the mission, there were no provisions for consumer
protection issues specifically associated with electronic funds transfer channels and products offered by
banks and other institutions in the financial system. Specific issues in this context include safeguarding
client funds, data privacy, electronic contracts and disclosures and liability for unauthorised and mistaken
payments, system malfunctions, and lost or stolen devices. There was also no specific regulations
relating to the offering of complex new products into the retail market, which might, for example, give OJK
the ability to ban products which are not considered suitable for offering to retail clients (such as complex
                     27
derivative products ).

With regards to financial literacy, Article 14 of the FCP Regulation has the potential to give needed
direction to financial services companies to advance this agenda. The reporting requirement sets out
an obligation for financial service providers to educate consumers and/or the community on financial
literacy matters and to report annully to OJK on their program. OJK is presently drafting an explanatory
Circular to assist with compliance with these requirements.




There is a potential overlap between the FCP Regulation, the Consumer Law and other sector-
specific laws and regulations with consumer protection provisions which needs to be minimized.
Ideally, this would be achieved by enacting a new Financial Consumer Protection Law which covers in
one law the principles of the FCP Regulation in addition to the more specific consumer protection aspects
of existing law which it is thought should continue. However, it is appreciated that, at best, this is likely to
be a long term objective. In the interim, the issue of Circulars which provide guidance as to the broadly
framed obligations in the FCP Regulation is highly desirable. It is understood that a number of such




26
   See FCP Regulation, Article 55
27
   See IOSCO Report on Suitability Requirements with respect to the Distribution of Complex Financial Products:
http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD373.pdf
Circulars are currently being developed, and will cover issues related to marketing (including Key Facts
Statements for standard products and advertising), data protection, standard clauses, and consumer
education and complaints. As these Circulars are developed, and subject to local legal advice,
overlapping regulations should be repealed or amended. In the long term, this should also apply to
overlapping laws.

There should be careful consideration of consumer protection issues relevant to innovative
products and distribution channels. In particular, there should be consideration of: (i) the issues
specific to different types of new products and channels; (ii) different international models such as the
                                28
Epayments Code in Australia ; (iii) regulatory and self-regulatory options (such as an industry Code of
Conduct); (iv) capacity building for supervisors; and (v) how to ensure OJK has regulatory flexibility to
cover future innovations. It would be appropriate for OJK and BI to consult closely in this regard, given
BI’s role in relation to the payments system. Such consultation could occur pursuant to the OJK/BI
coordination and cooperation provisions provided for by Chapter X of the OJK Law. MC should also be
involved in any such consultations. In addiiton, there should be consideration as to whether OJK (and
possibly MC) needs to exercise, or be given, power to deal with complex products which may not be
suitable for distribution to retail customers. It is, of course, important that care should be taken not to
unnecessarily dampen innovation and to ensure that any new regualtory regime provides a balance
between relevant risks and the cost of compliance. Furhter, relevant institutions should be encouraged to
consult with Bi and OJK in relation to proposed new innovative product and distribution channels.

A Circular setting out OJK’s expectations as to how financial institutions should comply with the
their financial literacy obligations under Article 14 of the FCP Regulation should be issued by OJK
                         29
as soon as possible. The aim should be to provide clarity to the great number of financial institutions
that lack a strong understanding of financial literacy. A Circular could provide the proper guidance to
financial institutions, while at the same time taking into account OJK’s ability to monitor compliance with
Article 14. The Circular could, for example, set out OJK’s expectations in relation to: consistency of
programs with the National Financial Literacy Blueprint; the expected size, scale and priority areas for the
relevant programs; the role and responsibilities of senior management; rules relating to impact
measurement and evaluation; coordination between financial institutions and the requirements for
reporting to OJK.




With the exception of a few regulations such as the Bank Transparency Regulation, there are very
few provisions that deal with any aspect of consumer protection in the banking industry and what
law exists is vague in its terms. For example, Article 4 of the Banking Law requires all banks to
“improve the welfare of the common people” and Articles 8 and 15 of the same Law require banks to have
“confidence based on thorough analysis of the intention, capability and ability of a Debtor Customer to
repay the debt (or the financing) according to the agreed terms. ” Article 29 (3) of the Banking Act also
provides that “in extending credits (or financing based on Sharia principles) and conducting other forms of
business, a bank is required to adhere to methods that are not detrimental to the bank and to the interests




28
  http://www.asic.gov.au/epaymentscode
29
  After the diagnostic mission, OJK Circular Letter No. 1/SEOJK.7/2014 concerning the Education Implementation
Plan to Enhance Financial Literacy towards the Consumer and/or Society was issued, but was not the object of the
mission team’s analysis.
of its customers.” While the FCP Regulation goes furthest to date in providing a regime for consumer
protection in the delivery of all financial services, none of its provisions are banking-sector specific and
none will be in effect until August 2014.




The work begun by the enactment of the FCP Regulation should be expanded to deal in greater
depth with important matters of financial consumer protection in the banking industry. For
example, further regulations would be particularly helpful in providing rules applicable to retail customer
account switching from bank to bank, in setting forth detailed disclosure rules for banks depending on the
banking product and in banning the practice of charging prepayment penalties (in some cases as high as
5%) on the outstanding balance of variable rate loans. OJK Circulars setting out OJK’s views on such
issues would be helpful.




Although some parts of the non-bank credit institutions sector (multi-finance companies and the
state-owned pawnshop) are covered by the FCP Regulation and upcoming Circulars, financial
cooperatives, small village credit providers and third-party dealers in the multi-finance sector are
not. While this complex sector may be subject to the Consumer Law, its provisions are in very general
terms and of limited assistance to consumers in the sector. In general, the non-bank credit sector laws
and regulations do not cover financial consumer protection issues with any degree of specificity. Further,
there is a concern as to the scope for regulatory arbitrage given that the consumer protection regime
operating to cooperatives regulated by the MC is so much less rigorous than that applying to OJK-
regulated entities.




In order to have a common legal consumer protection framework for all types of financial
products and providers, consideration should be given to the development of specific consumer
protection regulations or guidelines for cooperatives, village credit providers and third-party
dealers. In the case of cooperatives and village credit providers, there should be coordination with the
provincial authorities and the Ministry of Cooperatives and SMEs. In the case of third-party dealers,
coordination should be established with the MoT, which plays a role as enforcer of the Consumer Law
and as authorizer of third-party dealers for the sale (or rent) of automobiles and motorcycles. The scope
of coordination can include the improvement of disclosure of comparative information provided by dealers
to potential consumers, the standardization of calculation of interest rates and real cost of credit, and
provisions on the selling of bundled insurance products.




A significant concern for the securities sector is the fragmented system of regulation. Over the
period of time of its operation, MoF’s Babepam-LK issued a number of regulations for the operation of the
capital markets and the qualification of its participants. These regulations appear to have been issued
piecemeal to address particular issues. For example, investment fund selling agents are required to
provide prospective customers with a brochure which simply explains the investment fund in addition to
the longer and more complicated prospectus of the fund. However, this requirement is not made
applicable to broker-dealers or mutual fund employees that sell mutual funds.
Regulations in the area of the capital markets should be consolidated and harmonized so that
there is uniformity in regulatory requirements for market participants performing the same
functions. Ideally this would be done through the issue of specific regulations under the OJK Law, but in
the interim the proposed Circulars under the FCP Regulation would be helpful.




The market conduct regulatory system currently applying to the insurance sector is fragmented
and overlapping. As well as the generic rules that will apply under the FCP Regulation, the insurance
sector has to interpret and comply with the consumer protection provisions in a relatively wide array of
laws and regulations, many of which have come into force only recently. Relevant laws and regulations
include the Insurance Law, the Insurance Business Conduct Regulations and Decree, the Insurance
Licensing Decree and the Insurance Good Corporate Governance Regulation.




The laws and regulations applicable to consumer protection in the insurance sector should be
consolidated and harmonized so that the law is clear. As with other sectors, ideally this would be
done through the issue of specific regulations under the OJK Law, but in the interim the proposed
Guidelines under the FCP Regulation would be helpful.




Though currently adequate, the legal and regulatory framework of pensions may need to be
examined and strengthened if the voluntary sector grows and takes on a more important role as
the social security systems are reforms. The key pension legislation (No. 11 / 1992) and regulations
(Nos. 76 and 77 / 1992) are broadly in line with international good practice. The former regulator,
BAPEPAM- LK, also issued extensive guidelines on a range of topics (including investment, governance,
solvency etc.). In addition, the consumer protection framework for the financial system at large clearly
states that is applies to pensions. However, more specific, pension related regulations are lacking in
some areas (such as advertising and sales requirements, data protection etc.), which may need to be
reexamined if a direct, retail pension market develops. More urgently, an examination of whether the
existing pension law and proposed amendments which are currently with the parliament fit with the
pension landscape in the post social security reform context will be required.

With regards to governance arrangements, the law does not establish adequate minimum
requirements for governing boards to protect interests of members of pension funds. The
governing boards of employer-sponsored pension funds (DPPK) are made up of member representatives,
but international guidelines on knowledge and training of these boards could be applied. The governing
board for DPLK pension funds are currently the same as the board for the financial institution providing
the pension product – i.e. there is no direct member representation. The ‘governance vacuum’ is a
challenge for DC pension funds in all countries, and ensuring that commercial pension providers put their
fiduciary duties ahead of their commercial interests is not easy. However, mechanisms such as
independent governance committees have been tried in other countries, and Indonesia may be able to
learn lessons from international experience and good practice.




Development of consumer protection guidelines specifically for pensions is recommended. If and
when the retail pension market develops, the general financial system consumer protection legislation
and regulation will need to be reviewed to see if more detailed guidance is required specifically for
pension products (e.g. reporting of investment performance over long term).

Training and knowledge requirements for DPPK pension fund supervisory boards should be
introduced and an examination undertaken into the form of governance arrangements for DPLK
pension funds provided by financial institutions. Guidelines for introducing such training requirements
for DPPK funds are being drafted by OJK. Training and knowledge requirements could be based on (a
slimmed down version of) the training required for pension fund managers by the employer sponsored
pension fund association (ADPI). International good practice would also imply the introduction of
minimum suitability and collective knowledge requirements for governing boards.




The current legal framework applicable to credit reporting is composed of an array of laws and
regulations that are not sufficiently clear or consistent with each other. Of particular relevance in
this context are the Credit Bureau Regulation which applies to LPIPs, the Debtor Information System
Regulation which applies in relation to the BIK and the Electronic Transactions Law. The Credit Bureau
Regulation has a much stronger consumer protection regime than the Debtor Information System
Regulation so that consumers whose credit records are kept by BIK have lesser protections than those
whose records are kept by private credit.

There are other examples of gaps in the consumer protection regime applying to credit reporting
which should be addressed. For example, the consent of the relevant debtor is not a pre-requisite for
access to personal data held by the BIK (although, as a matter of practice, it may be obtained by the
creditor), or by an LPIP or for the transfer of data between BI and an LPIP; there is not an obligation on
BIK to maintain the accuracy and security of data held in BIK; there are no restrictions on the transfer of
data held in BIK and, importantly, Chapter IX of the Credit Bureau Regulation contains extensive
provisions on the Handing and Settlement of Complaints in relation to the conduct of LPIPs but the
Debtor Information System Regulation does not contain equivalent provisions (although there is provision
for debtors to access their credit information).




A legal and regulatory framework for credit reporting should be developed which is clear,
predictable, non-discriminatory and supportive of consumers’ rights. At a minimum, new rules
should be introduced ensuring that consumers whose data is held in BIK have the same rights as those
whose data is held by private credit bureaus and that the abovementioned gaps are addressed.
Although there are some provisions requiring disclosure of terms and conditions of products,
there are no details on the specific items of information which should be included for the different
types of financial products or any requirement to provide a short form Key Facts Statement which
highlights the most important information and features of a product. The disclosure requirements in
the FCP Regulation do not adequately deal with these issues given the generality of the requirements in
provisions such as Articles 4 and 8. Specific disclosure requirements can help create an informed
consumer marketplace, enable product comparisons and encourage competition. It is, however, important
that any new requirements in this regard are proportionate in the sense of reflecting the risks of the
relevant activity, the literacy level of the relevant consumers and do not impose costs which outweigh the
benefits. For example, the requirements imposed on small financial institutions such as cooperatives
could be a simplified version of those applicable to customers of commercial banks given the lower levels
of literacy in that section of the population. A further consideration in drafting disclosure requirements for
the insurance industry is the low levels of understanding of the nature of insurance products (this point
was made in repeated meetings with insurance companies).




In the short term, it is recommended that OJK (and the MC when relevant) focus on the following
            30
activities:

    There should be specialized disclosure requirements for different types of financial products
     (e.g. specialized disclosure requirements for credit, deposit and insurance products): For
     example, a loan contract should include the interest rate and how interest is calculated, all fees,
     charges and commission amounts, repayment amounts and frequency, details of any insurance
     related to the contract (such as credit life insurance), details of the credit provider, as well as
     information on the consequences of late payment of debt by customers and information about any
     security which must be provided (for example, in the case of a housing loan secured by real estate).
     Further, for cooperatives there could be a need to specify the minimum membership related
     information that should be provided;
    Key Facts Statements: It would be helpful for consumers’ understanding of the financial sector if
     financial institutions were required to publish, and give to consumers, a short form (one page), clearly
     expressed Key Facts Statements for commonly used debit, credit and insurance products. By way of
     example, such a statement should include for a loan contract: the interest rate, fees and charges, the
     total amount to be repaid, the term of the loan and repayment details. Examples of countries which
     have requirements for such statements of this type include Australia, Ghana, Mexico, Peru, the
     United States and various European countries.
    Total cost of credit interest rate: Consideration should be given to including a requirement to
     disclose a total cost of credit interest rate which shows as a single rate the applicable interest rate



30
   After the CPFL Review, OJK Circular Letter No.12/SEOJK.07/2014 concerning the Delivery of Responsible
Information on Financial and Marketing Products and/or Services was issued, but was not the object of the mission
team’s analysis.
    and mandatory fees (such as a loan application fee) and charges (such as for a credit- life insurance
    premium);
   Statements of account: Specifying the content requirements for periodic statements of account; and
   Consumer testing of proposed new disclosure requirements: the aim is to ensure the disclosed
    information is easily understood and useful.

In the medium term, it is recommended that consideration be given to the extent to which transparency
and disclosure requirements might be simplified for smaller financial institutions.




Many capital market institutions rely on a network of experts and professional market
participants, but advice as to the identity of participants in the network is not provided to
investors. These entities can have an impact on an investor’s decision to invest and the performance of
the investment. Therefore, disclosure of these entities is necessary to fully inform the investor about his
investment and the entity with whom he is doing business. This principle is recognized in Rule V.H.1 (4)
related to investment advisors who must disclose if other persons or entities prepared research reports
that are given to clients.




OJK should implement a rule requiring the disclosure by a capital market participant of all entities
that provide services that could have an impact on a customer’s account and investment.




Standardized reporting of performance and fees for private pension funds does not exist at
present. Fees may be charged in different ways (on contributions or on assets under management, on
entry or exit, etc.). Likewise, investment returns can be based on daily or weekly unit prices or other
measures.

There is also a lack of transparency around the purchase of annuity products ─ both in terms of
the exact nature of the product / contract and the fees involved. According to the Pension Law
(Article 21) members must use 80% of their accumulated DC pension fund balance to purchase an
annuity on retirement. However, there are a very limited number of annuity providers, and there are no
real annuity products. In practice, this means that the DPLK balance is transferred to one of the insurance
companies which pays an ‘annuity’ for the first year or less and then allows the member to ca sh out the
balance minus a significant fee. The requirement to purchase an annuity whilst these products do not
exist in the country is clearly having an adverse effect on consumers.




OKJ should conduct a survey on the DPLK market, specifically looking at the issues of
investment choice and pension statements. The number of pension funds offering choices to their
members should be ascertained and the nature of these choices analyzed (how many funds are offered,
the range and type of fund, whether a default fund is selected and if so what these default funds are). The
nature and level of information, education and assistance available to individuals making these choices
could also be examined. The content and format of pension statements provided to DPLK members could
also be considered, including innovative ways to presenting risk and methods for encouraging increased
savings. Recommendations, good practice and guidelines would be generated from this report, ensuring
that international good practices are followed.

OJK should introduce standardized reporting of performance and fees and a centralized
comparison site. Standards for calculating and imposing fees and charges should be set by the
regulator along with requirements for disclosing these clearly. Fees relating to the purchase of annuities
need particular attention and clarification and any ‘hidden’ charges should be prevented. OJK should
                                             31
provide a centralized comparison web site for comparing DPLK investment performance (and some
measure of risks) and costs by type of fund to increase transparency and increase competition in
otherwise price inelastic pension markets.

The Pension Law should be revised to allow for program withdrawals whilst measures to
encourage and assist the development of the annuity market are taken. This is one of the
amendments to the Pension Law 11/1992 which is currently before Parliament, and should be passed.
More flexibility around the type of annuity product which can be purchased could also be allowed in order
to encourage more providers to enter the market. The OJK could also consider the experience of
countries in which a central annuity provider operates, to see if such a solution could be appropriate for
Indonesia. In parallel, steps to help develop the annuity market should be taken – including the issuance
of appropriate instruments to hedge product related risks.




There are limited regulatory provisions related to assessing the suitability of a product for a
consumer. Some product suitability rules are in place currently but they are very limited in scope. Article
16 of the FCP Regulation also provides that “Financial Services Providers must pay attention to the fit
between the needs and the ability of consumers to use the products and/or services offered to them ”.
However, there is not a positive obligation to conduct such an assessment; details of how the assessment
should be conducted; any obligation to provide the consumer with a copy of the assessment or clarity as
to the implications of a failure to undertake the assessment. Further, this provision is very generic in
nature and does not, for example, provide details of what must be done in relation to responsible lending
practices for credit products. Article 64(2) (b) of the Insurance Good Corporate Governance Regulation is
an example of a general provision of specific relevance to the insurance industry. It requires insurance
companies, brokers and agents to “evaluate the needs” of the policyholder, the insured, or the participant
in the policy. However, no guidance is provided as to how this should be done.




31
   Guidance may be obtained from the World Bank’s recent publication on Public Sector-Operated Price Comparison
Websites: Case Studies and Good Practices:
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/Public-SectorOperated-Price-
Comparison-Websites.pdf
The existing provisions relating to understanding a customer’s needs should be considerably
strengthened to deal with the abovementioned gaps. This might be achieved by OJK providing
regulatory guidance as to its expectations as to how financial institutions might comply with Article 16.
The new rules could also appropriately include a requirement for a signed waiver by the client if a
recommendation of non-suitability of a product or investment is ignored.




Requirements to train bank and non-bank credit institution staff are very limited. Training of staff is
a matter essentially left to each bank to organize and administer as it thinks best and its resources permit.
In other jurisdictions, banking associations help to ensure minimum standards are achieved for banks
staff that interact with the public in terms of basic financial literacy and knowledge of all relevant laws and
regulations, as well as the products and services on offer. As a general rule, however, the various
banking associations do not appear to have the capacity to take on any such role whether on their own or
collectively. This issue also applies in relation to the non-bank credit sector. The issue is of considerable
concern given the low levels of financial literacy in Indonesia, the efforts to promote financial inclusion
and the increasing complexity of financial products and services on offer (for example, in relation to
bundled insurance and credit products and branchless banking).

Training can also be a concern with sale of pension products by agents. Where DPLK products are
sold on a retail basis, agents come from the insurance and banking sectors and are cross selling pension
products. They have to pass their own industry qualifications and knowledge tests. However, they do not
have specific training on pensions. This may result in the agents not fully understanding the
characteristics and risks of the products which they are selling (e.g. that with DC pensions the investment
risk passes to the individual). There does not currently appear to be any problems around miss-selling of
products in this environment, but if the market is to grow, more specifically qualified sales agents will be
required and some checks or controls on cross selling may be needed.

There are requirements applicable to training in the insurance industry which seems adequate . Of
particular relevance is the general requirement for the management of an insurer to ensure that it is
supported by “education and training of its human resources ” (Article 27 of the Insurance Licensing
Decree), the requirement to spend 5% of human resources budget on training and the requirements
relating to training of agents. These requirements are supported by training programs offered by the life,
general and Sharia insurance associations.




In the long-term and at a minimum, there should be a licensing requirement for bank, insurance
company and finance company staff and intermediaries who deal face-to-face with financial
institution consumers or who prepare advertising and sales brochures to undertake standardized
training programs which meet OJK requirements. In particular, it is considered that there should be
training and qualification requirements for staff or third party agents who advise on financial products and
services, as well as requirements to ensure that sufficient information about the custo mer’s needs is
gathered so as to ensure that appropriate products and services are provided.
Further, in the cooperative sector, OJK could consider developing, outsourcing, or otherwise
encouraging training programs for secondary cooperatives in coordination with the Ministry of
Cooperatives and SMEs. This would be so as to support implementation and enforcement of client
protection in primary cooperatives. However it is recognized that this is likely to be a long term objective,
given the resource constraints on OJK and the very large numbers of secondary cooperatives.

Finally, there should be an element of training on pensions in the insurance and banking
qualifications applicable to those selling investment products. If retail pension products increase in
prominence, stricter licensing and qualifications for sales agents will be required.




Insurance bundling practices are common. For example, consumers who take out loans from banks
are required to take out life insurance (this is apparently a BI requirement). Banks will also require that
mortgaged property insurance be taken out where relevant. Whilst many banks have tied arrangements
with insurers, they are required by BI to offer the consumer a choice of one of 3 insurers, one of which
                             32
can be a bank related part. However it is understood that it is common practice for there to be limited
observance of this requirement and it is not enforced. Further, there is no requirement to disclose
commissions which are paid. Bundling is also common practice in the multi-finance sector. In some
cases, the consumer is not given the option to choose the insurer, while the insurance product is a
requisite to obtain credit.

The limited rules relating to bundling of products do not deal in detail with this practice. Article 18
of the FCP Regulation will allow bundling of products in a “ single package” but forbids forcing consumers
to buy products and/or services in a single package and requires that consumers be given choice.
However it is not clear what is meant by a “ package” in this context. Further, it would be helpful if it was
clear that the prohibition also applies where an insured is required to pay for an insurance policy as well
as buy it in their own name. A further requirement could be for a rebate of the premium where a loan is
paid out early and the insurance protects the mortgaged property.




It is recommended that a clear prohibition on insuring forcing practices be introduced, coupled
with disclosure and rebate provisions. The ‘insurance forcing’ prohibition would apply to a requirement
to acquire insurance from a particular supplier as a condition of providing a banking service (such as a
loan) and to a requirement to pay for such insurance. However, there could be an exception to such a
prohibition in certain cases – for example, where the requirement is for insurance over mortgaged
property or where insurance is required by law. Further, where there is a tied insurance contract, credit
providers should be required to give a proportionate refund of the applicable premium if the consumer
pays out a loan early. It is further recommended to introduce a requirement for disclosure of insurance
commissions and premiums.




32
  See BI Circular No. 12 of 2010 re: Risk Management in Marketing Between Commercial Banks and Insurance
Companies
There are only limited Codes of Conduct in place for the financial sector. There is a Code for the
Life Insurance Industry and a Code of Ethics for General and Life Insurance Agents, but there are no
Codes of Conduct for the banking sector (which has 6 industry associations). Non-bank credit institutions
have an industry association for multi-finance companies and one for Sharia-based savings and loan
cooperatives. However there are no industry-based codes of conduct in place for the multi-finance,
savings and credit cooperatives, village credit or BMT segments. In the capital markets sector, there are
several industry associations, but they do not have a Code of Conduct. It has become recognized by
numerous market participants that the associations should develop a framework for ethics for their
members in the form of a Code of Conduct setting out principles of good behavior. Industry Codes of
Practice, if well drafted and widely disseminated to consumers and enforced, can be helpful in building
trust in the financial system and hence assist in financial inclusion. This is especially the case in a
competitive industry sector. Examples of such Codes are the Code of Banking Practice in Australia, the
United Kingdom and South Africa.




In order to strengthen the role of industry associations in financial consumer protection, OJK
could develop guidance on the principles and minimum content for industry Codes of Conduct.
Such Codes could be enforced by the associations or by OJK (if the industry associations do not have the
resources or the capacity to do so). Guidance should also be provided on the mechanisms to disseminate
the Code among industry employees and consumers and to enforce the industry code by the
association’s members. A Code of Conduct for the banking sector might, for example, include rules
regarding: (i) disclosure of information in banks’ general terms and conditions; (ii) the switching of
accounts from one bank to another; (iii) loyalty and rewards programs; and (iv) debt collection and a
bank’s employment of debt collection agencies; as well as commitments regarding the qualifications of
bank staff who deal with consumers. OJK could also usefully support a program for the development and
enhancement of the capital markets associations so that they can provide a strong framework for ethical
conduct through the development of a Code of Conduct. This Code could be applied to new and existing
customers of capital markets participants as one means of developing and enhancing trust in capital
markets, especially with retail investors.




The sale of a market-based financial instrument in an institution that takes deposits and provides
time deposits as a financial instrument can be very confusing to customers. This is a concern as
investment fund sales agents are most often banks. Many customers do not distinguish between the
instruments or understand the risks of a market-based instrument. As a result, notwithstanding extensive
disclosures as to the market risks of the investment funds, a degree of inadvertent mis-selling occurs.




Banks that sell investment funds should physically separate their sales activity from their banking
activity. This can be done by placing the investment fund sales in a different, well-marked room or,
indeed, in an office in a separate building.
The current statutory systems for the resolution of disputes in the financial system are
fragmented and overlapping. At the time of the CPFL Review there appeared to be two statutory
dispute settlement systems applicable to the financial services sector: the Consumer Dispute Resolution
Board (BPSK) (which operates under Regulation No. 350 of 2001 issued by the Ministry of Trade and
Industry) and the BI mediation service for consumers established under the Banking Mediation
Regulation No. 8 of 2006. Further, as from 7 August 2014, OJK will provide a facilitation service under
Articles 40 to 46 of the FCP Regulation, but this service is not clearly transparent, accessible, or binding
on the financial institutions. OJK also has advocacy powers to take measures against financial institutions
to resolve complaints and to institute proceedings to reclaim property or to recover damages on behalf of
consumers – and indeed financial institutions if it is the harmed party (Article 30 and “advocacy powers”).
Indonesia is also a participant in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Committee on
Consumer Protection, which provides an avenue for consumers of any services or products to complain
                                    33
and seek compensation for loss. Another option for consumers would also be to file a claim in the local
or District court (although it is understood this option is little used).

There are however fragmented industry schemes managed within the insurance, pensions and
capital markets industries. The Life and General Insurance Associations provide a comprehensive
mediation and adjudication service through the Indonesian Mediation Board (BAMI). ADPI offers an
external mediation body, but it has yet to be used. The Indonesian Capital Markets Arbitration Board
(BAPMI) has only been used in six cases since its establishment in 2006. The banking sector does not
have its own dispute resolution scheme, although this is contemplated by the Banking Mediation
Regulation, and it has 6 industry associations which appear largely inactive and inadequately resourced.

Non-bank credit consumers seek recourse through different mechanisms, but seem to prefer
traditional customary mediation. Some multi-finance industry customers have complained to consumer
organizations, the Ministry of Finance, OJK and BPSK. In the cooperative and village credit segments,
the most common way to solve disputes seem to be through musyawarah mufakat, which means
‘dialogue to reach consensus’, and is based on an amicable private negotiation process that aims to
maintain a good relation among two disputing parties. Parties may refer the dispute to a third party, such
as a religious or village leader or a senior community person, who would solve problem through mediation
or conciliation. In terms of formal ADR mechanisms, the multi-finance industry is currently evaluating the
establishment of an ADR system for its members. However, the pawnshop, the savings and loans
cooperatives and the village credit providers have not yet thought about establishing any type of ADR.

The abovementioned patchwork of industry schemes and associations is a concern given the
current proposal to have industry associations providing ADR services for consumers of financial
                                                                                                   34
services. This proposal is provided for in OJK’s draft ADR Regulation (which is now in force). In
summary, under the draft regulation, there are requirements for ADR Bodies to be registered with OJK, to




33
   http://aseanconsumer.org/
34
   After the CPFL Review, OJK Regulation No.1/POJK.07/2014 concerning Alternative Dispute Resolution Institutions
in the Financial Services Sector was finalized and is now in force.
provide mediation, adjudication and arbitration services, to apply specified principles of accessibility,
independence, fairness, efficiency and effectiveness and to report every 6 months to OJK. ADR Bodies
for the banking, finance, underwriting, mortgage sectors are required to be formed by 31 December 2015.
Any breach of the Regulation by ADR Bodies and/ or “ parties” may be subject to administrative sanctions
including a warning, payment of money and revocation of a registration.

Although OJK’s focus on the establishment of an external dispute resolution process is to be
                                                                                      35
welcomed, some aspects of the abovementioned proposal are of concern.                    These include: (i)
whether OJK has the required functions and powers to implement and enforce the proposed new
regulation; (ii) the fact that OJK cannot order payment to a consumer if a financial institution breaches a
decision of an ADR Body; (iii) uncertainty as to whether all relevant industry associations can be formed
where they do not currently exist; and (iv) even where the industry associations exist, whether they can
have an ADR system developed and registered by the deadline of 31 December 2015. A further concern
is the potential for lack of consistency in procedures and decisions amongst the various ADR Bodies, as
well as the lack of any requirement for consumer representatives on ADR boards (which could assist in
ensuring independence). It is also not clear how the ADR Bodies will be funded, especially as ideally
consumers should not have to pay a fee.

OJK is to be commended for the establishment of its Integrated Financial Customer Care System
(FCC System). The FCC System was first established in early 2013 but has since been further developed
to provide a trackable and traceable system for customer complaints with a view to making the review
process more effective, quick and responsive. Financial institutions can trace the handling of complaints
and consumers can track progress in OJK’s consideration of the complai nts. From 21 January 2013 to 31
December 2013, the FCC System recorded 7,655 reports, including 495 information deliveries (6.47%),
6,271 information enquiries 981.92%) and 889 complaints (11.61%). Consumers can access the service
                                                                                th
on line, through a hotline and through OJK regional offices. As at February 6 , 2014, the FCC System
                                                                                              36
was supported by 2 supervisors, a quality assurance officer and 22 customer service officers.

The FCP Regulation provisions concerning OJK’s complaints facilitation role could nevertheless
be clarified. These provisions are not clearly transparent, accessible or binding on the financial institution
concerned. Issues of particular concern are that:

    OJK is unlikely to be seen as independent as it will be acting as both the supervisor of the relevant
     institution and the facilitator in a consumer dispute;
    OJK does not have power to make binding decisions;

                                                                                 37
     Both the consumer and the financial institution must agree to facilitation;
    There are no details of the process for selecting facilitators, or of the required skills, experience,
     qualifications and independence;
    OJK’s complaint investigation powers are not specified;
    The procedures to be followed in resolving complaints are not specified (such as whether lawyers are
     allowed, what evidence can be called and the required time lines for decisions);




35
   The making of OJK Regulation No.1/POJK.07/2014 concerning Alternative Dispute Resolution Institutions in the
Financial Services Sector provides more clarity around these issues, but Circular had not been made at the time of
the CPFL Review. .
36
   file:///C:/Users/wb371925/Downloads/press-release-ojk-inaugurates-integrated-consumer-care-system%20(1).pdf
37
   Article 44, FCP Regulation
    It is not specified whether consumers will have to pay fees; and
    There is no provision for OJK to collect, analyze or report on compliant statistics.




In the short term, it is recommended that OJK undertake the following activities to review the
ability of industry associations to provide ADR services by December 2015 (except of course to the
extent that it has not done so already):
 Map the current industry association dispute resolution services and assessing those that exist
    against international best practice standards;
 Advise on the terms of reference and governance arrangements for the various industry association
    schemes with a view to achieving consistency in approaches;
 Develop formats for the reporting of statistics on consumer complaints to OJK;
 Consider related regulatory requirements; and
 Capacity building for the relevant industry associations.

Adequate mechanisms for alternative dispute resolution in financial services should be developed
for all types of non-bank credit providers. The facilitation service to be provided by OJK, coupled with
the proposed industry based ADR schemes, would to some extent cover all types of non-bank credit
providers that are regulated by OJK. However customers of financial cooperatives and village credit
providers should also have a clear ADR scheme available to them. The MC could either encourage the
formation of a cooperative-based ADR scheme within secondary cooperatives, or set up a unit to deal
with consumer complaints. Customers of village credit providers should be able to go to BPSK to seek
appropriate recourse. In any case, the Ministry and BPSK should follow key ADR principles and
coordinate with OJK to set up similar dispute resolution procedures.

In the long term, it is recommended that options for a single, independent ADR scheme for all
financial sector consumers be considered. It is understood that OJK is giving some consideration to
this objective. However, further analysis is needed to identify the most effective institutional setup. Such
an analysis should explore different models, and the costing and effectiveness of each in the Indonesian
context. At a minimum, it is considered that the relevant body should be independent of financial
institutions and OJK (and any other regulator), be available at no or low cost to consumers, have the
power to make decisions which are binding on the financial institutions, and operate in accordance with
transparent processes and procedures. It is also recommended that it be a licensing condition that the
institution concerned be a member of the external dispute resolution scheme. The overseeing body for
                                                                          38
the scheme should include consumer as well as industry representatives. In the interim the FCC System
appears to be playing a useful role.

Prior to the commencement of OJK’s new complaint facilitation powers, it is recommended that
OJK conduct a public awareness campaign of the processes and procedures to be followed.
Furthermore, consumer call centers in both OJK and the Consumer Protection Division of BI’s Payments
System Department should help as a first response to consumers’ concerns, provided their existence is




38
  Guidance may be obtained from the World Bank’s recent publication on Resolving disputes between Consumers
and Financial Businesses: Fundamentals for a Financial Ombudsman: http://www.networkfso.org/Resolving-
disputes-between-consumers-and-financial-businesses_Fundamentals-for-a-financial-ombudsman_The-World-
Bank_January2012.pdf
very widely publicized (perhaps as a further bank disclosure requirement). It seems likely however that
the vast majority of consumers are not likely to know which center to turn to in the first instance.

The extent to which BPSK will continue to have jurisdiction over disputes involving financial
services after the FCP Regulation comes into effect should also be clarified. Consideration will also
need to be given as to the transitional arrangements for existing claims (if any).




There are requirements of general application relating to internal complaint resolution processes
and procedures and specific requirements relating to the banking and credit reporting
              39
industries. There are also general provisions in the Consumer Law relating to entrepreneurs
obligations to deal with customer complaints. In this regard Article 19 requires entrepreneurs to
compensate consumers for the damages or loss that they suffer as a result of consuming services.
Consumers also have the statutory rights in relation to the right to be heard and to obtain proper
advocacy, protection and settlement. Further, once the new FCP Regulation comes into effect all
financial services providers (including banks) will be required to have and implement detailed
mechanisms for consumer complaint resolution and consumers will have the right to compensation for the
                                                    40
faults or failures of financial services providers.




Under BI Regulation No. 7 of 2005, every bank must have a policy and written procedures dealing
with complaints. The policy and procedures must cover the receipt of consumer complaints, the
handling and resolution of consumer complaints, and the monitoring of complaint handling and
           41
resolution. All banks are also required to have a “unit and/or function” established in each branch office
to handle and resolve consumer complaints. Furthermore, banks are required to publish for the public the
existence of the dedicated unit and/or function in written and/or electronic form. “




For multi-finance companies and pawnshops, the FCP Regulation has minimum requirements on
internal complaints handling procedures; however, complaints handling rules are nonexistent for
financial cooperatives or small village credit providers. Some multi-finance companies already
include in contract agreements and summary sheets the toll-free phone number a consumer may call to
raise a complaint, and have developed internal procedures for complaints handling. However, many
others do not have clear procedures, let alone provide contact information regarding a complaints
handling contact person or unit.




39
   These provisions are also expanded on in OJK Circular No.2/SEOJK.07/2014 concerning the Service and Dispute
Settlement of Consumer Complaints, which was made after the CPFL Review. .
40
   Articles 29 and 32 to 38
41
   Ibid., Article 2 (2)
The consumer protection framework for handling disputes regarding data in BIK can be
significantly improved. Consumers in general can access their own reports for free but they have to go
to BI in person. Correction of errors is also handled directly by the data provider which means that a
consumer will need to visit each credit provider who has accessed a credit report with a mistake in it and
ask for the mistake to be corrected. However, BI follows up with the data provider to send a letter to the
consumer once the data has been corrected, in addition to notifying the consumer once the correction
has been made.




All financial providers should be required to follow similar principles on the handling of consumer
complaints. At the minimum, these principles should include the communication to the consumers of the
person in charge of dealing with consumer complaints, as well as the number of days that a response to a
complaint is expected to be given to the consumer, and the existing alternative dispute resolution
schemes (including at BPSK and OJK). Financial regulators should also develop a format for financial
providers to record the number and types of complaints received and how they were handled by the
provider, and require financial providers to submit such reports periodically to regulators.

There should also be clarification of the interaction between the FCP complaint resolution
requirements and those under the Consumer Law and BI Regulation No. 7 of 2005. Ideally, financial
services providers should only have to comply with one set of requirements in relation to dealing with
complaints.

The following reforms are suggested with regards to dispute handling in credit reporting – BI
should:
 Notify the consumer if a correction has been made as a result of the consumer ’s complaint;
 Notify a consumer whose credit record has been corrected as a result of a compliant of enquiries
   during the previous 6 months.




The publication of OJK’s Financial Literacy Blueprint is an important step toward building
Indonesia's financial literacy infrastructure, but needs to be quickly followed up with
implementation of a several key projects in its first few years to maintain momentum. Of the
highest priority are projects that emphasize program evaluation, market segmentation, strong distribution,
training for intermediaries and evidenced-based programming. The national website can also usefully
serve as a central repository for electronic financial literacy tools and resources. It should bring together
materials from across the government and, possibly, select NGOs and private sector entities. The site
should be positioned to assist consumers with everyday financial issues and have a user-friendly
interface. The financial literacy program should also be targeted to specific groups of adults outside of a
formal school setting. This might take the form of community based sessions focused on specific financial
issues or decisions facing this particular segment of consumers. The outreach effort would help raise
awareness of the website and other financial literacy and inclusion opportunities in consumers' respective
communities. Outreach efforts may include opportunities at public events to open bank accounts, receive
one-on-one counseling or receive financial literacy materials.
Both BI and OJK are working on financial literacy data collection as well as program development
and implementation. For example, BI has a school-based curriculum and OJK is planning to develop
one soon; this presents a timely opportunity for cooperation for greater impact. Similarly BI and OJK have
each performed their own financial literacy survey in the last couple of years. Ideally, data collection
methods, analysis and results should be compared to determine if there is an opportunity to eliminate
redundancy and increase efficiency.

A further need for financial literacy education arises from the introduction of the new National
Social Security System over the course of the next three years. Once fully implemented, this system
will radically transform the structure of the social security system in Indonesia. These reforms involve the
creation of five national social security programs – a health program and four employment programs
(work accident, old-age savings, pension, death benefits) that will eventually cover all Indonesians,
including formal and informal sector workers, and provide the same benefits for all.




OJK should launch a three-part program to spread financial capability and coordinate with BI on
financial literacy matters. The program should consist of the development and launch of a
national financial capability website, the creation of a targetted financial literacy programs, and
the implementation of an outreach program. These efforts should provide consumers with a number of
important resources including on-line tools to compare terms and prices of financial products and
services.

OJK and BI should coordinate their financial literacy programs.

It is also recommended that the government develop a public communication campaign
introducing the new social security scheme. Messaging will explain the new public benefit while
educating citizens on their continued need to save for retirement along with providing tips and tools to
facilitate financial planning for retirement.




Credit reporting activities are not well known by the population at large. BI has relevant information
regarding BIK in their website including the list of participants, the process to become members and the
process to request data correction by consumers and has conducted various public awareness
campaigns explaining the role of credit reporting in the overall credit process. However BIK’s rules of
operation are not published. Furhter, details of the other private credit reporting systems operating in the
country are not publicized and are accordingly not likely to be known by consumers and data subjects.




A credit reporting awareness campaign should be undertaken by the authorities. The campaign
should inform all relevant consumer associations, banks, financial institutions, cooperatives and credit
organizations of the main characteristics of the credit reporting system in Indonesia including its benefits
and risks. This campaign could be done in coordination with all relevant authorities in the matter including
BI, OJK, MC and the NCPC.
(See Volume II of this Report for details of these recommendations)

Area             Sector       Recommendation                                     Responsibility    Term
                 Cross-       Consider separating the prudential and market                        Short
                                                                                 OJK
                 cutting      conduct supervisory functions within OJK                             term
                              Develop CPFL resources, tools and capacity
                 Cross-       within OJK for implementing financial                                Short
                                                                                 OJK
                 cutting      consumer protection/market conduct                                   term
                              regulations and related supervisory activities
                 Cross-       Establish coordination arrangements for            OJK / BI / MC /   Short
                 cutting      consumer protection regulators                     MoT / NCPC        term
                              Design and implement a financial literacy          OJK / BI /
                 Cross-                                                                            Short
                              technical working group as a coordination          Ministry of
                 cutting                                                                           term
                              mechanism involving all relevant stakeholders      Finance + GAs
                              Consider support for funding financial sector
                 Cross-                                                                            Medium
                              consumer associations and encourage their          OJK
                 cutting                                                                           Term
                              participation in policy development
                 Cross-       Establish coordination arrangements between                          Medium
                                                                                 OJK / KPPU
Institutional    cutting      regulators on competition issues                                     Term
Arrangements                  Ensure that KPPU is appropriately resourced
                 Cross-                                                                            Long
                              for the purposes of its functions in relation to   KPPU
                 cutting                                                                           term
                              the financial services sector
                              Develop guidelines for provincial authorities
                 Non-bank                                                                          Medium
                              with delegated supervision of savings and loan     OJK
                 credit                                                                            Term
                              cooperatives and MFIs
                              Specify powers of MC’s Monitoring Institution
                 Non-bank                                                                          Long
                              for Savings and Loans Cooperatives in relation     MC
                 credit                                                                            Term
                              to consumer protection issues
                              Develop the capacity of the Investor Protection                      Medium
                 Securities                                                      OJK
                              Fund                                                                 term
                              Develop the capacity of the statutory manager
                                                                                                   Medium
                 Securities   or the bankruptcy trustee for capital market       OJK
                                                                                                   term
                              participants
                 Credit       Enhance the oversight framework for credit         OJK / BI / MC /   Medium
                 reporting    reporting                                          NCPC / MCIT       term
                              Eliminate / minimize overlap between the FCP
                              Regulation, the Consumer Law and other
                              existing consumer protection laws and
Legal and
                 Cross-       regulations and consolidate the consumer           OJK/ BI / MC /    Long
Regulatory
                 cutting      protection regime (pending development of a        MoT / NCPC        term
Framework
                              comprehensive Financial Consumer Protection
                              Law, in interim provide guidance in Circulars
                              under the FCP Regulation)
Area               Sector       Recommendation                                        Responsibility      Term
                   Cross-       Develop financial literacy guidelines for Article                         Short
                                                       42                             OJK
                   cutting      14 of FCP Regulation                                                      term
                                Provide the regulatory flexibility to deal with
                   Cross-                                                                                 Medium
                                consumer protection issues relevant to                OJK / BI
                   cutting                                                                                term
                                innovative products and distribution channels
                                Make it a licensing condition for all financial
                   Cross-                                                                                 Long
                                services providers that they can demonstrate          OJK/MC
                   cutting                                                                                Term
                                compliance with consumer protection laws
                   Cross-       Mandate disclosure of regulator contact details                           Long
                                                                                      OJK/MC
                   cutting      in sales materials                                                        Term
                   Cross-       Require complete customer and investor                                    Long
                                                                                      OJK/MC
                   cutting      records to be kept                                                        Term
                   Cross-       Introduce rules on the foreclosure of                                     Long
                                                                                      OJK/MC
                   cutting      mortgaged property                                                        Term
                   Cross-       Consider introduction of an over-arching data                             Long
                                                                                      OJK
                   cutting      protection law                                                            Term
                   Cross-       Evaluate NGO supervisory role in Consumer                                 Long
                                                                                      MoT
                   cutting      Law                                                                       Term
                   Cross-                                                                                 Long
                                Consider mandating cooling – off periods              OJK
                   cutting                                                                                Term
                                Issue guidelines / Circulars to restirict
                   Cross-                                                                                 Medium
                                unreasonable prepayment penalties and                 OJK
                   cutting                                                                                term
                                account closure fees
                                Consider the development of common
                   Non-bank                                                           OJK / MoT /         Medium
                                guidelines for cooperatives, village credit
                   credit                                                             MC                  term
                                providers and third-party dealers
                   Non-bank     Introduce minimum fit and proper requirements                             Medium
                                                                                      MC
                   credit       for cooperative founders                                                  term
                                Harmonize capital market regulatory
                                                                                                          Medium
                   Securities   requirements for market participants                  OJK
                                                                                                          term
                                performing the same function
                                Consolidate the laws and regulations
                                                                                                          Medium
                   Insurance    applicable to consumer protection in the              OJK
                                                                                                          term
                                insurance sector
                                                                                                          Long
                   Insurance    Require insurance agents to be licensed               OJK
                                                                                                          Term
                                                                                                          Long
                   Insurance    Introduce nominal defendant arrangements              OJK
                                                                                                          Term
                                Develop consumer protection laws for private                              Long
                   Pensions                                                           OJK
                                pension products                                                          term




42
  After the diagnostic mission, OJK Circular Letter No. 1/SEOJK.7/2014 concerning the Education Implementation
Plan to Enhance Financial Literacy towards the Consumer and/or Society was issued, but was not the object of the
mission team’s analysis.
Area               Sector        Recommendation                                        Responsibility      Term
                                 Implement training and knowledge
                                                                                                           Short
                   Pensions      requirements for DPPK pension fund                    OJK
                                                                                                           term
                                 supervisory boards
                                 Consider clarifying guarantee policy in relation
                                 to an underfunded pension fund in the event of                            Medium
                   Pensions                                                            OJK
                                 a sponsor bankruptcy and rigorously enforce                               Term
                                 solvency regulations
                                 Enhance the legal and regulatory framework
                   Credit                                                              OJK / BI / MC /     Medium
                                 applicable to consumer protection issues
                   reporting                                                           NCPC / MCIT         term
                                 relevant to credit reporting
                                 Develop specific disclosure requirements for
                   Cross-                                                                                  Short
                                 different types of financial products, including      OJK /MC
                   cutting                               43                                                term
                                 Key Facts Statements
                   Cross-        Develop total cost of credit interest rate                                Short
                                                                                       OJK /MC
                   cutting       requirements                                                              term
                   Cross-        Develop content requirements for periodic                                 Short
                                                                                       OJK /MC
                   cutting       statements of account                                                     term
                   Cross-        Conduct consumer testing of the proposed                                  Short
                                                                                       OJK /MC
                   cutting       new disclosure requirements                                               term
                                 Consider the extent to which transparency and
                   Cross-                                                                                  Medium
                                 disclosure requirements might be simplified for       OJK /MC
                   cutting                                                                                 term
                                 smaller financial institutions
                   Cross-        Develop licensing and conduct rules for debt                              Long
                                                                                       OJK/MC
                   cutting       collectors                                                                Term
Transparency                                                                                               Long
                   Banking       Develop a price comparison website                    OJK/MC
and                                                                                                        Term
Consumer                         Require details of any third party guarantee to                           Long
Disclosure         Banking                                                             OJK/MC
                                 be disclosed                                                              Term
                                 Implement a rule requiring the disclosure by a
                                 capital market participant of all entities that                           Medium
                   Securities                                                          OJK
                                 provide services that could have an impact on                             term
                                 a customer’s account and investment
                                 Require more detailed disclosures in relation to
                                                                                                           Medium
                   Securities    collective investment funds, margin loan              OJK
                                                                                                           term
                                 interest rates and order executions
                                                                                                           Long
                   Securities    Develop insolvency rules for securities industry      OJK
                                                                                                           term
                                 Introduce rules on advertising of investment                              Long
                   Insurance                                                           OJK
                                 returns used in life insurance value projections                          Term
                                 Conduct a survey on the DPLK market looking
                                                                                                           Short
                   Pensions      at the issues of investment choice and pension        OJK
                                                                                                           term
                                 statements




43
   After the diagnostic mission, OJK Circular Letter No.12/SEOJK.07/2014 concerning the Delivery of Responsible
Information on Financial and Marketing Products and/or Services was issued, but was not the object of the mission
team’s analysis.
Area         Sector      Recommendation                                       Responsibility   Term
                         Introduce standardized reporting for private
                                                                                               Medium
             Pensions    pension funds and centralized comparison web         OJK
                                                                                               term
                         site
                         Amend the Pension Law to allow for program
                                                                                               Long
             Pensions    withdrawals, and encourage the development           OJK
                                                                                               term
                         of the annuity market
                         Strengthen obligations for product suitability /
             Cross-      affordability assessments (e.g. by issuing a                          Short
                                                                              OJK / MC
             cutting     Circular under Article 16 of the FCP                                  term
                         Regulation)
                         Introduce standardized training requirements
             Cross-                                                                            Long
                         for staff and intermediaries of financial services   OJK / MC
             cutting                                                                           term
                         providers
                         Ensure that banks selling investment funds
                                                                                               Long
             Banking     physically separate their sales activity from        OJK
                                                                                               term
                         their banking activity
Business
Practices    Non-bank    Consider the development of a training                                Medium
                                                                              OJK / MC
             credit      program for secondary cooperatives                                    term
                         Prohibit unreasonable insurance forcing
                         practices relating to bundling and tying of credit
             Cross-      and insurance products and introduce                                  Medium
                                                                              OJK / MC
             cutting     requirements for disclosure of insurance                              term
                         details and rebates for tied insurance policies
                         where the loan is paid out early
                         Support the development of industry Codes of
             Cross-                                                                            Long
                         Practice through providing guidance on               OJK / MC
             cutting                                                                           term
                         minimum content and principles
             Cross-      Review the ability of industry associations to                        Short
                                                                              OJK
             cutting     provide ADR services                                                  term
             Cross-      Conduct a public awareness campaign around                            Short
                                                                              OJK
             cutting     OJK’s new complaint facilitation services                             term
                         Confirm the extent to which BPSK has
                         jurisdiction over financial services disputes
             Cross-                                                                            Short
                         after the FCP Regulation comes into effect and       OJK / MoT
             cutting                                                                           term
                         deal with transitional issues (through amending
                         regulations)
Dispute
Resolution   Cross-      Develop options for a single, independent ADR                         Long
                                                                              OJK
Mechanisms   cutting     scheme                                                                term
             Cross-      Require records of customer complaints to be                          Long
                                                                              OJK/MC
             cutting     kept and disclosed                                                    Term
             Non-bank    Develop complaint handling rules for                                  Medium
                                                                              MC
             credit      cooperatives                                                          term
             Non-bank    Ensure all NBCIs follow similar principles on                         Medium
                                                                              OJK
             credit      the handling of consumer complaints                                   term
             Credit      Enhance the consumer protection framework                             Medium
                                                                              OJK / BI
             reporting   for handling disputes regarding data in the BIK                       term
Area        Sector       Recommendation                                    Responsibility    Term
                         Develop a national website and public
            Cross-                                                         OJK / TNP2K /     Short
                         awareness campaign, launch informal
            cutting                                                        BI + GAs          term
                         education program and conduct outreach
            Cross-       Undertake evaluation of financial literacy                          Medium
                                                                           OJK / BI
            cutting      programs                                                            Term
            Cross-                                                                           Medium
                         Regulators should share financial literacy data   OJK / BI / MC
            cutting                                                                          Term
Financial
Literacy                 IDX should enhance financial literacy programs                      Medium
            Securities                                                     IDX
                         and records                                                         Term
                         Consider a National Pension Awareness
                                                                           Government /      Medium
            Pensions     Campaign for social security reforms and role
                                                                           OJK               term
                         of voluntary pensions in the future
                         Conduct a public awareness campaign around
            Credit                                                         OJK / BI / MC /   Short
                         the benefits and risks of the Credit Reporting
            reporting                                                      MCIT              term
                         System
