|i
DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 2
 I.    GOOD PRACTICES: BANKING SECTOR............................................................................................... 4
         CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS ....................................................................................... 4
         DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES ........................................................................................... 59
         CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE .............................................................. 74
         PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ................................................................................................. 94
         DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS.......................................................................................... 102
         GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY ................................................................................. 107
         CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ........................................................................................................ 110
         COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ........................................................................... 112
 II.   GOOD PRACTICES: CREDIT REPORTING SYSTEM ........................................................................ 115
         PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ............................................................................................... 115
         CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ........................................................................................................ 119
ANNEXURE I. LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK .......................................................................... 120
ANNEXURE II. COMPARISON BETWEEN CONSUMER LAW OF THE PHILIPPINES AND BSP LAWS ..... 124




                                    Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 3
                      I.
NOTE: It is understood that a number of the recommendations below may be covered by the BSP
                                                                          1
Financial Consumer Protection Framework once it is given the force of law. In particular, the mission
team was advised that the recommendations concerning FCAG, transparency and disclosure and
standards of conduct will be covered by the Framework.

NOTE: See Annexure 1 for a summary of the Legal and Regulatory Framework applying to the banking
sector in the Philippines.


 SECTION A.           CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

 Good Practice A.1.   Consumer Protection Regime
                      The law should provide clear consumer protection rules regarding banking
                      products and services, and all institutional arrangements should be in place to
                      ensure the thorough, objective, timely and fair implementation and enforcement
                      of all such rules.
                      a.      Specific statutory provisions should create an effective regime for the
                      protection of a consumer of any banking product or service.
                      b.      A general consumer agency, a financial supervisory agency or a
                      specialized financial consumer agency should be responsible for implementing,
                      overseeing and enforcing consumer protection regarding banking products and
                      services, as well as for collecting and analyzing data (including inquiries,
                      complaints and disputes).
                      c.      The designated agency should be funded adequately to enable it to carry
                      out its mandates efficiently and effectively.
                      d.     The work of the designated agency should be carried out with
                      transparency, accountability and integrity.
                      e.       There should be co-ordination and co-operation between the various
                      institutions mandated to implement, oversee and enforce consumer protection
                      and financial system regulation and supervision.
                      f.      The law should also provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the
                      private sector, including voluntary consumer organizations and self-regulatory
                      organizations, in respect of consumer protection regarding banking products
                      and services.




 1
   The proposed Framework was reviewed during the CP Review Mission but had not been published at the
 time of preparing this report.

                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 4
                                                                      I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description   The current institutional arrangements for consumer protection in the banking sector
              are somewhat fragmented as there are overlapping, and to some extent inconsistent,
              provisions applying to BSP, DTI, SEC and CDA regulated entities .
              Relevant aspects of the legal framework at the time of the mission were as follows:
              The BSP has a broad mandate over the banking and quasi- banking sector expressed
              as follows in s. 3 of RA 7653 The New Central Bank Act of 1993 (emphasis added):
              “The Bangko Sentral shall provide policy directions in the areas of money,
              banking, and credit. It shall have supervision over the operations of banks and
              exercise such regulatory powers as provided in this Act and other pertinent laws over
              the operations of finance companies and non-bank financial institutions
              performing quasi-banking functions, hereafter referred to as quasibanks, and
              institutions performing similar functions.
              The primary objective of the Bangko Sentral is to maintain price stability
              conducive to a balanced and sustainable growth of the econom y. It shall also
              promote and maintain monetary stability and the convertibility of the peso. ”
              The above stated provisions do not expressly state that BSP’s functions include
              consumer protection or the market conduct of the institutions that it regulates. There is
              not even a reference to the BSP mandate covering financial stability. However, some
              reassurance should be provided by the express reference to the BSP mandate
              including policy directions in the areas of “banking and credit” and to its ability to
              supervise the operations of banks and quasi banks. It is nevertheless understood that
              consideration is being given to clarifying that the above mandate covers financial
              consumer protection issues (for the avoidance of doubt).
              A wide range of laws and of regulatory instruments issued by BSP (including
              Circulars) (together laws”) apply to the banking sector in the Philippines and support
              consumer protection. These laws are discussed as applicable below in the context of
              specific Good Practices. These include laws in relation to Truth in Lending for loan
              products, credit cards, microfinance, electronic banking, investment products,
              responsible lending practices, confidentiality and data protection, cross selling of
              products, outsourcing of bank functions and compliance systems. The laws specifically
              applicable to regulated banking institutions are consolidated in the voluminous 2008
              BSP Manual of Regulations for Banks (MORB).
              There are a number of other institutions besides BSP which have responsibility for
              consumer protection relevant to debit and credit products. They are discussed in the
              following paragraphs.
              The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) has responsibility for some, but not all, of
              the general consumer protection provisions as well as specific provisions concerning
              credit contracts in The Consumer Act of the Philippines of 1991 (Consumer Act). The
              Consumer Act applies to all entities providing credit (or indeed any financial service)
              as a business (including those regulated by BSP, the SEC, the IC and the CDA and
              also including those which are otherwise unregulated). The relevant provisions of the
              Consumer Act include the following:
                      “Services” are defined to include any that are the subject of a “ consumer
                       transaction” and the latter term is defined to include “(ii) grant or provision of
                       credit to a consumer” and “Consumer” is defined to mean “a natural person
                       who is a purchaser, lease, recipient or prospective purchase, lease or
                       recipient of consumer products, services or credit”;
                       Title III, Chapter I contains provisions concerning deceoptive, unfair and
                       unconscionable sales acts and practices;




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 50
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                 Ttile III, Chapter VI deals with advertising and contains specific provisions
                                  concering credit advertising (for which DTI is expressly stated to be the
                                  implementing agency); and
                                 Title IV concerns credit transactions including provisions relating to dislcosure,
                                  finance charges, delinquencies, prepayments, periodic statements of account.
                         It is not entirely clear who is responsible for supervising compliance with the
                         Consumer Act so far as banks are concerned. Most of the Titles in the Consumer Act
                         make it clear that the DTI has supervisory responsibility for the relevant provisions as
                         the “implementing authority”. However, the Consumer Act is silent on the question as
                         to who has responsibility for supervising Title IV, which contains specific provisions
                         concerning credit transactions. The mission team was told that the DTI relies on two
                         opinions from the DoJ to the effect that BSP is to be considered as the implementing
                         agency for the application of the Consumer Act to BSP regulated institutions with
                         respect to consumer credit card transactions. This is notwithstanding that the
                         Consumer Act does not mention BSP (for example BSP is not included on the
                         National Consumers Affairs Council referred to below) and that the DTI is mentioned
                         as the implementing agency for some (but not all) of the relevant provisions (for
                         example, concerning credit advertisements and the general consumer protection
                         provisions). To make the position clearer, there is currently a DTI proposal to make
                         BSP the implementing authority for the application of the Consumer Act to the
                         institutions it regulates (although the mission team were advised that BSP had not
                         been consulted on this proposal).
                         The banking industry also seems to be uncertain as to whether the Consumer Act
                         applies to them. Some of the banks the mission team interviewed said that they
                         treated the Consumer Act as applying to them. For example, some (but not all) banks
                                                                                                                2
                         comply with the provision confirming a borrower’s right to prepay a credit contract.
                         However BSP does not at present actively supervise compliance with the Consumer
                         Act, although the Financial Consumer Affairs Group seeks to resolve complaints
                         arising under the Consumer Act which are referred to them by DTI.
                         As well as the institutional uncertainties concerning the Consumer Act, there are
                         overlapping and inconsistent provisions in the Consumer Act and in the legislation
                         supervised by BSP. For example, both laws contain disclosure requirements for credit
                         contracts but the Consumer Act has more specific provisions in relation to credit sale
                         and installment contracts which reflect the nature of those products. There are also
                         provisions in the Consumer Act dealing with prepayments, rebates due on prepayment
                         and delinquency and deferral charges which do not appear in BSP laws. Annexure II
                         contains further details of the differences between BSP laws and the Consumer Act.
                         The SEC has jurisdiction over “Lending Companies” under the RA 9474 of the Lending
                         Company Regulation Act of 2007 (SEC Lending Company Act).A “Lending Company”
                         is defined in s. 3 (a) as follows:
                             “(a)Lending Company shall refer to a corporation engaged in granting loans from
                             its own capital funds or from funds sourced from not more than nineteen (19)
                             persons. It shall not be deemed to include banking institutions, investment houses,
                             savings and loan associations, financing companies, pawnshops, insurance
                             companies, cooperatives, and other credit institutions already regulated by law.
                             The term shall be synonymous with lending investors.”




2
    There is also a similar provision in the General Banking Law (s. 45).

                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 51
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


            The only specific consumer protection provision in the SEC Lending Company Act
            appears to be designed to ensure that loan agreements entered into by Lending
            Companies are consistent with RA 3765 Truth in Lending Act of 1963 (supervised by
            BSP) and with the Consumer Act.S. 7 provides (emphasis added):
                    “(a) A lending company may grant loans in such amounts and reasonable interest
                    rates and charges as may be agreed upon between the lending company and the
                    debtor. Provided, That the agreement shall be in compliance with the
                    provisions of Republic Act No. 3765, known otherwise as the “Truth in
                    Lending Act” and Republic Act 7364, otherwise known as the “Consumer
                    Act of the Philippines”. Provided further, That the Monetary Board, in
                    consultation with the SEC and the industry, may prescribe such interest rate as
                    may be warranted by prevailing economic and social conditions. ”
            SEC Circular No 7 of 2011 also provides for the adoption of BSP Circular 730 of 2011
            which contains “Updated Rules Implementing the Truth in Lending Act to Enhance Loan
            Transaction Transparency”.
            There are also limited consumer protection provisions applying to cooperatives supervised
            by the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) which provide credit or savings facilities.
            The CDA is responsible for regulating and registering cooperatives (which include credit
            cooperatives and the purposes of which can include the ownership of cooperative banks).
            The promotion and development of cooperative banks is described in the Cooperative
            Development Authority Act of 1990 RA 6939 as a “ major concern” of the CDA, which is to
                                                       3
            be undertaken in collaboration with BSP. Further, Chapter VIII of the Cooperatives Code
            of the Philippines of 1990 contains detailed provisions concerning cooperative banks, but
            makes it clear they are under the supervision of BSP. There do not appear to be any
            consumer protection provisions in either the Cooperative Development Authority Act of
            1990 or in the Cooperatives Code. However, the CDA has applied the BSP Truth in
            Lending Circular 730 to the institutions they regulate.
            The Insurance Commission (IC) regulates insurance companies and mutual benefit
            associations, which may provide finance on the security of their policies and applies the
            BSP’s Truth in Lending rules to relevant companies. The IC, like the SEC and the CDA,
            has applied the Truth in Lending Act to the institutions they regulate.
            Further consumer protection is provided for by the deposit insurance scheme
            administered by the Philippines Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC). The PDIC Charter
            provides for a deposit insurance scheme for member banks up to a prescribed limit which
            is currently 500,000 Pesos for both individual and corporate customers and which applies
            on a per customer / per institution basis. The scheme applies to banks incorporated
            under Philippine laws (such as universal and commercial banks, savings banks,
            development banks, rural banks, cooperative banks and stock savings and loan
            associations and branches and agencies of foreign banks in the Philippines). The PDIC
            also gives PDIC wide ranging powers to deal with insolvent banks. The PDIC powers are
            frequently used: the mission team was advised that, over the last 5 years, on average
            around 25 PDIC insured banks per year have been closed.




3
    S. 12

                     Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 52
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                  The National Consumers Affairs Council (NCAC) has overarching coordination
                  responsibility for consumer protection in the Philippines. The NCAC was established
                  by the Consumer Act. It has wide ranging functions (in summary) to rationalize and
                  coordinate the functions of all agencies charged with consumer protection in the
                  Philippines; to advise on policy and legislation; and to conduct consumer education
                  functions. Notwithstanding these broad functions, the mission team was advised that
                  the NCAC has a very limited budget of around 2 million pesos and it has only 3 full
                  time staff. Its members consist of 4 consumer representatives, 2 business and
                  industry representatives and representatives of the DTI, Agriculture, Health and
                  Education, Culture and Sports. Significantly, its members do not include a
                  representative of BSP. However the mission team was advised that there is
                  consultation with BSP on relevant programs.
                  Active steps are also being taken to achieve coordination between relevant financial
                  sector agencies (other than CDA and the DoJ) through the Financial Sector Forum.
                  The Forum, which was launched in 2004, seeks to deepen coordination among its four
                  participating agencies, including in relation to financial consumer protection and
                  education issues. The four agencies involved are BSP, PDIC, IC and SEC (but not the
                  CDA). Collaboration with DTI is also ongoing through the participation of BSP in the
                  consumer protection initiatives of the NCAC (which is under the auspices of DTI).
                  There is also ongoing collaboration between BSP and CDA through the participation of
                  BSP in the coordinating committee organized by CDA which monitors programs,
                  provides a system of consultation, and recommends policies related to the
                  development of the cooperative sector.

                  BSP should continue to actively consult and collaborate with other supervisors of
Recommendations
                  providers of debit and credit products, including DTI, SEC, IC and, in the future, also
                  including CDA. This is important to ensure consistency of protection for consumers
                  and to minimize the risk of regulatory arbitrage.
                  There should be clarification of the extent to which the Consumer Act applies to BSP
                  regulated entities and the products and services they provide, and of the BSP’s
                  supervision mandate in relation the Consumer Act. This might be achieved through the
                  following steps:
                          Conduct a careful review of the Consumer Act to identify those provisions
                           which should appropriately apply to regulated banks but are not currently
                           covered by other laws specifically applying to such banks (for example, the
                           provisions dealing with unfair terms (see Article 52)); and
                          Then apply the relevant provisions to banks, whilst at the same time making it
                           clear that the Consumer Act does not apply to banks.
                  An alternative approach would be for BSP to supervise compliance of regulated banks
                  with the Consumer Act. However this approach would give rise to supervision and
                  compliance complexities given the differences between the Consumer Act and BSP
                  specific laws and the fact that the approach would require BSP to be designated as
                  the “implementing authority” for the relevant general and specific provisions of the
                  Consumer Act.
                  In the long term, it could be helpful for there to be absolute clarity as to BSP mandate
                  to regulate consumer protection issues. This should include clarity as to its powers to
                  provide a binding complaints resolution service. However this is not an immediate
                  concern as BSP’s functions specifically extend to credit and the operations of banks
                  and quasi - banks.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 53
                                                                            I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice A.2   Code of Conduct for Banks
                       a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for banks that is
                          devised by all banks or the banking association in consultation with the
                          financial supervisory agency and consumer associations, if possible.
                          Monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory agency,
                          this code should be formally adhered to by all sector-specific
                          institutions.
                       b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized and
                          disseminated to the general public.
                       c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes of
                          conduct for banks on such matters as facilitating the easy switching of
                          consumers’ current accounts and establishing a common terminology in
                          the banking industry for the description of banks’ charges, services and
                          products.
                       d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                          disseminated.
Description         The principles based Banking Code for Consumer Protection (Banking Code) has
                    recently come into effect but implementation and public awareness is at a very
                    nascent stage. There do not appear to be any voluntary codes of the type
                    contemplated by this Good Practice.
                    The Banking Code was developed with the encouragement of BSP and appears to be
                    supported by all relevant banking associations. This includes the Bankers Association
                    of the Philippines (BAP), the Chamber of Thrift Banks (CTB), the Rural Bankers
                    Association of the Philippines (RBAP), the Credit Card Association of the Philippines
                    (CCAP), and the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines (BMAP). BMAP led the
                    project for updating the Code from its original 2004 version and is described in the
                    Code as “the keeper of the Code.”
                    The objectives of the Code are broadly described and support fundamental consumer
                    protection principles. The objectives are stated as follows:
                        “1. To promote transparency and better understanding and appreciation of
                            banking products and services;
                        2. To set minimum service standards that will help ensure customer/consumer
                            protection;
                        3. To further professionalize and uplift the local banking industry to world class
                            standards; and
                        4. To strengthen the relationship between banks and their respective customers.”
                    The Code has a wide range of provisions designed to protect consumers. They
                    include:
                           An initial statement of Consumer Rights;
                           Standards and promises concerning service delivery; multiple banking
                            channels; elderly and disabled customers; internal complaint resolution
                            standards (and a reminder as to the ability to raise unsatisifed complaints with
                            FCAG and PDIC); privacy and confidentiality; advertising and marketing (Part
                            A);
                           Extensive advice for consumers as to: what they can (and should) expect from
                            banks in relation to the product pre-sale, sale and post - sale process;
                            information about different types of bank products; detailed questions
                            consumers should ask of their banks; and the information that they should
                            provide to banks and including advice about the PDIC (Part B); and
                           Information for customers about the security measures that they should take
                            to safeguard their bank facilities, such as electronic banking facilities (Part C).



                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 54
                                                                            I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                    To date there has not been a systematic customer awareness campaign to alert bank
                    customers to the existence of the Banking Code. Such a campaign is important as the
                    Code is very much framed as a document advising customers as to what they can
                    expect from banks and how customers should protect their own interests. It has
                    numerous provisions designed to inform customers of their rights and to provide
                    helpful advice for customers to assist them in their dealings with banks.

Recommendation      The BSP should encourage implementation and publication of the Banking Code for
                    Consumer Protection by all relevant banks. This should be coupled with a public
                    awareness campaign so that consumers are aware of its provisions and a requirement
                    that the Banking Code be published on bank websites and readily made available in
                    bank branches and other banking outlets (such as agents).


Good Practice A.3   Appropriate    Allocation     between     Prudential    Supervision     and    Consumer
                    Protection
                    Whether prudential supervision of banks and consumer protection regarding
                    banking products and services are the responsibility of one organization or two
                    institutions, the allocation of resources to these functions should be adequate
                    to enable their effective implementation.
Description         Although BSP supervises relevant consumer protection laws through on-site and off-
                    site supervision and, through its Financial Consumer Affairs Group (FCAG), provides a
                    comprehensive external complaints resolution service, there are limitations in this
                    approach. From numerous meetings with BSP supervisory units and banks, it seems
                    to be the case that BSP seeks to actively supervise the consumer protection laws
                    currently in place. The limitation is that this supervision is currently carried out by the
                    same team that undertakes prudential supervision. On-site supervision is dependent
                    on annual visits (other than in exceptional cases approved by the Monetary Board or
                    the Governor).
                    Further, although the FCAG appears to provide a comprehensive complaint resolution
                    service, it does not currently have the power to pro-actively supervise market conduct
                    matters or conduct on-site supervision. However, if FCAG identifies a systemic issue
                    with the complaints that is handling, it will notify the Central Point of Contact, which is
                    the off-site supervision team for larger institutions, which may in turn notify the on-site
                    supervision team. An example of the effectiveness of this approach is the relatively
                    new rules on collection practices concerning credit cards. FCAG initially raised this
                    issue as a result of receiving multiple complaints. FCAG is nevertheless dependent on
                    action taken by the off-site supervision team - it is up to that team as to whether they
                    take action and the timing of that action. It may well be the case that the supervision
                    teams have other priorities and may be limited by the resources and the skill base that
                    they have. This issue will be exacerbated if BSP takes up other recommendations in
                    this report for further consumer protection measures (such as increased disclosure
                    requirements), which will increase the pressure for market conduct supervision.
                    The powers of FCAG will, however, be strengthened, if the proposed BSP Financial
                    Consumer Protection Framework is given the force of law. In that case there would
                    appear to be a commensurate need to increase FCAG’s resources.
Recommendation      Supervision of banking consumer protection laws should be separate from prudential
                    supervision and be properly resourced so as to encourage pro-active supervision and
                    to avoid conflicts between supervising financial institutions and protecting the interests
                    of their customers. A practicable way to achieve this would be to provide FCAG with
                    the relevant responsibilities (as we understand is currently proposed) on the
                    assumption that FCAG would also be given the resources to undertake these new
                    responsibilities.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 55
                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice A.4   Other Institutional Arrangements
                        a. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any
                           dispute regarding a consumer protection matter in respect of a banking
                           product or service is affordable, timely and professionally delivered.
                        b. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in
                           promoting banking consumer protection.
Description         There are special procedures for Small Claims Cases in the Philippines involving
                    amounts of up to 100,000 pesos. Further, the media seems to have no hesitation in
                    reporting on issues concerning banks. Examples of media activism were the reporting
                    of BSP regulation of ATM fees and reports about the Small Claims Cases procedures.
                    The Small Claims Procedure was provided for in a Supreme Court resolution dated
                    October 27, 2009 and commenced in 2010. Features of the Procedure are:
                            The Procedure is provided for by a Supreme Court Rule;
                            It applies to procedures before the Metropolitan Trial Courts, Municipal Trial
                             Courts in Cities, Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial Courts for
                             payment of money where the value of the claim does not exceed One
                             Hundred Thousand Pesos (P100,000.00) exclusive of interest and costs;
                            It applies to money owed under a contract of loan or a contract of mortgage
                             (as well as other claims and demands);
                            Lawyers are not permitted to represent parties; and
                            The required procedures are very much simplified as compared to those which
                             would normally apply in a Supreme Court matter.
                    Consumer associations do not seem to play a key role in relation to financial services.
                    A further concern is that the NCAC, as mentioned above, does not seem to have
                    adequate resources to fulfill its broad consumer protection mandate. The mission team
                    was advised that the NCAC has a very limited budget of around 2 million pesos and it
                    has only 3 full time staff. This mandate is established by the Consumer Act and would
                    appear to cover financial services as well as other services. The NCAC mandate is
                    described as follows in article 153:
                    “ARTICLE 153. Powers And Functions- The Council shall have the following powers
                    and functions:
                        a) to rationalize and coordinate the functions of the agencies charged with
                           consumer programs and enforcement of consumer related laws to the end
                           that an effective, coordinated and integrated system of consumer protection,
                           research and implementation and enforcement of such laws shall be achieve;
                        b) to recommend new policies and legislation or amendments to existing ones;
                        c) to monitor and evaluate implementation of consumer programs and projects
                           and to take appropriate steps to ensure that concerned agencies take
                           appropriate steps to comply with the establish priorities, standards and
                           guidelines;
                        d) to seek the assistance of government instrumentalities in the form of
                           augmenting the need for personnel, facilities and other resources; and
                        e) to undertake a continuing education and information campaign to provide the
                           consumer with, among others:
                           1) facts about consumer products and services;
                           2) consumer rights and the mechanism for redress available to him;
                           3) information on new concepts and developments on consumer protection;
                                 and
                           4) general knowledge and awareness necessary for a critical and better
                                 judgment on consumption;




                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 56
                                                                          I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                              5)   such other matters of importance to the consumer's general well-being.”
                    BSP holds regular meetings with the various banking associations and the
                    Compliance Officers in banks but not with consumer organizations.
                    Apart from FCAG and the NCAC, there do not appear to be any bodies external to
                    banking institutions to represent the interests of bank customers. The mission team
                    was not able to identify any relevant civil society groups which might be interviewed to
                    discuss issues relevant to consumers.
Recommendation      The mission team supports giving FCAG power to make decisions in relation to
                    complaints which bind the financial institution concerned. See also Good Practice E.2
                    on external dispute resolution schemes more generally.
                    Consideration might also be given by BSP to providing support for civil society groups
                    which represent the interests of consumers.


Good Practice A.5   Licensing
                    All banking institutions that provide financial services to consumers should be
                    subject to a licensing and regulatory regime to ensure their financial safety and
                    soundness and effective delivery of financial services.

Description         All banks in the Philippines are required to be licensed and to meet strong prudential
                    standards apparently designed to meet their safety and soundness.
                    The licensing requirements primarily arise under s.6 of the General Banking Law
                    which provides that:
                    No person or entity shall engage in banking operations or quasi-banking functions
                    without authority from the Bangko Sentral: Provided, however, That an entity
                    authorized by the Bangko Sentral to perform universal or commercial banking
                    functions shall likewise have the authority to engage in quasi-banking functions.
                    The General Banking Law further makes provision for wide ranging prudential and
                    “safety and soundness” requirements, including in relation to:
                            Organization, management and administration of banks (Chapter III);
                            The powers and investments of universal and commercial banks (Chapter IV,
                             Articles I and II);
                            Risk based capital (s. 34);
                            Limits on loans, credit accommodations and guarantees (s. 35);
                            Restrictions on exposures to relates parties (s. 36);
                            Minimum loan to security ratios (ss. 37, 38, 41 and 42 and see Good Practice
                             B.2);
                            The purpose of loans and other credit accommodations (s. 39);
                            Assessment of credit worthiness (s. 40);
                            Amortisation of loans (s. 44);
                            Prepayment of loans (s. 45);
                            Foreclosures of real estate mortgages (s. 47 and see Good Practice
                            Provisions for Losses and Write- offs (s. 49);
                            Investments (ss. 50 and 51);
                            The factors to be considered by the Monetary Board in determining whether a
                             bank is acting in an unsafe or unsound manner (s. 56);
                            A requirement to only declare dividends out of net profits (s. 57); and
                            Financial statements (ss. 60 and 61);
                    There are also provisions in the General Banking Act concerning the insolvency of
                    banks and giving BSP wide ranging powers to deal with banks in distress. They
                    include provisions on placing banks in conservatorship (s.67); voluntary liquidation
                    (s. 68) and receivership and involuntary liquidation (s. 69).

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 57
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                  The General Banking Act also contains provisions concerning the safety and
                  soundness of trust organisations (which may take deposits). This includes provisions
                  concerning registration (s. 79), minimum capital (s. 82), the required security deposit
                  (s. 84); a bond to be lodged with the relevant court by an administrator, trustee and
                  other persons (ss. 85 and 86); and investments by the trust (ss. 88 to 90).
                  The details of many of the abovementioned requirements are also contained in the
                  MORB, including (for example):
                          Basic Guidelines in establishing banks (X.102);
                          Minimum capitalization (X.111);
                          Risk based capital (X.115);
                          Directors. Officers and Employees (Section H);
                          Outsourcing of bank functions (X.162);
                          Risk Management (Section N);
                          Liquidation and Receivership (Section P);
                          Credit Exposure Limits (X.303); and
                          Loans and Other Credit Accommodations to Directors, Officers, Stockholders
                           and their Related Interests (X. 326 – 340).
                  The Thrift Banks Act, the Rural Banks Act, and the Cooperative Code also contain
                  provisions concerning the organization, ownership and capital requirements, powers,
                  BSP supervision and general conduct of business of thrift banks, rural banks and
                  cooperative banks. However it is clear that the provisions of the General Banking Law
                  also apply to such banks to the extent they are not inconsistent with the bank –
                  specific laws (s. 71).
                  The Foreign Banks Liberalisation Act also makes provision for the establishment of
                  foreign bank branches and subsidiaries in the Philippines. These provisions include
                  requirements for registration and minimum capital requirements.
Recommendations   There are no recommendations for the purposes of this Good Practice.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 58
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


SECTION B.          DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   Information on Customers
                        a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a bank should gather,
                           file and record sufficient information from the consumer to enable the
                           bank to render an appropriate product or service to that consumer.
                        b. The extent of information the bank gathers regarding a consumer
                           should:
                              (i) be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the product or
                                   service either being proposed to or sought by the consumer; and
                              (ii) enable the bank to provide a professional service to the consumer in
                                   accordance with that consumer’s capacity.

Description         Although there are strong (and important) laws in place requiring record keeping by
                    banks and requiring a thorough assessment of the credit worthiness of a customer,
                    there are not specific rules in place requiring an overall assessment of the needs of
                    needs of a customer as contemplated by this Good Practice.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Banks are subject to a variety of record keeping obligations but there do not appear to
                    be specific obligations relating to the keeping of those customer records which relate
                    to the customer’s product or service needs. For example, there are obligations relating
                                                                                         4
                    to the keeping of minimum records for internal control purposes , where the focus
                    seems very much to be on the keeping of accounting records. Further, under the AML
                    Act there are record keeping obligations in relation to evidence of a customer’s identity
                    and for transaction records:
                            s.9(a) requires covered institutions to “establish and record the true identity of
                             its clients based on official documents.”; and
                            s.9 (b) provides that “All records of all transactions of covered institutions shall
                             be maintained and safely stored for five (5) years from the dates of
                             transactions. With respect to closed accounts, the records on customer
                             identification, account files and business correspondence, shall be preserved
                             and safely stored for at least five (5) years from the dates when they were
                             closed.”
                    Paragraph (b)
                    There are no requirements of the type contemplated in this Good Practice.
                    It is recommended that consideration be given to requiring banks to keep written
Recommendation
                    records of the type described above, and including records on the recommendations
                    and advice that they provide to customers. Further, customers should be given a right
                    of access to such records.
                    This recommendation is in addition to the recommendation made in relation to Good
                    Practice C.3.




4
    MORB X185

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 59
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice B.2       Affordability
                             a. When a bank makes a recommendation regarding a product or service to
                                a consumer, the product or service it offers to that consumer should be
                                in line with the need of the consumer.
                             b. The consumer should be given a range of options to choose from to
                                meet his or her requirements.
                             c. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided to
                                the consumer to enable him or her to select the most suitable and
                                affordable product or service.
                             d. When offering a new credit product or service significantly increasing
                                the amount of debt assumed by the consumer, the consumer’s credit
                                worthiness should be properly assessed.
Description             There are provisions in place designed to ensure the affordability of loans made by
                        BSP regulated entities but there do not appear to be requirements for a needs
                        assessment, for consumers to be given a range of options or for consumers to be
                        given specific information.   Further, the consequences for a customer of an
                        irresponsible needs assessment are not clear.
                        Paragraph (a)
                        There is no requirement to this effect.
                        Paragraph (b)
                        There is no requirement to this effect.
                        Paragraph (c)
                        Although there are requirements in place for the disclosure of finance charges and
                        effective interest rates for certain credit products, it is not clear all credit products are
                        covered and there are no equivalent provisions relating to deposit products. In
                        summary, the relevant provisions require:
                             For loans: Disclosure of finance charges (which include interest, fees and all
                                                                                               5
                                 other charges); and disclosure of an effective interest rate ; and
                             For credit cards: dislcosure of an effective interest rate .
                                                                                            6


                        Details of these requirements are in Good Practice B.6, together with a discussion of
                        their limitations and recommendations for change.
                        For completeness we note that there are requirements of the type contemplated by
                        this Good Practice which apply to derivative products (see MORB Appendix 25).
                        Paragraph (d)
                        Regulated banks are required to undertake detailed credit worthiness assessments
                        and to ensure that secured loans meet specified loan to valuation ratios. The
                        obligation to undertake credit worthiness assessments arises primarily from the
                        General Banking Act which provides (in summary and emphasis added):




5
    Circular 730 and Truth in Lending Act
6
    MORB X320.4

                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 60
                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


        Before a bank grants credit, “a bank must ascertain that the debtor is
         capable of fulfilling his commitments to the bank. Toward this end, a bank
         may demand from its credit applicants a statement of their assets and
         liabilities and of their income and expenditures and such information as may
         be prescribed by law or by rules and regulations of Monetary Board to enable
         the bank to properly evaluate the credit application which includes the
         corresponding financial statements submitted for taxation purposes to the
         Bureau of Internal Revenue. Should such statements prove to be false or
         incorrect in any material detail, the bank may terminate any loan or other
         credit accommodation granted on the basis of said statements and shall have
         the right to demand immediate repayment or liquidation of the bligation.
         In formulating rules and regulations under this Section, the Monetary Board
         shall recognize the peculiar characteristics of microfinancing, such as cash
         flow-based lending to the basic sectors that are not covered by traditional
         collateral.”(s. 40).
Other relevant requirements are as follows:
        MORB X304.1 contains detailed provisions relating to the information and
         documents that a bank must require of an applicant for credit;

        Specfic provisions relating to credit cards are contained in MORB X320.3;

        MORB X320.3 contains detailed rules on the assessment of the credit
         worthiness of an applicant for a credit card;

        Subject to any contrary rules of the Monetary Baord, credit secured by real
         estate to have a maximum 75 percent loan to valuation ratio of real estate plus
         60 percent of the valuation of the insured’s improvements (s. 37). These
         percentage figures have each been changed to 70 percent in MORB X311;

        Subject to any contrary rules of the Monetary Baord, credit secured by chattels
         and intangible property to have a maximum loan to valuation ratio of 75
         percent of the secured property (s.38);

        The Monetary Baord can issue regulations as to maximum loan to valuation
         ratios for unsecured loans (s. 41); and
A bank is permitted to grant credit “only in amounts and for the periods of time
essential for the effective completion of the operations to be financed. Such
grant of loans and other credit accommodations shall be consistent with safe and
sound banking practices”. The purpose of all loans and other credit accommodations
shall be stated in the application and in the contract between the bank and the
borrower. If the bank finds that the proceeds of the loan or other credit accommodation
have been employed, without its approval, for purposes other than those agreed upon
with the bank, it shall have the right to terminate the loan or other credit
accommodation and demand immediate repayment of the obligation.” (s. 39). This
provision is somewhat ambuguous as it suggests that banks can only grant loans for
business purposes i.e. for “operations to be financed”. It would be helpful for s. 39 to
be clarified so that it is clear that there is not intented that there is any restriction on
the grant of credit for consumption purposes (which is probably the intent).




        Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 61
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendations     Consideration should be given to introducing requirements to ensure product suitability
                    for all banking products. In particular, it is considered that there should be training and
                    qualification requirements for staff or third party agents who advise on banking
                    products and services (or indeed other products and services distributed by banks
                    such as insurance or investment products), as well as requirements to ensure that
                    sufficient information about the customer’s needs is gathered so as to ensure that
                    appropriate products and services are provided.
                    The current regime requiring responsible lending practices should be reviewed with a
                    view to introducing provisions which protect a consumer from the consequences of
                    irresponsible lending and to ensuring consistency across different types of credit. A
                    court might, for example, be given the right to adjust the amounts payable under the
                    contract or order the discharge of a mortgage or make other changes to the contract
                    terms. The new provisions should apply consistently to different credit products and to
                    an increase in the amount of credit, as well as a new credit facility.


Good Practice B.3   Cooling-off Period
                        a. For financial products or services with a long-term savings component,
                           a bank should provide the consumer a cooling-off period of a reasonable
                           number of days (at least 3-5 business days) immediately following the
                           signing of any agreement between the bank and the consumer.
                        b. On his or her written notice to the bank during the cooling-off period, the
                           consumer should be permitted to cancel or treat the agreement as null
                           and void without penalty to the consumer of any kind.
Description         There is no requirement to this effect applicable to credit and debit banking products.

Recommendation      It is recommended that consideration be given to the introduction of a provision of the
                    type proposed by this Good Practice. It is, however, recognized that there may be a
                    need for some qualification to an automatic right of cooling off. For example, there
                    could be a right to retain reasonable administrative fees relating to the cancellation of
                    the contract or for the application for the facility. Further, it may be that the right should
                    not apply where there has been a drawdown of a credit facility and a bank should be
                    able to recover any loss arising from an early withdrawal of a fixed rate term deposit
                    which loss arises because of a difference in interest rates. This would be in addition to
                    any reasonable administrative fees associated with closure of the term deposit.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 62
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice B.4      Bundling and Tying Clauses
                           a. As much as possible, banks should avoid bundling services and
                              products and the use of tying clauses in contracts that restrict the
                              choice of consumers.
                           b. In particular, whenever a borrower is obliged by a bank to purchase any
                              product, including an insurance policy, as a pre-condition for receiving a
                              loan from the bank, the borrower should be free to choose the provider
                              of the product and this information should be made known to the
                              borrower.
Description            There are specific (and quite onerous) provisions in the MORB dealing with cross-
                       selling. However these provisions appear to be primarily focused on protecting the
                       bank, rather than on the consumer protection issues covered by this Good Practice.
                       Paragraph (a)
                       Banks in the Philippines do engage in the cross selling of insurance products and may
                       require mortgaged property insurance for secured loans. This may include life and
                       general insurance products. It is understood that commissions are not always
                       separately disclosed.
                       Paragraph (b)
                       There are various restrictions on cross – selling but they do not relate to the issues
                       covered by this Good Practice. For example:
                               A bank is prohibited from tele-marketing credit cards and insurance products
                                                                                               7
                                and cross-selling except as permitted by the Monetary Board . Further, there
                                are strict requirements for universal and commercial banks as to the
                                information that a bank must provide to BSP when seeking approval to cross-
                                sell products. This information primarily relates to compliance with prudential
                                              8
                                requirements ;

                               Universal and commercial banks must make a clear distinction between bank
                                products and those of its allied undertakings (such as an insurance company)
                                so as to avoid any misunderstanding as to whether the third party product is
                                                 9
                                protected by PDIC ; and

                               There are also requirements relating to the disclosure of insurance premiums
                                payable in connection with loans and credit cards (but not other types of
                                revolving credit products). However, there does not appear to be a
                                                                     10
                                requirement to disclose commissions.
                                                                                   11
                       It is also clear that insurance premiums can be financed.
                       There is a specific requirement relating to the minimum required insurance over
                                         12
                       secured property.




7
    MORB X162.11 and X162.12
8
    MORB S. 1172.2-4
9
    MORB S. 1172.1 and 1172.5
10
     MORB X307.1 (e) and X320.3
11
     MORB X307.1(e)
12
     MORB X311.3

                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 63
                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendation      Subject to limited exceptions, it is recommended that a clear prohibition be introduced
                    on insurance forcing practices, coupled with disclosure and rebate provisions. Such a
                    prohibition should apply to a requirement to acquire an insurance policy from a
                    particular insurer and to a requirement to pay for such service, in either case as a
                    condition of providing a banking service (such as a loan). Further, where there is a tied
                    insurance contract, banks should be required to give a proportionate refund of the
                    applicable premium if the consumer pays out a loan early and to disclose separately
                    all applicable commissions and premiums. The exceptions might relate to insurance
                    over mortgaged property, mortgage indemnity insurance and insurance which is
                    required by law (such as third party motor vehicle insurance).


Good Practice B.5   Preservation of Rights
                    Except where permitted by applicable legislation, in any communication or
                    agreement with a consumer, a bank should not exclude or restrict, or seek to
                    exclude or restrict:
                        (i) any duty to act with skill, care and diligence toward the consumer in
                             connection with the provision by the bank of any financial service or
                             product; or
                        (ii) any liability arising from the bank’s failure to exercise its duty to act with
                             skill, care and diligence in the provision of any financial service or
                             product to the consumer.
Description         Although the mission team saw some examples of terms and conditions which purport
                    to waive statutory rights, it is not clear whether this is a widespread practice.
Recommendation      It should be clear that any purported waiver of statutory rights given to a consumer is
                    of no effect.


Good Practice B.6   Regulatory Status Disclosure
                    In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio or otherwise, a bank
                    should disclose the fact that it is a regulated entity and the name and contact
                    details of the regulator.
Description         Although the MORB contains provisions concerning advertising by banks, the mission
                    team was not able to identify a specific requirement of the type described in this Good
                              13
                    Practice.
Recommendation      It is recommended that a requirement of the type described in this Good Practice be
                    introduced.




13
     MORB X104.1

                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 64
                                                                            I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice B.7   Terms and Conditions
                       a.    Before a consumer opens a deposit, current (checking) or loan account
                             at a bank, the bank should make available to the consumer a written
                             copy of its general terms and conditions, as well as all terms and
                             conditions that apply to the account to be opened. Collectively, these
                             Terms and Conditions should include:
                             (i)    disclosure of details of the bank’s general charges;
                             (ii)   a summary of the bank’s complaints procedures;
                             (iii) a statement regarding the existence of the office of banking
                                   ombudsman or equivalent institution and basic information relating
                                   to its process and procedures;
                             (iv) information about any compensation scheme that the bank is a
                                  member of;
                             (v)    an outline of the action and remedies which the bank may take in
                                    the event of a default by the consumer;
                             (vi) the principles-based code of conduct, if any, referred to in A.2
                                  above;
                             (vii) information on the methods of computing interest rates paid by or
                                   charged to the consumer, any relevant non-interest charges or fees
                                   related to the product offered to the consumer;
                             (viii) any service charges to be paid by the consumer, restrictions, if any,
                                    on account transfers by the consumer, and the procedures for
                                    closing an account; and
                             (ix) clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer should
                                  follow in the case of unauthorized transactions in general, and
                                  stolen cards in particular, as well as the bank’s liability in such
                                  cases facilitates the reading of every word.
                       b.    The Terms and Conditions should be written in plain language and in a
                             font size and spacing that facilitates the reader’s comprehension.
Description         There is no requirement for disclosure of all terms and conditions although there are
                    detailed provisions concerning disclosure of specified information and a requirement
                    for certain credit card disclosures to be in 12 point font.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    There are general disclosure requirements applying under the Consumer Act as well
                    as specific provisions which apply to regulated banks.
                    The general provisions applying under the Consumer Act in relation to loans not being
                    open-ended credit and not being part of a credit sale transactions are requirements to
                    disclose:
                    “a) the amount of credit of which the debtor will have the actual use, or which is or will
                    be paid to him or for his account or to another person on his behalf;
                    b) all charges, individually, itemized, which are included in the amount of credit
                    extended but which are included in the amount of credit extended but which are not
                    part of the finance charge;
                    c) the total amount to be financed or the sum of the amounts referred to in paragraphs
                    (a) and (b);
                    d) the finance charge expressed in terms of pesos and centavos;
                    e) the effective interest rate;

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 65
                                                                          I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                                                                                                        14
                   f) the percentage that the finance charge bears to the total amount to be financed. ”.
                   Similar provisions apply in relation to a loan which is part of a credit sale and in
                   relation to open-ended credit plans (Articles 140 and 141). There are, however, some
                   variations to take account of the nature of the facility. For example, for credit sales
                   there is a requirement to disclose the cash price or delivered price of the property or
                                                                                  15
                   service to be acquired and the amount of any down payment. For open-ended credit
                   contracts there are requirements to disclose when a finance charge will be payable
                                                             16
                   and how the finance charge is calculated.
                   Following amendments to the Truth in Lending Act requirements provided for by BSP
                   Circular 730, the required items of information to be disclosed to specified borrowers
                   by regulated banks in relation to loan accounts are as follows (emphasis added):
                   “X307.2 Information to be disclosed. As a general rule, loan terms shall be
                   disclosed to all types of borrower. For small business/retail/consumer credit the
                   following are the minimum information to be disclosed (sample form in
                   Appendix 19):
                   a. The total amount to be financed;
                   b. The finance charges expressed in terms of pesos and centavos;
                   c. The net proceeds of the loan; and
                   d. The percentage that the finance charge bears to the total amount to be financed
                   expressed as a simple annual rate or an effective annual interest rate (EIR) as
                   described in item h of Subsection x307.1. EIR may also be quoted as a monthly rate in
                   parallel with the quotation of the contractual rate.
                   Banks are required to furnish to each borrower a copy of the disclosure statement,
                   prior to the consummation of the transaction."
                   The terms “finance charge”, “simple annual rate” and “effective interest rate”           are
                   defined in Circular 730 as follows:
                   “g. Finance charge includes interest, fees, service charges, discounts, and such other
                   charges incident to the extension of credit.
                   h. Simple annual rate is the uniform percentage which represents the ratio between
                   the finance charge and the amount to be financed under the assumption that the loan
                   is payable in one year with single payment upon maturity and there are no upfront
                   deductions to principal.
                   For loans with terms different from the above assumptions, the effective annual
                   interest (ElR) rate shall be calculated and disclosed to the borrower as the relevant
                   true cost of the loan comparable to the concept of simple annual rate.
                   For loans with contractual interest rates stated on monthly basis, the effective interest
                   rate may be expressed as a monthly rate.




14
     Article 142
15
     Article 140
16
     Article 141

                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 66
                                                                            I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                   In accordance with the Philippine Accounting standards (PAS) definition, effective
                   interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash flows through the
                   life of the loan to the net amount of loan proceeds. For consistency, methodology and
                   standards for discounted cash flow models shall be prescribed to be used for the
                   purpose.”
                   There are also specific disclosure requirement for credit cards issued by banks or their
                   affiliates or subsidiaries. In summary, the requirements are for disclosure of:
                            Non-finance charges i.e. those not related to the provision of credit (such as
                             insurance premiums);

                            The percentage that interest bears to the total amount to be financed
                             expressed as a simple monthly
                             or annual rate, as the case may be, on the outstanding balance of the
                             obligation;

                            The effective interest rate per annum;

                            Information about payments due in relation to instalment loans (but it is not
                             clear why this is relevant to credit cards);

                            The conditions for imposing interest (such as an interest free period);

                            Information about how default rates and delinquency charges are calculated;

                            Information about interest rates and how each rate applies;

                            Information about fees; and
                                                                      17
                   Information about foreign currency transactions.
                   The following disclosure requirements must be met in relation to deposits:
                   “Sec. X243 Disclosure of Effective Rates of Interest. Banks are required to disclose to
                   depositors the following information on interest computation and payments:
                       a. Type/kind of deposit;

                       b. Nominal rate of interest and period covered;

                       c.    Manner of interest payment, i.e., whether credited in advance or otherwise;

                       d. Basis of interest payment, i.e., whether based on average daily balance
                          compounded quarterly or otherwise;
                       e. Effective rate of interest expressed as a simple annual rate, on the basis of the
                          information above given and indicating the formula used to arrive at the
                          effective rate of interest; and Illustration of basis of computing interest on a
                          hypothetical deposit account.
                   Copies of the abovementioned information shall be made available to each and every
                   depositor by attaching these copies to savings deposit passbooks and time deposit
                   certificates. Posters disclosing the above information and aggregate deposit rates
                   shall also be displayed conspicuously within the bank premises. ”




17
     MORB X320.4

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 67
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                 The abovementioned requirements, while very useful, are limited in that they require
                 disclosure of specified information but do not require disclosure of all terms and
                 conditions. Further, information about the following subjects referred to in paragraph
                 (a) of this Good Practice is not required (in summary):
                         So far as deposits are concerned – bank charges;
                         Complaints procedures (including FCAG);
                         Information about PDIC (but see Good Practice F.1 below);
                         Action by the bank on default;
                         Action in the event of unauthorized transactions; or
                         The Banking Code.
                 Paragraph (b)
                 There is also not an overall requirement for clear language or minimum font sizes.
                 This is clearly a concern as the mission team reviewed terms and conditions for some
                 products which were virtually unreadable because the font size was so small.
Recommendation   Ideally, there would be a comprehensive, consistent contractual disclosure regime
                 applied to banking services which goes beyond the current Truth in Lending regime
                 and the disclosure rules for deposit products credit cards. The new rules should
                 require disclosure of all applicable terms and conditions, as well as disclosure of the
                 more important information. For credit products this should include requirements for
                 disclosure of, at a minimum: the amount borrowed, the applicable interest rate and
                 total interest charges, details of all fees and charges, whether interest rates are fixed
                 or variable, the method of calculating interest charges (flat or on a declining basis); the
                 amount and frequency of repayments, of any security given and the applicable default
                 rate of interest; any applicable insurance premiums and commissions and a
                 requirement to give reasonable notice of changes (say 20 days). For deposit products
                 the minimum information should include the applicable interest rate, details of all fees
                 and charges, whether interest rates are fixed or variable, the method of calculating
                 interest charges (flat or on a declining basis); and any minimum balance requirement.
                 Similarly, there should be a requirement for pre –contractual disclosure of all terms
                 and applicable charges relevant to electronic banking and e-banking channels.
                 This is the minimum information that should be given to customers if they are to be
                 able to make an informed decision about the service and to be fully aware of their
                 rights and responsibilities.
                 Contract documents could also be made comprehensible through summaries of key
                 information, clear language and format and explanations from bank staff in appropriate
                 cases.     This might be achieved by          implementing the following specific
                 recommendations:
                         A Key Facts Statement should be provided on the first page of every contract
                          summarizing the key terms. See Good Practice B.8 for further details;
                         Contracts should be both intelligible and legible and in a minimum of 12 point
                          font;
                         Contract documents should be explained to customers who would not
                          otherwise understand them; and
                         Customers should be given time to consider documents before the contract is
                          signed.
                     Recommendations in relation to electronic banking are in Good Practice C.7.




                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 68
                                                                          I. Good Practices: Banking Sector



Good Practice B.8   Key Facts Statement
                        a. A bank should have a summary statement, such as a Key Facts
                           Statement, for each of its accounts, types of loans or other products or
                           services and provide these to its customers and potential customers.
                        b. The summary statement should be written in plain language and
                           summarize in a page or two the key terms and conditions of the specific
                           banking product or service.
                        c. Prior to a consumer opening any account at, or signing any loan
                           agreement with, the bank, the consumer should have delivered a signed
                           statement to the bank to the effect that he or she has duly received, read
                           and understood the relevant summary Statement from the bank.
                        d. Summary statements throughout the banking sector should be written in
                           such a way as to allow consumers the possibility of easily comparing
                           products that are being offered by a range of banks.
Description         The Truth in Lending Act makes provision for a simplified form of disclosure of certain
                    essential loan terms. However, it is not clear that the sample format provided is
                    mandatory, there are certain key items of information which are missing (such as the
                    total amount to be repaid including the principal, the interest charges and all
                    mandatory fees and charges) and ideally there would be specific form and content
                    requirements. Further, there is no requirement for a Key Facts Statement for non-loan
                    banking products.
                    Paragraphs (a) and (b)
                    See Good Practice B.7 for a description of the relevant law.
                    There are key items of information which are not included in the Appendix 19
                    Statement. They include:
                         the total amount to be repaid including the principal, the interest charges and
                           all mandatory fees and charges (this information can be useful for comparison
                           purposes);
                         the term of the loan;
                         the total amount of repayments; and
                         information about any security which must be provided (for example, in the
                           case of a housing loan secured by real estate).
                    Other concerns in relation to the Circular 730 requirements are that:
                        The above “missing” information is not in any event part of the mandatory
                            information which must be provided under the terms of Circular 730;
                        The Appendix 19 Statement seems to be provided as a sample, rather than a
                            mandatory form of disclosure and there is no requirement for a minimum font
                            size (say 12 point font); and
                    Circular 730 only applies to loan contracts. It does not, for example, apply to credit
                    cards or deposit products.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 69
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendation         It is recommended that consideration be given to amending the requirements of
                       Circular 730 so that is clear that the use of the prescribed form is mandatory, it is
                       required to be in a minimum of a 12 point font and so that the mandated information
                       required to be disclosed includes all key terms of a loan contract. In particular, it is
                       considered that the required information should also include the total amount to be
                       repaid, the term of the loan, the total amount of repayments and information about any
                       security which must be provided (for example, in the case of a housing loan secured
                       by real estate).
                       It is also recommended that consideration be given to new requirements to provide a
                       “Key Facts Statement” for non – loan banking products. Examples are revolving credit
                       products (such as credit cards and overdrafts) and deposit products.


Good Practice B.9       Advertising and Sales Materials
                            a. Banks should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
                               procedures do not mislead customers.
                            b. All advertising and sales materials of banks should be easily readable
                               and understandable by the general public.
                            c. Banks should be legally responsible for all statements made in their
                               advertising and sales materials (i.e. be subject to the penalties under
                               the law for making any false or misleading statements).
Description             Whilst there are general requirements relating to advertising as well as specific
                        requirements relating to credit advertising which go some way to meeting the issues
                        covered by this Good Practice, it is important that they are enforced.
                        Paragraph (a)
                        There are various provisions in the MORB specifically relating to regulated banks
                        which appear aimed at ensuring that advertising is not misleading and deceptive
                        (emphasis added):
                                 There is a general provision relating to advrtisements whcih might mislead
                                  depositors and to false claims etc, and concering banking services more
                                  generally: “c. No bank shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement
                                  tending to mislead a depositor into believing that he will get more in benefits
                                  than what the bank is legally authorized to give. No bank advertisement shall
                                  contain any false claim or exaggerated representation as to its liquidity,
                                                                                      18
                                  solvency, resources, deposits or banking services.” ;
                                 There is a prohibiion on advertisements which “degrade, deprecate or
                                                                                                 19
                                  otherwise prejudice other banking and financial institutions .” ; and
                                 There is also a provision requiring “proper advertising disclosures”
                                                                 20
                                  concerning e-banking services .




18
     MORB X104 (c)
19
     MORB X104 (a)
20
     MORB Appendix 70b, para (2) (d)

                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 70
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                        The following provisions of the Consumer Act are also relevant in this context:
                                 There is a prohibition on false, misleading and deceptive advertising (Article
                                  110);
                                 There are restrictions on misleading price comparisons (Article 111);
                                 There is a prohibition on advertisements making claims about amounts of
                                  credit payments or installments or down payments unless the credit provider
                                  customarily arranges the relevant payment, installment or amount (Article
                                  113); and
                                 Advertisements about open-ended credit plans (e.g. for credit cards or
                                  cheques) must disclose “the rate of interest and other material features of the
                                  plan…” (Article 114); and
                        There is a probihibiton on misrepresentations              and   false   impressions   in
                                                              21
                        advertisements relating to derivatives .
                        It is also to be noted that, for the purposes of the AML Law, “ False, deceptive or
                                                                                      22
                        misleading advertisements” are treated as unlawful activities. This in turn suggests
                                                                               23
                        that they are intended to be prohibited at general law. The position could, however,
                        be clearer.
                        Paragraph (b)
                        There is not a specific requirement to this effect.
                        Paragraph (c)
                        MORB X104(g) makes it clear that “Responsibility for compliance with the above rules
                        and regulations rests with the bank officers or directors who caused the approval or
                        placement of such advertisement.”
Recommendation          It would provide clarity in the long term for there to be a general prohibition on
                        misleading and deceptive conduct and false and misleading statements in relation to
                        the sale, distribution and management of banking products and services (as well as
                        other financial products and services). In any event, as mentioned in relation to Good
                        Practice A.1, it is important that the application of the Consumer Act to banks be
                        clarified and, in the context of this Good Practice, it is especially important that the
                        provisions of the Consumer Act relating to advertising are enforced so far as banks
                        are concerned (as well as those in the MORB).




21
     MORB Appendix 26, Section III
22
 MORB, Appendix 52, Article 3i, para. 82
23
 MORB, Appendix 52, Article 3i, para. 79

                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 71
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice B.10    Third-Party Guarantees
                      A bank should not advertise either an actual or future deposit or interest rate
                      payable on a deposit as being guaranteed or partially guaranteed unless there
                      is a legally enforceable agreement between the bank and a third party who or
                      which has provided such a guarantee. In the event such an agreement exists,
                      the advertisement should state:
                            (i) the extent of the guarantee;
                            (ii) the name and contact details of the party providing the guarantee;
                                 and
                      in the event the party providing the guarantee is in any way connected to the
                      bank, the precise nature of that relationship.
Description           There is not a specific requirement to this effect in the Philippines, although there are
                      general requirements relating to advertising and, of most relevance, a requirement
                      that advertisements relating to deposits and banking services generally. Of particular
                      relevance in MORB 104 (c), which provides that:
                              “No bank shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement tending to
                              mislead a depositor into believing that he will get more in benefits than what
                              the bank is legally authorized to give. No bank advertisement shall contain
                              any false claim or exaggerated representation as to its liquidity, solvency,
                              resources, deposits or banking services.”
                      It is also to be noted that, for the purposes of the AML Law, “ False representations in
                      advertisements as the existence of a warranty or guarantee” are treated as unlawful
                      activities. This in turn suggests that they are intended to be prohibited at general
                            24
                      law. The position could, however, be clearer.
Recommendation        If there is a practice in the Philippines of referring to guarantees of applicable interest
                      rates (for both debit and credit facilities) then it would be helpful to also require
                      disclosure of the information referred to in Good Practice B.10.




24
 MORB, Appendix 52, Article 3i, para. 79

                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 72
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice B.11      Professional Competence
                            a. In order to avoid any misrepresentation of fact to a consumer, any bank
                               staff member who deals directly with consumers, or who prepares bank
                               advertisements (or other materials of the bank for external distribution),
                               or who markets any service or product of the bank should be familiar
                               with the legislative, regulatory and code of conduct guidance
                               requirements relevant to his or her work, as well as with the details of
                               any product or service of the bank which he or she sells or promotes.
                            b. Regulators and associations of banks should collaborate to establish
                               and administer minimum competency requirements for any bank staff
                               member who: (i) deals directly with consumers, (ii) prepares any Key
                               Facts Statement or any advertisement for the bank, or (iii) markets the
                               bank’s services and products.
Description             There are no general requirements of the type described relating to professional
                        competence of bank staff and no obligation to collaborate as envisaged by this Good
                        Practice.
                        Paragraph (a)
                        The mission team was told by the banks we met with that there are training programs
                        conducted on a regular basis in relation to the products and services that the bank
                        provides and, to at least some extent, in relation to regulatory requirements. However,
                        there are limited requirements currently in relation to the matters mentioned in this
                        Good Practice, which will become more relevant if the recommendations made by the
                        mission team are accepted. Then it will become even more important that staff
                        understand their duties and obligations, and customer rights, under relevant laws.
                        The limited requirements that currently exist relate to training requirements for:
                                 Directors, officers and other personnel of RBs/Coop Banks as required by
                                  BSP;
                            
                                                                    25
                                  Directors and officers of a bank;
                                 Those officers engaged in investement banking under the terms of a licence
                                                          26
                                  for investment banking;
                            
                                                                                             27
                                  Officers and staff responsible for microcredit operations;
                            
                                                  28
                                  Trust officers;
                            
                                                                  29
                                  UIT fund martketing personnel ; and
                            
                                                                                              30
                                  Employees engaged in anti-money laundering programs.
                        Paragraph (b)
                        As far as the mission team is aware, no such collaboration exists.




25
     MORB s. 3147
26
     Appendix 3
27
     MORB X268.3
28
     MORB S. 2404 (f)
29
     MORB X410.8
30
     MORB X801.3

                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 73
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector




Recommendation      It is considered that, at a minimum, it should be a banking license condition that the
                    bank in question must ensure that their staff, third party agents and authorized
                    representatives are adequately trained and have the skills, experience and
                    professional qualifications necessary to ensure that they can competently carry out
                    their functions. This would include, for example, a requirement that those staff and
                    others who provide financial product advice have all the competencies and
                    qualifications required to ensure that they perform the services that they are
                    authorized to provide to an acceptable standard.
                    Further, as mentioned in Good Practice B.3, consideration should be given to
                    introducing express requirements to ensure product suitability. In particular, it is
                    considered that there should be training and qualification requirements for staff or
                    third party agents who advise on banking products and services, as well as
                    requirements to ensure that sufficient information about the customer’s needs is
                    gathered so as to ensure that appropriate products and services are provided.


SECTION C.          CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Statements
                        a. Unless a bank receives a customer’s prior signed authorization to the
                           contrary, the bank should issue, and provide the customer free of
                           charge, a monthly statement of every account the bank operates for the
                           customer.
                        b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions concerning the
                           account during the period covered by the statement; and (ii) provide
                           details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during the period
                           covered by the statement.
                        c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment
                           required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder
                           makes only the required minimum payment.
                        d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly indicate
                           the amount paid during the period covered by the statement, the total
                           outstanding amount still owing, the allocation of payment to the
                           principal and interest and, if applicable, the up-to-date accrual of taxes
                           paid.
                        e. A bank should notify a customer of long periods of inactivity of any
                           account of the customer and provide a reasonable final notice in writing
                           to the customer if the funds are to be treated as unclaimed money.
                        f.   When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such statements
                             should be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable format.




                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 74
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description            Other than in relation to checks, the current regulatory framework does not require
                       banks to give customers regular statements of account or up-dated account
                       information on request, although it is understood that, as a matter of practice, some
                       banks make such statements available. This information would enable customers to
                       check for the accuracy of balances and debits and credits and generally facilitate
                       management of their accounts. This is particularly important for long term and
                       revolving credit facilities (such as an overdraft or a credit card contract) and variable
                       rate contracts.
                       Check account statements must be provided monthly but there are no requirements
                       as to the information that must be in such statements. The MORB simply requires:
                       “In case of checking accounts, the banks shall ensure that the monthly statement of
                                                       31
                       accounts reach the depositors.”
                       The Banking Code contemplates that statements may be provided but acknowledges
                       that “The availability of the statements of accounts and the frequency of its publication
                                                                                               32
                       and release depend on the feature of the financial product or service ”
Recommendation         At a minimum, there should be a requirement for regular periodic statements of
                       account to be provided to the holders of both debit and credit products. We suggest
                       that the relevant period be at least monthly in the case of a line of credit facility (such
                       as a credit card or an overdraft) and otherwise six monthly (such as for a home loan).
                       Such statements should provide details of the following matters in the applicable
                       period:
                                The opening and closing balances;
                                All debit and credit transactions in the applicable period (including details of
                                 any saction);
                                Any amount currently payable and the date it became due;
                                Any amounts currently overdue and when each such amount became due;
                                Separate itemization of any fees and charges debited in the period;
                                Clear specification of any interest debited or credited in the relevant period;
                                The applicable interest rate in the relevant period; and
                                The amount of any interest charge or payment debited or credited to the
                                 account.
                       Statements could be required to be given electronically or in person as well as by
                       post. If these avenues are not reasonably practicable, statements should at least be
                       available to the customer on request.
                       Exceptions to the new requirement should be allowed for as appropriate. For
                       example, there might be exceptions for fixed rate contracts, for loans which have
                       been written off and for facilities where there have not been any debits or credits in
                       the relevant period.
                       We also recommend that customers be given advance notice if an account is to be
                       closed and if moneys are to be treated as unclaimed money.




31
     MORB X185.12(c)
32
     MORB S.B 1.d

                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 75
                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice C.2   Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-interest Charges
                        a. A customer of a bank should be notified in writing by the bank of any
                           change in:
                              (i)    The interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the
                                     customer as soon as possible; and
                              (ii)   A non-interest charge on any account of the customer a
                                     reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the change.
                        b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she
                           should have the right to exit the contract without penalty, provided such
                           right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                        c. The bank should inform the customer of the foregoing right whenever a
                           notice of change under paragraph a. is made by the bank.
                    Description
                    There does not appear to be an obligation to inform a customer directly of a change
                    to interest rates or fees and charges. However, it is clear that a customer can pre-pay
                    a loan early for any reason (even a fixed rate loan) and that there is no practicable
                    impediment to closing a deposit account.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Although banks may have a practice of notifying customers about changes to interest
                    rates and fees and charges, either directly or through their website or by way of
                    notices in branches, there does not seem to be a legal requirement to do so. However
                    the Banking Code contemplates that there should be at least a practice of giving such
                    notice. Paragraph 1(a) of section B provides in this regard:
                    “Established practice requires your bank to advise you through various ways, of
                    changes in the features and/or cost of its regular products and services, prior to their
                    effective date, or as may be required by regulation.
                    Your bank may state in its notices/advisories the reason for the changes in
                    product/service features and/or cost.
                    Your bank will post the information on changes in its product features and/or prices in
                    any or combination of the following:
                             Website;
                             ATM screens;
                             Statement-of-account notice;
                             Statement-of-account insert;
                             Posters in its offices including branches;
                             Phone banking;
                             E-mail.”




                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 76
                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                   Paragraph (b)
                   There do not appear to be impediments to terminating a banking contract early, even
                   a fixed rate loan contract. On the contrary, there is a Consumer Act provision to the
                                                                                           33
                   effect that all credit contracts can be prepaid early, without penalty. The General
                   Banking Law also provides that the credit can be pre-paid in whole or in part subject
                                                                                        34
                   to “such reasonable terms and conditions as may be agreed ”. There is also
                   apparently no cost for closing a deposit account.
                   Paragraph (c)
                   It does not appear to be the case that any such warning is given.
Recommendation     It is recommended, at a minimum, that there be a legal requirement for a customer be
                   given notice of changes in interest charges, repayments and fees and charges as
                   follows:
                            Notice of a change in interest rates should be given before the change takes
                             effect, either personally or by newspaper notice. In the latter case, the notice
                             should be also be given in the next statement of account.
                            There should be at least 20 days advance, personalized notice of a change in
                             the amount of a repayment (but if it is a reduction, it could be notified in the
                             next statement of account); and
                   20 days advance, personalised notice of a change in the amount of a fee, or a new
                   fee should also be given.




33
     Article 119
34
     S.45

                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 77
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice C.3   Customer Records
                     a. A bank should maintain up-to-date records in respect of each customer of
                        the bank that contain the following:
                            (i)        a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and
                                       provide the customer’s profile;
                            (ii)       the customer’s address, telephone number and all other customer
                                       contact details;
                            (iii)      any information or document in connection with the customer that
                                       has been prepared in compliance with any statute, regulation or
                                       code of conduct;
                            (iv)       details of all products and services provided by the bank to the
                                       customer;
                            (v)        a copy of correspondence from the customer to the bank and vice-
                                       versa and details of any other information provided to the customer
                                       in relation to any product or service offered or provided to the
                                       customer;
                            (vi)       all documents and applications of the bank completed, signed and
                                       submitted to the bank by the customer;
                            (vii)      a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in
                                       support of an application by the customer for the provision of a
                                       product or service by the bank; and
                            (viii)     any other relevant information concerning the customer.
                    A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period for
                    retaining all such records and, throughout this period, the customer should be
                    provided ready access to all such records free of charge or for a reasonable
                    fee.
Description         Although there are requirements concerning the keeping of records about credit and
                    other documentation files, complaints, electronic funds transfer transactions, there are
                    no overarching requirements relating to the keeping of customer records in general.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Although customer records are likely to be kept in practice, there are no record
                    keeping obligations of the general type contemplated in the legislation we have
                    reviewed. There are, however, the following specific requirements:
                                  There are obligations on regulated banks relating to the keeping of minimum
                                                                        35
                                   records for internal control purposes , where the focus seems very much to
                                   be on the keeping of accounting records;




35
     MORB X185

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 78
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                             Under the AML Act there are extensive record keeping obligations, whcih have
                              been expanded by provisions in the MORB. in relation to evidence of a
                              customer’s identity and for transaction records, s.9(a) requires covered
                              institutions to “establish and record the true identity of its clients based on
                              official documents.”. s.9(b) also provides that “All records of all transactions of
                              covered institutions shall be maintained and safely stored for five (5) years
                              from the dates of transactions. With respect to closed accounts, the records
                              on customer identification, account files and business correspondence, shall
                              be preserved and safely stored for at least five (5) years from the dates when
                              they were closed.” Further, the MORB expressly provides requirments to keep
                              records of identification documentation and transactions for 5 years from the
                                              36
                              relevant event.
                             Banks and their affiliate / subsidiary credit card companies are required to
                              have written policies, procedures and internal control guidelines about various
                                                            37
                              matters, including complaints. Further, MORB s. 9.2.a in Appendix 52 makes
                              clear that the required records include the full and true identity of the owners
                              or holders of the accounts involved in the covered transactions and all other
                              customer identification documents.
                             Rural and cooperative banks have extensive record keeping requirments set
                              out in MORB Appendix 50, including in relation to keeping records of
                              complaints and court proceedings (whcih must be kept permanently) and a
                              “catch all” requirement to keep records of all transactions (including loans and
                              investments, disposal of assets, deposit liabilities and borrowings,
                              expenditures and income, disbursements and disposal of assets. These
                              records have to be kept for 10 years from the date when the account or the
                              matter was closed /disposed/settled.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Customers do not appear to have a right of access to their customer records, other
                    than as provided for by the Data Privacy Act.
Recommendation      It is recommended that consideration be given to expanding the record keeping
                    obligations of a bank so as to explicitly require retention of the following customer
                    records (as well as those currently provided for as described above):
                             Contact details of the customer and of any security provider;
                             Details of all products and services provided to the customer;
                             All account information relevant to each such service (i.e. not just cusotmer
                              transaction information – details of all debits and credits, interest rates and
                              fees and charges should also be retained);
                             Full details of any collateral provided for a loan;
                             All communications related to the account; and
                             A copy of any disclosures made to the customer or any security provider
                              (including a copy of the terms and conditions of the account).
                    Consideration should also be given to requiring records to be kept for a minimum
                    period after termination of the business relationship with the customer (such as 5
                    years).
                    It is also recommended that customers be given a right of access to their personal
                    information held by a bank.



36
 MORB Appendix 52, rule 9.2
37
 MORB X320.2 (p)

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 79
                                                                          I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice C.4   Paper and Electronic Checks
                       a. The law and code of conduct should provide for clear rules on the
                          issuance and clearing of paper checks that include, among other things,
                          rules on:
                            (i)     checks drawn on an account that has insufficient funds;
                            (ii)    the consequences of issuing a check without sufficient funds;
                            (iii)   the duration within which funds of a cleared check should be
                                    credited into the customer’s account;
                            (iv)    the procedures on countermanding or stopping payment on a
                                    check by a customer;
                            (v)     charges by a bank on the issuance and clearance of checks;
                            (vi)    liability of the parties in the case of check fraud; and
                            (vii)   error resolution.
                       b. A customer should be told of the consequences of issuing a paper check
                          without sufficient funds at the time the customer opens a checking
                          account.
                       c. A bank should provide the customer with clear, easily accessible and
                          understandable information regarding electronic checks, as well the cost
                          of using them.
                       d. In respect of electronic or credit card checks , a bank should inform each
                          customer in particular:
                            (i)     how the use of a credit card check differs from the use of a credit
                                    card;
                            (ii)    of the interest rate that applies and whether this differs from the
                                    rate charged for credit card purchases;
                            (iii)   when interest is charged and whether there is an interest free
                                    period, and if so, for how long;
                            (iv)  whether additional fees or charges apply and, if so, on what basis
                                  and to what extent; and
                            whether the protection afforded to the customer making a purchase
                            using a credit card check differs from that afforded when using a credit
                            card and, if so, the specific differences.
                       e. Credit card checks should not be sent to a consumer without the
                          consumer’s prior written consent.
                       f.   There should be clear rules on procedures                  for     dealing   with
                            authentication, error resolution and cases of fraud.




                        Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 80
                                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description                     The New Central Bank Act has provisions concerning the issue and legal effect of
                                                                       38
                                demand deposits in the form of checks , but does not specifically address the issues
                                covered by this Good Practice. Nor does the Banking Code, although it does contain
                                                                                  39
                                advice on security issues associated with checks.
                                Paragraph (a)
                                There are limited rules on the issuance and clearing of checks, but there is not a
                                strong focus on providing for the consumer protection concerns inherent in this Good
                                Practice. For example:
                                          There are stringent penalties for issuing a check which is later dishonored,
                                                                                                                 40
                                           but there is no obligation to warn the customer of those consequences; and

                                          MORB X203 has detailed rules concerning the dishonour and return of
                                           checks but again there is no obligation to advise customers of what these
                                           rules are.
                                Paragraph (b)
                                There is no such obligation to advise a customer.
                                Paragraphs (c),(d) and (e)
                                Electronic or credit card checks do not seem to be available in the Philippines.
                                Paragraph (f)
                                There do not seem to be any rules dealing with the issue covered by this Good
                                Practice.
Recommendations                 Users of check accounts should have explained to them (in plain language) the
                                implications of issuing checks and their liability as drawers or endorsers of checks.
                                The issues that might be covered could include, at a minimum:
                                          the time generally taken for clearing a check and how a cheque may be
                                           specially cleared;
                                          the effect of crossing a check, the meaning of “not negotiable” and “account
                                           payee only” and the significance of deleting “or bearer” when any of these
                                           expressions appear on a check;
                                          how and when a check may be stopped;
                                          how a cheque may be made out so as to reduce the risk of unauthorised
                                           alteration; and
                                          the consequences of the dishonour of a check for any reason (for example,
                                           because of insufficient funds or because it is post-dated or stale).
                                Ideally BSP would work with the commercial banks to prepare a simply expressed
                                brochure which explains these matters.
                                Consideration should also be given to implementing the above Good Practices in
                                relation to credit card checks, if their use becomes common in the market. However
                                this would not be a priority at this stage given the very limited availability of credit card
                                cheques.
                                If the recommendations in Good Practice A.2 were implemented, this would also be
                                helpful for the purposes of this Good Practice.




38
     New Central Bank Act ss. 58 - 60
39
     Paragraph 3, section C
40
     Batas PambansaBlg. 22: An Act Penalizing the Making or Drawing and Issuance of a Check Without Sufficient Funds or Credit, 1979


                                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 81
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice C.5   Credit Cards
                        a. There should be legal rules on the issuance of credit cards and related
                           customer disclosure requirements.
                        b. Banks, as credit card issuers, should ensure that personalized
                           disclosure requirements are made in all credit card offers, including the
                           fees and charges (including finance charges), credit limit, penalty
                           interest rates and method of calculating the minimum monthly payment.
                        c. Banks should not be permitted to impose charges or fees on pre-
                           approved credit cards that have not been accepted by the customer.
                        d.    Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment warnings
                             on each monthly statement and the total interest costs that will accrue if
                             the cardholder makes only the requested minimum payment.
                        e. Among other things, the legal rules should also:
                             (i)    restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing of
                                    credit cards to young adults who have no independent means of
                                    income;
                             (ii)   require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest rates
                                    increase;
                             (iii) prevent the application of new higher penalty interest rates to the
                                   entire existing balance, including past purchases made at a lower
                                   interest rate;
                             (iv) limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
                                  consumers exceed their credit limits;
                             (v)    prohibit a practice called ―double-cycle billing‖ by which card
                                    issuers charge interest over two billing cycles rather than one;
                             (vi) prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly payments in
                                  ways that maximize interest charges to consumers; and
                             (vii) limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards issued to
                                   individuals with bad credit.
                        f.   There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of
                             unauthorized transactions and of stolen cards, with the ensuing liability
                             of the customer being made clear to the customer prior to his or her
                             acceptance of the credit card.
                        g. Banks and issuers should conduct consumer awareness programs on
                           the misuse of credit cards, credit card over- indebtedness and
                           prevention of fraud.
Description         There are extensive rules relating to the issuance of credit cards by banks and their
                    affiliates / subsidiaries which cover many aspects of this Good Practice.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    The MORB contains detailed rules on the risk management systems for credit card
                    issuers and on the procedures that issuers must adopt to ensure that applicants
                    possess good credit standing and are financially capable of fulfilling their credit
                    commitments. Further, MORB X320.4 contains rules on disclosure requirements for
                    credit cards. However, the disclosure rules are subject to the limitations described in
                    paragraph (b) below.




                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 82
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                        Paragraph (b)
                        The MORB contains specific disclosure requirement for credit cards issued by banks
                        or their affiliates or subsidiaries. In summary, the requirements are for disclosure of:
                              Non-finance charges i.e. those not related to the provision of credit (such as
                                 insurance premiums);
                              The percentage that interest bears to the total amount to be financed,
                                 expressed as a simple monthly or annual rate, as the case may be, on the
                                 outstanding balance of the obligation;
                              The effective interest rate per annum;
                              Information about payments due in relation to instalment loans (but it is not
                                 clear why this is relevant to credit cards);
                              The conditions for imposing interest (such as an interest free period);
                              Information about how default rates and delinquency charges are calculated;
                              Information about interest rates and how each rate applies;
                              Information about fees; and
                              Information about foreign currency transactions.
                                                                                    41


                        The Consumer Act also contains disclosure requirements for an “open -ended credit
                        contract” which would include credit cards. These r equirements include:
                        “a) The conditions under which a finance charge may be imposed, including the time
                        period, if any within which any credit extended may be repaid without incurring a
                        finance charge;
                            b) The method of determining the balance upon which a finance charge may be
                               imposed;
                            c) the method of determining the amount of the finance charges, including any
                               minimum of fixed amount imposed as a finance charge;
                            d) where one or more periodic rates may be used to compute a finance charge,
                               each such rate, the range of balances to which it in applicable, and the
                               corresponding simple annual rate;
                            e) the conditions under which the creditor may impose a security lien and a
                                                                                      42
                               description of the goods to which such lien may attach. .”“

                        The abovementioned requirements, while very useful, are limited in that they require
                        disclosure of specified information but do not require disclosure of all terms and
                        conditions. Further, there could usefully be a requirement to disclose information
                        about the method of calculation of the minimum monthly payment as well as all
                        applicable terms and conditions.




41
     MORB X320.4
42
     Consumer Act ss. 1(ay) and 141

                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 83
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                       Paragraph (c)
                       Banks are required to provide information to consumers about the terms and
                       conditions associated with the usage of e-banking products such as credit cards,
                       including in relation to fees and charges associated with the purchase, use or
                                                    43
                       redemption of the product”. This Good Practice is also impliedly covered by the
                                                                                                         44
                       requirement to disclose information about charges before the charges are imposed.
                       Paragraph (d)
                       There is no requirement for minimum payment warnings to be included on credit
                       cards.
                       Paragraph (e)
                       Although none of these Good Practices are explicitly covered, there are strict rules
                       requiring an assessment of credit worthiness of an applicant for a credit card. There
                       rules are contained in s. 40 of the General Banking Law and in MORB X320.3.
                       Paragraph (f)
                       Although there are not any rules precisely to the effect described in this Good
                       Practice, the complaint resolution service provided by FCAG goes some way to
                       meeting its requirements.
                       Paragraph (g)
                       The mission team is not aware of any such program being systematically conducted.
                       On the contrary, it is understood that the take up of credit cards is very actively
                       promoted. However, the Banking Code helpfully contains advice on security issues
                                                                         45
                       associated with credit cards, PINS and passwords.
Recommendations        As well as requiring disclosure of all terms and conditions, the disclosure regime
                       which applies to credit cards should be expanded so that there is a specific
                       requirement to disclose information about the method of calculation of the minimum
                       monthly payment, and the amount (or percentage) of that payment There should also
                       be a requirement to give consumers at least annually a clear and prominent warning
                       about the need to safeguard cards and related security devices (such as PINs).
                       Further, as mentioned in relation to Good Practice C.1, there should be a requirement
                       for regular periodic statements of account to be provided to the holders of credit card
                       accounts. Such statements should be provided at least monthly in the case of a line
                       of credit facility (such as a credit card or an overdraft) and should include the
                       information specified in Good Practice C.1, as well as the warnings referred to in
                       paragraph (d) above.
                       Consideration should also be given to explicitly prohibiting sending customers’
                       unsolicited credit cards and invitations to increase credit limits.
                       Finally, it is proposed that, when the financial literacy diagnostic is conducted, it would
                       be helpful to consider the extent to which consumer awareness programs might be
                       introduced on the misuse of credit cards, credit card over- indebtedness and
                       prevention of fraud.




43
   MORB Appendix 70b
44
   MRON 320.4
45
   Paragraph 3, section C

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 84
                                                                             I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                                                                       46
Good Practice C.6      Internet Banking and Mobile Phone Banking
                           a. The provision of internet banking and mobile phone banking (m-
                              banking) should be supported by a sound legal and regulatory
                              framework.
                           b. Regulators should ensure that banks or financial service providers
                              providing internet and m-banking have in place a security program that
                              ensures:
                                (i)     data privacy, confidentiality and data integrity;
                                (ii)    authentication, identification of counterparties and access
                                control;
                                (iii)   non-repudiation of transactions;
                                (iv)    a business continuity plan; and
                                (v)     the provision of sufficient notice when services are not
                                available.
                           c. Banks should also implement an oversight program to monitor third-
                              party control conditions and performance, especially when agents are
                              used for carrying out m-banking.
                           d. A customer should be informed by the bank whether fees or charges
                              apply for internet or m-banking and, if so, on what basis and how much.
                           e. There should be clear rules on the procedures for error resolution and
                              fraud.
                           f.   Authorities should encourage banks and service providers to undertake
                                measures to increase consumer awareness regarding internet and m-
                                banking transactions.
Description            The Philippines has strong consumer protection rules relating to e-banking which
                       address the substantive issues covered by this Good Practice.
                       Paragraph (a)
                       BSP has clear authority to regulate electronic transactions under s. 59 of the General
                       Banking Act, which provides:
                       ‘The Bangko Sentral shall have full authority to regulate the use of electronic devices,
                       such as computers, and processes for recording, storing and transmitting information
                       or data in connection with the operations of a bank, quasi-banks or trust entity,
                       including the delivery of services and products to customers by such entity. ”




46
  “Internet banking” is defined as banking services that customers may access via the Internet. The access to
the Internet could be through a computer, mobile phone (“mobile banking”), or any other suitable device.
Payment services that are only initiated via the internet using a mobile phone (e.g. by a mobile banking
application using an app on a smart phone) are not considered to be mobile payments; instead they are
categorized as internet payments. This interpretation is consistent with the view of the Committee on
Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), who is the relevant
standard setting body on payment and settlement systems. However, for practical reasons and due to the
importance of mobile money in the country, Good Practice C.6 is intended here as also covering mobile
payments and, to some extent, e-money.

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 85
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                          MORB X705 and Appendix 70d MORB sets out extensive consumer protection rules
                          relating to ”e-banking” (which term appears to cover internet banking and mobile
                          banking). These rules deals with issues such as the need for BSP approval to e-
                          banking services; oversight by the relevant bank’s Board of Directors; compliance
                          systems; risk management and internal controls (including in relation to system
                          security and unauthorized transactions); complaint systems; and consumer
                          awareness programs and disclosures.
                          Paragraph (b)
                          There are strong provisions in MORB 705 relating to security programs. Of particular
                          relevance are the following paragraphs and the related Appendices 70a and 70b:
                          “Banks should ensure that their information security measures and internal control
                          related to e-banking are installed, regularly updated, monitored and is appropriate
                          with the risks associated with their products and services.
                          Appendices 70a and 70b provide for the minimum security measures that banks
                          should employ in their ATM facilities and internet/mobile banking activities,
                          respectively, to protect depositors and consumers from fraud, robbery and other-
                          banking crimes.
                          Banks should also take into account other relevant industry security standards and
                          sound practices as appropriate, and keep up with the most current information
                          security issues (e.g., security weaknesses of the wireless environment), by sourcing
                          relevant information from well-known security resources and organizations”
                          Appendices 70a and 70b contain detailed rules on security measures for ATMs and
                          internet banking and mobile banking.
                          Paragraph (c)
                          There are detailed provisions in place relating to the outsourcing of bank functions.
                          Outsourcing of information technology systems relevant to internet and mobile
                          banking functions is governed by the provisions of MORB s. X162.2 and outsourcing
                          of other banking functions by MORB X162.3. . Both banks and non-banks issuing
                                                                                                       47
                          electronic money are required to comply with the provisions of MORB s. 649. Banks
                          are also required to have “a comprehensive process for managing risks associated
                          with increased complexity of and increasing reliance on outsourcing relationships and
                                                                                            48
                          third-party dependencies to perform critical e-banking functions”.
                          MORB X705.2 also provides that “Whenever critical systems or processes are
                          outsourced to third parties, management should ensure that the appropriate logging
                          and monitoring procedures are in place and that suspected unauthorized activities are
                          communicated to the bank in a timely manner.”
                          For completeness it is to be noted that banks are not allowed to outsource “inherent
                          banking functions”, which are defined as “servicing the deposit transactions” of a
                                49
                          bank. This would appear to prevent reliance on agents for the delivery of traditional
                          banking services as has happened in other countries. However, e-money services are
                          well developed (see Volume 1 of this report and Good Practice C.8 below).




47
     S. 3 of Circular 649 of 2009
48
     MORB X705.1
49
 MORB X162.1. See also s.2.1 of BSP Circular 268 of 2000

                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 86
                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                       Paragraph (d)
                       There do not appear to be any requirements relating to disclosure of fees and
                       charges specifically relating to the usage of internet or mobile banking service
                       channels, although there is a requirement to make “ adequate disclosure of
                                    50
                       information”. This is in contrast to the position concerning e-banking products. As
                       mentioned in Good Practice C.5, banks are required to provide information to
                       consumers about the terms and conditions associated with the usage of a range of e-
                       banking products such as credit cards, including in relation to fees and charges
                                                                                        51
                       associated with the purchase, use or redemption of the product”.
                       Paragraph (e)
                       Banks are required to have complaint resolution processes for e-banking which seem
                                                                       52
                       to meet the requirements of this Good Practice. In particular, these procedures must
                       cover unauthorized transactions, loss or theft.
                       Paragraph (f)
                       MORB Appendix 70c sets out detailed minimum standards on the Electronic Banking
                       Customer Awareness Program that banks are required to provide to their
                                  53
                       customers. These requirements include provisions concerning security of personal
                       information, log-in IDs, passwords and PINs, protecting personal computers from
                       hackers etc., understanding the provider’s privacy policies and safe use of ATMs and
                       credit cards.
Recommendation         There are no specific recommendations in relation to this Good Practice other than to
                       note the need to have full disclosure requirements for internet and mobile banking
                       channels, as well as for the products which are used through these channels.




50
   MORB X705.4
51
   MORB Appendix 70b
52
   MORB X705.5
53
   MORB Appendix 70d

                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 87
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice C.7   Electronic Fund Transfers and Remittances
                        a. There should be clear rules on the rights, liabilities and responsibilities
                           of the parties involved in any electronic fund transfer.
                        b. Banks should provide information to consumers on prices and service
                           features of electronic fund transfers and remittances in easily
                           accessible and understandable forms. As far as possible, this
                           information should include:
                              (i)   the total price (e.g. fees for the sender and the receiver, foreign
                                    exchange rates and other costs);
                              (ii) the time it will take the funds to reach the receiver;
                              (iii) the locations of the access points for sender and receiver; and
                              (iv) the terms and conditions of electronic fund transfer services that
                                    apply to the customer.
                        c. To ensure transparency, it should be made clear to the sender if the
                           price or other aspects of the service vary according to different
                           circumstances, and the bank should disclose this information without
                           imposing any requirements on the consumer.
                        d. A bank that sends or receives an electronic fund transfer or remittance
                           should document all essential information regarding the transfer and
                           make this available to the customer who sends or receives the transfer
                           or remittance without charge and on demand.
                        e. There should be clear, publicly available and easily applicable
                           procedures in cases of errors and frauds in respect of electronic fund
                           transfers and remittances.
                        f.    A customer should be informed of the terms and condition of the use of
                              credit/debit cards outside the country including the foreign transaction
                              fees and foreign exchange rates that may be applicable.
Description         Most of the requirements of this Good Practice would appear to be met.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    There are two electronic money providers in the Philippines:
                             The SMART Money card enables customers to engage in a wide variety of
                              payments transactions through either the Smart MasterCard debit card
                              functionality or through an e-wallet which accesses electronic money
                              acquired through purchasing airtime. SMART Money is an electronic wallet,
                              similar to a bank account, that allows bill payment, reloads of airtime and
                              money transfers using a SMART Mobile phone. With the SMART Money
                              MasterCard, a cardholder can also do ATM and debit card transactions. It is
                              considered to be a bank based model because the card can be re-loaded
                              from bank accounts.




                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 88
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                 GCash presents a nonbank-based model of branchless banking. GCash clients load
                 cash onto electronic “wallets” on their mobile phones from which they can then make
                 payments (via SMS) to other GCash clients using their Globe mobile phone. Other
                 services include the ability to use the service to pay for utilities, credit cards, Globe
                 Telecom bills and top ups for mobile phones. Value in GCash accounts, and
                 information about transactions, is held by G-Xchange, Inc (GXI), a wholly-owned
                 subsidiary of Globe that is registered with BSP as a remittance agent.
                 BSP clearly has a policy of appropriately regulating payment services as envisaged
                 by this Good Practice. This is evidenced by the following statement of policy as well
                 as the provisions relating to e-banking discussed in relation to Good Practice C.7:
                 “It is the policy of the BSP to promote the efficient delivery of competitively-priced
                 remittance services by banks and other remittance service providers by promoting
                 competition and the use of innovative payment systems, strengthening the financial
                 infrastructure, enhancing access to formal remittance channels in the source and
                 destination countries, deepening the financial literacy of consumers, and improving
                                                                                                    54
                 transparency in remittance transactions, consistent with sound banking practices.”
                 There are various regulatory provisions which appear to give effect to this policy.
                 They include:
                          Circular 649 on E-Money;
                          Circular 471 on Foreign Exchange Dealers, Money Changers and Remittance
                           Agents;
                          MORB X162 -Duties and Responsibilities of Banks and their
                           Directors/Officers in All Cases of Outsourcing of Banking Functions;
                          MORB X705 - Consumer Protection for Electronic Banking;
                          MORB X906 - Disclosure of Remittance Charges and Other Relevant
                           Information;
                          MORB Appendix 70c – Electronic Banking Consumer Awareness Program;
                           and
                          MORB Appendix 70d – Disclosure Requirements.
                 Paragraph (b)
                 MORB X906 contains appropriate requirements for disclosure of fees and other
                 relevant information relating to overseas remittances, but does not cover remittance
                 with the Philippines or other forms of electronic payment services. The information
                 which is required to be disclosed in relation to overseas remittances includes that
                 relating to transfer/ remittance fees, exchange rates, other currency conversion
                 charges, all other charges, the amount of money the recipient can expect to receive,
                 the expected delivery date. Relevant information is also required to be posted on
                 bank websites and prominently in premises and in remittance / service centers.
                 Paragraph (c)
                 See paragraph (b).




54
     MORB X906

                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 89
                                                                             I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                         Paragraph (d)
                         There is not a requirement as described by this Good Practice, other than the general
                         record keeping obligations imposed on banks.
                         Paragraph (e)
                         The Electronic Banking Customer Awareness Program that banks are required to
                         provide to their customers would seem to meet the requirements of this Good
                                  55
                         Practice. This is on the assumption that the extensive “ e-banking” provisions
                         discussed in the context of Good Practice C.7 cover electronic fund transfer and
                         remittance services provided by banks.
                         Paragraph (f)
                         MORB X320.4 requires information about foreign currency transactions concerning
                         credit cards to be disclosed.

Recommendation           There should be stronger disclosure requirements for the terms and conditions
                         (including relevant charges) relating to all payments services provided by banks. For
                         example, the current rules on disclosure of fees related to overseas remittances
                         should also apply to remittances and other payments services provided within the
                         Philippines (electronic or over the counter). Further, there should be a requirement
                         relating to disclosure of all terms and conditions and fees and charges relating to
                         electronic payments services.
                         Banks should also be required to give customers a receipt relating to an electronic
                         payment and including remittances. Such a receipt might be in an electronic or paper
                         form.


Good Practice C.8        Debt Recovery
                             a. A bank, agent of a bank and any third party should be prohibited from
                                employing any abusive debt collection practice against any customer of
                                the bank, including the use of any false statement, any unfair practice
                                or the giving of false credit information to others.
                             b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a bank, the person
                                who can collect any such debt and the manner in which that debt can
                                be collected should be indicated to the customer of the bank when the
                                credit agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into between the
                                bank and the customer.
                             c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a bank
                                customer’s debt without informing that party of the debt collector’s
                                right to do so; and the type of information that the debt collector is
                                seeking.
                             d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed by
                                law, the borrower should be:
                                 (i) notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of days;
                                 (ii) informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt; and
                                 (iii) provided with information as to where to make payment, as well as
                                       the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact information.




55
     MORB Appendix 70d

                              Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 90
                                                                             I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description            There are strong requirements in place in relation to debt collection practices
                       concerning credit cards, but they do not apply in relation to other credit products.
                       However to some extent this gap is met by the outsourcing requirements contained in
                       BSP Circular 705 on Outsourcing and other provisions of the MORB.
                       MORB X320.14 provides as follows for debt collection practices concerning credit
                       cards:
                       “Unfair collection practices
                       Banks, subsidiary/affiliate credit card companies, collection agencies, counsels and
                       other agents may resort to all reasonable and legally permissible means to collect
                       amounts due them under the credit card agreement: Provided, That in the exercise of
                       their rights and performance of duties, they must observe good faith and reasonable
                       conduct and refrain from engaging in unscrupulous or untoward acts.
                       Without limiting the general application of the foregoing, the following conduct is a
                       violation of this Subsection:
                            a.     the use or threat of violence or other criminal means to harm the physical
                                   person, reputation, or property of any person;
                            b.     the use of obscenities, insults, or profane language which amount to a
                                   criminal act or offense under applicable laws;
                            c.     disclosure of the names of credit cardholders who allegedly refuse to pay
                                                                                     56
                                   debts, except as allowed under Subsec. X320.9 ;
                            d.     threat to take any action that cannot legally be taken;
                            e.     communicating or threat to communicate to any person credit information
                                   which is known to be false, including failure to communicate that a debt is
                                   being disputed;
                            f.     any false representation or deceptive means to collect or attempt to collect
                                   any debt or to obtain information concerning a cardholder; and
                            g.     making contact at unreasonable/ inconvenient times or hours which shall
                                   be defined as contact before 6:00 A.M. or after 10:00 P.M., unless the
                                   account is past due for more than sixty (60) days or the cardholder has
                                   given express permission or said times are the only reasonable or
                                   convenient opportunities for contact.”
                       Although there are not specific provisions concerning debt collection practices other
                       than in relation to credit cards, the general BSP requirements concerning outsourcing
                       and service providers are helpful. Relevant provisions of BSP’s Circular on
                       Outsourcing (Circular 705) are as follows:
                       “Subsection X162.1. Governance in All Cases of Outsourcing of Banking Functions.
                       When outsourcing is allowed by law, a Bank shall:
                         Be responsible for the performance of the outsourced activity in the same manner
                         and to the same extent as if it was performing directly the said activity;
                            a.    Comply with all laws and regulations applicable in the Philippines including
                                  labor laws and those governing the banking activities/services performed
                                  by the qualified services providers on the bank’s behalf; and
                            b.    Monitor and review on an ongoing basis the performance of the service
                                  providers undertaking the outsourced activity and/or service;




56
 Subsec. X302.9 relates to the confidentiality of cardholder information.

                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 91
                                                                             I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                         Subsection X162.9. Service Providers. The bank shall carry out due diligence in
                         selecting service providers. It must ensure the integrity, technical expertise,
                         operational capability, financial capacity and suitability of the service provider to
                         perform the outsourced activity. In cases where the clients are prejudiced due to
                         errors, omissions and frauds by the service provider, the bank shall be liable in
                         providing the appropriate remedies as may be allowed by laws or regulations, without
                         prejudice to recourse by the bank to the service provider.”
Recommendation           Provisions equivalent to MORB X320.14 should be applied in relation to all credit
                         facilities. Consideration might also be given to:
                                  Removing the exceptions to the time limit requirements in paragraph X320.9
                                   (g) so that contact can only be made between the hours of 10.00 pm and
                                   6.00am with the express prior consent of the debtor; and
                         Limiting the number of times a debtor may be contacted in a week to say 3 times.



Good Practice C.9         Foreclosure of mortgaged or charged property
                              a. In the event that a bank exercises its right to foreclose on a property
                                 that serves as collateral for a loan, the bank should inform the
                                 consumer in writing in advance of the procedures involved, and the
                                 process to be employed by the bank to foreclose on the property it
                                 holds as collateral and the consequences thereof to the consumer.
                              b. At the same time, the bank should inform the consumer of the legal
                                 remedies and options available to him or her in respect of the
                                 foreclosure process.
                              c. If applicable, the bank should draw the consumer’s attention to the fact
                                 that the bank has a legal right to recover the balance of the debt due in
                                 the event the proceeds from the sale of the foreclosed property are not
                                 sufficient to fully discharge the outstanding amount.
                          In the event the mortgage contract or charge agreement permits the bank to
                          enforce the contract without court assistance, the bank should ensure that it
                          employs professional and legal means to enforce the contract, including
                          regarding the sale of the property.
Description               Although the General Banking Law provides a borrower with a generous right of
                          redemption when their mortgaged real estate is the subject of foreclosure
                                       57
                          proceedings , there do not appear to be any legal requirements of the type
                          contemplated by this Good Practice. On the contrary, there are some provisions
                          which limit the rights of mortgagors. A particular example is the provisions to the
                          effect that thrift, rural and cooperative banks are not required to advertise in
                          newspapers the foreclosure of mortgages secured by real estate where the
                                                                                    58
                          amounts secured by the mortgage are less than P100,000.
Recommendation            Consideration should be given to implementing the requirements of this Good
                          Practice over time (except to the extent that they are covered by the general law on
                          mortgages).




57
  General Banking Law s.47, s.6 of the Rural Banks Act, s.6 of the Thrift Banks Act and see also MORB
X311.5
58
     See s. 6 of the Rural Banks Act, .6 of the Thrift Banks Act and see also MORB ss. 2311.4 and 3311.5

                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 92
                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector



Good Practice C. 10   Bankruptcy of Individuals
                          a. A bank should inform its individual customers in a timely manner and
                             in writing on what basis the bank will seek to render a customer
                             bankrupt, the steps it will take in this respect and the consequences of
                             any individual’s bankruptcy.
                          b. Every individual customer should be given adequate notice and
                             information by his or her bank to enable the customer to avoid
                             bankruptcy.
                          c. Either directly or through its association of banks, every bank should
                             make counseling services available to customers who are bankrupt or
                             likely to become bankrupt.
                          d. The law should enable an individual to:
                              (i)    declare his or her intention to present a debtor’s petition for a
                              declaration of bankruptcy;
                              (ii)    propose a debt agreement;
                              (iii)   propose a personal bankruptcy agreement; or
                              (iv)    enter into voluntary bankruptcy.
                      Any institution acting as the bankruptcy office or trustee responsible for the
                      administration and regulation of the personal bankruptcy system should
                      provide adequate information to consumers on their options to deal with their
                      own debt and rehabilitation process in the event of bankruptcy.
Description           RA 10142 of 2010, The Rehabilitation and Liquidation of Financially Distressed
                      Individuals and Enterprises Act (Insolvency Act) makes provision for the voluntary
                      and involuntary liquidation of individuals and for court approved schemes for the
                      suspension of payments by individuals. However a number of issues covered by this
                      Good Practice are not covered by the Insolvency Act.
                      Paragraphs (a) – (c) and (e)
                      Although there are not any specific requirements in the Insolvency Act reflecting
                      these Good Practices, the mission team is not aware of any concerns in practice. It
                      is also to be noted that the Banking Code does not deal with bankruptcy issues
                      (although it does contain general advice for consumers who are in default), which
                      may also indicate that individual bankruptcies are not common.
                      Paragraph (d)
                      The insolvency Law provides for most aspects of this Good Practice. See, in
                      particular,:
                             Sections 94 -102 which provide for an agreement with creditors relationg to
                              suspension of payments;
                             Sections 103 and 104 dealing with voluntary liquidations; and
                      Sections 105 – 107 dealing with involuntary liquidations.
Recommendation        The various bankers associations in the Philippines should be encouraged to require
                      that their members provide the advice and counselling services referred to in this
                      Good Practice.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 93
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


SECTION D.                PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1         Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                           a. The banking transactions of any bank customer should be kept confidential by
                              his or her bank.
                           b. The law should require a bank to ensure that it protects the confidentiality and
                              security of the personal data of its customers against any anticipated threats or
                              hazards to the security or integrity of such information, as well as against
                              unauthorized access.
Description               The Philippines has strict rules on the confidentiality of banking transactions, which
                          are primarily contained in the Secrecy of Bank Deposits Act, the Data Privacy Act,
                          the AML Act and specific provisions relating to matters such as e-banking
                          transactions.
                          Paragraph (a)
                          The main examples relating to the rule concerning the confidentiality of customer
                          information are as follows:
                                 The Secrecy of Bank Deposits Act makes it clear that all “ deposits of
                                  whatever nature with banks or banking institutions in the Philippines” are to
                                  be considered as “absolutely confidential”;
                                 There is an express statement in s.2 of the AML Act that “ It is hereby
                                  declared the policy of the State to protect and preserve the integrity and
                                  confidentiality of bank accounts”; and
                          Importantly, the Data Privacy Act imposes strict obligations in relation to the
                          processing of personal information, which appear to be designed to maintain the
                          confidentiality of personal information held by institutions such as banks and limit the
                                                                                                          59
                          purposes for which such information can be collecuted, used and disclosed. More
                          specifically, s. 20(c) of the Act provides that “ The employees, agents or
                          representatives of a personal information controller who are involved in the
                          processing of personal information shall operate and hold personal information
                          under strict confidentiality if the personal information are not intended for public
                          disclosure. This obligation shall continue even after leaving the public service,
                          transfer to another position or upon termination of employment or contractual
                          relations.”
                          Paragraph (b)
                          There are also various provisions concerning the security of personal data. They
                          include the following examples.
                          The Data Privacy Act has strict rules requiring personal information to be kept
                          secure to the following effect:
                          “SEC. 20. Security of Personal Information. – (a) The personal information controller
                          must implement reasonable and appropriate organizational, physical and technical
                          measures intended for the protection of personal information against any accidental
                          or unlawful destruction, alteration and disclosure, as well as against any other
                          unlawful processing.




59
     Data Privacy Act ss. 11 and 12

                              Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 94
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                  (b) The personal information controller shall implement reasonable and appropriate
                  measures to protect personal information against natural dangers such as accidental
                  loss or destruction, and human dangers such as unlawful access, fraudulent misuse,
                  unlawful destruction, alteration and contamination.
                  (c)The determination of the appropriate level of security under this section must take
                  into account the nature of the personal information to be protected, the risks
                  represented by the processing, the size of the organization and complexity of its
                  operations, current data privacy best practices and the cost of security
                  implementation. Subject to guidelines as the Commission may issue from time to
                  time, the measures implemented must include:
                           (1)   Safeguards to protect its computer network against accidental,
                                 unlawful or unauthorized usage or interference with or hindering of
                                 their functioning or availability;

                           (2)   A security policy with respect to the processing of personal
                                 information;

                           (3)   A process for identifying and accessing reasonably foreseeable
                                 vulnerabilities in its computer networks, and for taking preventive,
                                 corrective and mitigating action against security incidents that can
                                 lead to a security breach; and

                           (4)   Regular monitoring for security breaches and a process for taking
                                 preventive, corrective and mitigating action against security incidents
                                 that can lead to a security breach; and
                  (d) The personal information controller must further ensure that third parties
                  processing personal information on its behalf shall implement the security measures
                  required by this provision.”
                  S.9(b) of the AML Act also provides that records of transactions of covered
                  institutions must be “safely” stored for 5 years. There is a similar requirement for the
                  records on customer identification, account files and business correspondence of
                  closed accounts, which must be kept for 5 years from when the account is closed.
Recommendations   We make no recommendations in relation to this Good Practice.




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 95
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice D.2            Sharing Customer’s Information
                              a. A bank should inform its customer in writing:
                                  (i)   of any third-party dealing for which the bank is obliged to share
                                        information regarding any account of the customer, such as any legal
                                        enquiry by a credit bureau; and
                                  (ii) as to how it will use and share the customer’s personal information.
                              b. Without the customer’s prior written consent, a bank should not sell or
                                 share account or personal information regarding a customer of the bank
                                 to or with any party not affiliated with the bank for the purpose of
                                 telemarketing or direct mail marketing.
                              c. The law should allow a customer of a bank to stop or – opt out‖ of the
                                 sharing by the bank of certain information regarding the customer and,
                                 prior to any such sharing of information for the first time, every bank
                                 should be required to inform each of its customers in writing of his or
                                 her rights in this respect.
                             The law should prohibit the disclosure by a third party of any banking-specific
                             information regarding a customer of a bank.
Description                  The Data Privacy Act contains provisions covering the issues covered by this Good
                             Practice, and in some respects goes further.
                             Paragraph (a)
                             A data subject is required to be informed of various matters before their information
                             is processed (or as soon as practicable afterwards). This information includes
                             information about how their information will be processed, including the recipients or
                                                                                                   60
                             classes of recipients to whom the information is or may be disclosed.
                             Given the limitations on the processing of personal information (which would include
                             disclosure to third parties and as to which see paragraph (b) below), it would seem
                             to be the case that the customer’s prior consent would be needed before a
                             disclosure is made to a third party, unless another exception applies. However,
                             there is not a specific provision dealing with disclosures to credit bureaus (as to
                             which see Good Practice D.4).
                             Paragraph (b)
                             As mentioned below, the starting point is that the processing of personal information
                             is permitted only if not otherwise prohibited by law, and when at least one of the
                             specified exceptions apply. These exceptions include where the data subject has
                             given consent and where the processing is necessary for compliance with a legal
                                                                                                   61
                             obligation to which the personal information controller is subject. There is no
                             provision allowing for disclosures for marketing purposes. A customer would
                             accordingly need to consent before any such disclosure should take place. Further,
                             the term “consent” is quite narrowly defined as follows in s.2 (emphasis added):




60
     Data Privacy Act s. 16(b)
61
     Data Privacy Act s.12

                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 96
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                            “Consent of the data subject refers to any freely given, specific, informed
                            indication of will, whereby the data subject agrees to the collection and processing
                            of personal information about and/or relating to him or her. Consent shall be
                            evidenced by written, electronic or recorded means. It may also be given on
                            behalf of the data subject by an agent specifically authorized by the data subject to
                            do so.”
                            The term “processing” is also broadly defined as follows in s.3(j) (emphasis added)::
                            “Processing refers to any operation or any set of operations performed upon
                            personal information including, but not limited to, the collection, recording,
                            organization, storage, updating or modification, retrieval, consultation, use,
                            consolidation, blocking, erasure or destruction of data.”
                            Paragraph (c)
                            See paragraph (b).
                            Paragraph (d)
                            Although the Bank Secrecy Act obligations as to the absolute confidentiality of
                            information about bank deposits apply to “any person, government official, bureau or
                            office “, they do not apply to other information about bank accounts. However, the
                                                                          62
                            Data Privacy Act would seem to fill the gaps. That Act also requires that a personal
                            information controller use “contractual or other reasonable means” to ensure that
                            third parties to whom it discloses information provide a level of protection for
                            personal information disclosed to them which is comparable to that provided for by
                            the Act.
Recommendations             We make no recommendations in relation to this Good Practice.




62
     Bank Secrecy Act s.2

                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 97
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector



Good Practice D.3            Permitted Disclosures
                             The law should provide for:
                               (i) the specific rules and procedures concerning the release to any
                                   government authority of the records of any customer of a bank;
                               (ii) rules on what the government authority may and may not do with any
                                    such records;
                               (iii) the exceptions, if any, that apply to these rules and procedures; and
                               (iv) the penalties for the bank and any government authority for any breach
                                    of these rules and procedures.
Description                  The Data Privacy Act contains provisions of the type contemplated by this Good
                             Practice, and in some respects goes even further.
                             The starting point is that the processing of personal information is permitted only if
                             not otherwise prohibited by law, and when at least one of the specified exceptions
                             apply. These exceptions include where the data subject has given consent and
                             where the processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation to which
                                                                            63
                             the personal information controller is subject. Paragraph (b) of Good Practice D.2
                             has further details.
                             There are also strict rules imposed on government agencies and instrumentalities
                                                                                                            64
                             relating to security of the personal information they have on their records. The
                             National Privacy Commissioner also has power to petition or compel any
                             government instrumentality or agency to comply with its orders concerning privacy or
                             take action on a matter affecting data privacy; to monitor their compliance with
                             security and technical measures and make recommendations concerning data
                             protection; and coordinate with them (and the private sector) on efforts to formulate
                             and implement plans and policies to strengthen the protection of personal
                                          65
                             information.
                             The detailed penalty provisions in the Data Privacy Act would seem to apply to
                                                                                                   66
                             government agencies and instrumentalities as well as their officials.
Recommendations              We make no recommendations in relation to this Good Practice.




63
     Data Privacy Act s.12
64
     Data Privacy Act ss. 22-24
65
     Data Privacy Act s.7(1)
66
     Data Privacy Act Chapter VIII

                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 98
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice D.4   Credit Reporting
                        a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with
                           sufficient enforcement authority.
                        b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and sufficient
                           data. The system should also maintain rigorous standards of security
                           and reliability.
                        c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting
                           system should be: (i) clear, predictable, non-discriminatory,
                           proportionate and supportive of consumer rights; and (ii) supported by
                           effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.
                        d. In facilitating cross-border transfer of credit data, the credit reporting
                           system should provide appropriate levels of protection.
                        e. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the right
                           of the consumer
                            (i)     to consent to information-sharing based upon the knowledge of
                                    the institution’s information-sharing practices;
                            (ii)    to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once a
                                    year), subject to proper identification;
                            (iii)   to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-
                                    optimal conditions/prices due to credit report information;
                            (iv)    to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such as
                                    six months;
                            (v)     to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted and
                                    to mark (flag) information that is in dispute;
                            (vi)    to reasonable retention periods of credit history, for instance two
                                    years for positive information and 5-7 years for negative
                                    information; and
                            (vii) to have information kept confidential and with sufficient security
                                  measures in place to prevent unauthorized access, misuse of
                                  data, or loss or destruction of data.
                    The credit registries, regulators and associations of banks should undertake
                    campaigns to inform and educate the public on the rights of consumers in the
                    above respects, as well as the consequences of a negative personal credit
                    history.
Description         The new public credit reporting agency, the Credit Information Corporation (CIC) is
                    subject to oversight by the SEC but private credit bureaus are not similarly regulated.
                    Other aspects of this Good Practice are covered by the CIS Act (for the CIC) and the
                    Data Privacy Act for private credit bureaus (with some gaps in the latter case).
                    Paragraph (a)
                    There are no rules requiring oversight of private credit bureaus in the Philippines,
                    although the CIC is subject to extensive oversight as well as having to comply with
                    the credit reporting specific rules in the CIC Act.




                        Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 99
                                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                             The mission team identified two private credit bureaus operating in the banking
                             sector in the Philippines.    The BAP Credit Bureau is operated by the Bankers
                             Association of the Philippines, which provides positive and negative information
                             (p.htm) http://www7.bapcb.com/v2_services.ba. The other credit reporting service is
                             provided       by      TransUnion       in     relation      to     credit   cards
                             (http://www.transunion.ph/philippines/business/service-solutions/credit-
                             reporting.page).
                             Importantly, private credit bureaus are not required to be licensed under Philippines
                             law (unlike the CIC) and accordingly their credit reporting activities are not subject to
                             any form of supervision. The CIC, however, is a statutory corporation which operates
                             pursuant to the provisions of the CIS Act and is supervised by the SEC and a
                                                                   67
                             Congressional Oversight Committee.
                             Private credit bureaus would, however, be subject to the new Data Privacy Act of
                             2012 and the banks using their services would be required to comply with relevant
                             BSP rules (for example, the rule requiring banks to keep up to date information they
                             have given credit bureaus). However, private credit bureaus and their subscribers
                             are not subject to data protection rules specific to credit reports. For example, there
                             is no obligation to inform a loan applicant that there information will be disclosed to a
                             credit bureau and private credit bureau debtors do not have the right to be informed
                             if credit is refused because of an adverse credit report. As a result, they have no
                             opportunity to seek correction of any alleged incorrect information or to request that
                             disputed information be flagged on the system. On the contrary, the loan and credit
                             card application forms reviewed by the mission team all contained a provision to the
                             effect that the debtor has no right to be informed of the reason why credit is refused.
                             This position is in contrast to that which applies to the CIC under the CIS Act. Under
                             that Act, a number of the protective provisions mentioned above apply in relation to
                             the records maintained by the CIC. They are discussed further below.
                             The Banking Code also contains a reminder for consumers that their information
                             may be disclosed to a credit bureau. It states that : Credit standing. Your credit
                             standing will give the bank an indication of your propensity to repay loans. Thus,
                             your bank will require that you furnish it with credit references. It will also check your
                                                                 68
                             credit records with credit bureaus.
                             Paragraph (b)
                             Both the CIC Act and the Data Privacy Act contain provisions concerning the
                             accuracy of data. The CIC is required to “acquire and use state-of-the art technology
                             and facilities in its operations to ensure its continuing competence and capability to
                             provide up to date negative and positive credit information … and to insure accuracy
                             of collected, stored and disseminated credit information.”
                             See Good Practices – Credit Reporting System, paragraph (j) in relation to the issue
                             concerning security of data.
                             Paragraph (c)
                             See Good Practices – Credit Reporting System for a detailed assessment of
                             consumer rights in relation the credit reporting system .




67
     CIS Act ss.5, 8 and 9
68
     Section 2

                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 100
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                            Paragraph (d)
                            The CIC Act does not contain any provisions concerning cross border flows of data;
                            the Data Privacy Act makes it clear that a data controller’s responsibilities under the
                            Act apply to data which is under its custody or control, including data which is
                                                      69 70
                            processed internationally. . The Act requires that a personal information controller
                            use “contractual or other reasonable means” to ensure that third parties to whom it
                            discloses information provide a level of protection for personal information disclosed
                            to them which is comparable to that provided for by the Act.
                            Paragraph (e)
                            See Good Practices – Credit Reporting System for a detailed assessment of
                            consumer rights in relation the credit reporting system.
                            Paragraph (f)
                            See the Good Practices – Credit Reporting System for a discussion about public
                            awareness campaigns concerning credit reporting systems.
Recommendations             Private credit bureaus should be required to be licensed and subject to regulatory
                            oversight through legislation which is similar to the CIS Act. This is in order to
                            maintain a level playing field between the CIC and the private credit bureaus and
                            ensure that consumers get the same level of protection, regardless of which credit
                            bureau has their information.
                            See the Good Practices – Credit Reporting System for other recommendations
                            concerning the credit reporting system in the Philippines.




69
     Data Privacy Act s.21 (a)
70
     Bank Secrecy Act s.2

                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 101
                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


SECTION E.          DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Complaints Procedure
                       a. Every bank should have in place a written complaints procedure and a
                          designated contact point for the proper handling of any complaint from
                          a customer, with a summary of this procedure forming part of the
                          bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in B.7 abov e and an
                          indication in the same Terms and Conditions of how a consumer can
                          easily obtain the complete statement of the procedure.
                       b. Within a short period of time following the date a bank receives a
                          complaint, it should:
                            (i)    acknowledge in writing to the customer/complainant the fact of
                                   its receipt of the complaint; and
                            (ii)   provide the complainant with the name of one or more
                                   individuals appointed by the bank to deal with the complaint
                                   until either the complaint is resolved or cannot be processed
                                   further within the bank.
                       c. The bank should provide the complainant with a regular written update
                          on the progress of the investigation of the complaint at reasonable
                          intervals of time.
                       d. Within a few business days of its completion of the investigation of the
                          complaint, the bank should inform the customer/complainant in writing
                          of the outcome of the investigation and, where applicable, explain the
                          terms of any offer or settlement being made to the
                          customer/complainant.
                       e. The bank should also inform the customer/complainant of the
                          availability of the services of a financial ombuds service or other form
                          of alternative dispute resolution.
                       f.   When a bank receives a verbal complaint, it should offer the
                            customer/complainant the opportunity to have the complaint treated by
                            the bank as a written complaint in accordance with the above. A bank
                            should not require, however, that a complaint be in writing.
                       g. A bank should maintain an up-to-date record of all complaints it has
                          received and the action it has taken in dealing with them.
                       h. The record should contain the details of the complainant, the nature of
                          the complaint, a copy of the bank's response(s), a copy of all other
                          relevant correspondence or records, the action taken to resolve the
                          complaint and whether resolution was achieved and, if so, on what
                          basis.
                       i.   The bank should make these records available for review by the
                            banking supervisor or regulator when requested.




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 102
                                                                            I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description             Although all banks met by the mission team have internal complaints resolution
                        systems, there are no mandated requirements relating to such schemes.
                        There are, however, some provisions concerning credit card complaints. For
                        example, banks and their affiliates / subsidiaries seeking approval to issue credit
                        cards must provide details of their written policies, procedures and internal control
                                                                                    71
                        guidelines about various matters, including complaints. They must also give
                                                                                                           72
                        customers 20 days after delivery of their card statement to dispute a transaction.
                        The Banking Code also has extensive provisions setting out what customers can
                        expect from their bank’s complaints procedures. In summary, it provides that:
                               Complaints can be delivered in a range of ways such as a website, by SMS,
                                through social media and by email (as well as in person);

                               Complaints may be handled by a customer service center or branch officers
                                or managers;

                               Complaints will be acknowledged in 10 days and should be resolved in 3
                                weeks; and
                                                                                      73
                        Customers can also take matters up with FCAG and the PDIC.
Recommendation          Organizations regulated by BSP should be required to meet internal dispute
                        resolution standards approved by BSP. At a minimum, the standards should set
                        timelines for resolving complaints, require regular reporting to the customer and
                        reasons for adverse decisions and require reporting of complaint statistics to BSP.
                        International standards on complaint resolution could be helpful in this context, as
                                                                      74
                        well as the provisions of this Good Practice.
                        BSP should also strictly monitor, and enforce, compliance with the abovementioned
                        requirements. This might be done by officers in FCAG. Banks could be required to
                        comply with these requirements as a licensing condition.




71
     MORB X320.2 (p)
72
     MORB X 320.13
73
     Part A, s. 2 (d)
74
   See e.g. AS ISO 10002-2006 Customer satisfaction - Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations
(http://infostore.saiglobal.com/store/details.aspx?ProductID=341668 )

                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 103
                                                                             I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice E.2     Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                       a. A system should be in place that allows customers of a bank to seek
                          affordable and efficient recourse to a third-party banking ombudsman or
                          equivalent institution, in the event the complaint of one or more of
                          customers is not resolved in accordance with the procedures outlined in
                          E.1 above.
                       b. The existence of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution and
                          basic information relating to the process and procedures should be
                          made known in every bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in B.7
                          above.
                       c. Upon the request of any customer of a bank, the bank should make
                          available to the customer the details of the banking ombudsman or
                          equivalent institution, and its applicable processes and procedures,
                          including the binding nature of decisions and the mechanisms to ensure
                          the enforcement of decisions.
                       d. The banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should                             be
                          appropriately resourced and discharge its function impartially.
                       e. The decision of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should
                          be binding upon the bank against which the complaint has been lodged.
Description           At present the responsibility for providing an external dispute resolution system in
                                                                         75
                      the Philippines rests primarily with FCAG in BSP. FCAG receives, processes and
                      evaluates complaints against BSP-supervised financial institutions. It is a unit within
                      the Central Supervisory Sub-sector of the Supervision and Examination Division of
                      the BSP. It was established pursuant to BSP Officer Order No. 892 on 15 October
                      2006 to support the Supervision and Examination Sector of BSP (SES) through the
                      following functions:
                             Facilitating communication with BSP supervised financial institutions to
                              address consumer complaints or disputes;
                             Initiating the adoption or modification of policies, rules and regulations in line
                              with consumer protection laws and BSP’s financial literacy programs (but
                              FCAG does not itself have the relevant powers (e.g. to make regulations
                              although it can (and does) make suggestions for changes); and
                             Provide liasion activities and advice between BSP supervision departments
                                                                                          76
                              and the public, the legislature and financial institutions.
                      Although FCAG does not have a power to issue binding decisions, it is understood
                      that regulated banks in practice comply with the decisions arrived at through FCAG
                      facilitation services.
                      Complaints must be lodged in writing but can be delivered personally, by email or fax
                      to the FCAG office in the BSP Manila building. FCAG will then take the issue up with
                      the financial institution, which is required to reply directly to the complainant, with a
                      copy to FCAG. FCAG may also facilitate a meeting between the complainant and the
                      financial institution. The purpose of the meeting is to provide an opportunity to both
                      parties to explain each other's position on the issues and possibly find ways to
                      reconcile differences and resolve the concerns. In 2012, FCAG received 1,854
                      complaints from the public.




75
 http://www.bsp.gov.ph/about/advocacies_fin_cam.asp
76
 http://www.bsp.gov.ph/about/ConsumerAssistanceMechanismFlyer.pdf

                         Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 104
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                        FCAG may also raise issues of individual or systemic concern with relevant BSP
                        supervisors. For example, the mission team was advised that FCAG raised an issue
                        concerning debt collection practices in relation to credit cards which resulted in the
                        introduction of strong BSP rules concerning such practices. 77
                        There are, however, significant limits to FCAG’s powers. In particular, FCAG does
                        not have power to make binding decisions, to impose sanctions or to conduct on –
                        site examinations of financial institutions. Accordingly any issues of concern
                        (whether individual or systemic) can only be raised with the relevant BSP
                        supervisory department. The mission team was advised that these issues may be
                        provided for under the proposed BSP Financial Consumer Protection Framework.
                        However details of the new proposals were not publicly available at the time of the
                        mission.
                        The Supervised Banks Complaints Evaluation Group (SBCEG) is the next level of
                        handling complaints; its public assistance panel conducts voluntary mediation
                        proceedings. The Panel is specifically tasked to help resolve disputes between BSP-
                        supervised institutions and/or their directors/trustees/officers and their public clients.
                        However, it has no jurisdiction over cases involving violation of banking laws, rules
                        and regulations and cannot make biding decisions. The mission team is not aware of
                        the number of consumer cases that go to mediation.
Recommendation          Although the complaint resolution service offered by the FCAG seems to operate
                        effectively in a number of respects, there are ways in which the current operations
                        might be improved in the interests of complying with international best practices on
                        financial ombudsman schemes. In particular, having regard to the World Bank’s
                        publication on Resolving Disputes between Consumers and Financial Businesses:
                        Fundamentals for a Financial Ombudsman , it is proposed that:
                               FCAG could be given the power to make decisions which bind the financial
                                institution concerned;

                               Regulated banks might be required to advise customers with whom they
                                have a dispute that the customer can take the complaint to FCAG (but only
                                after the customer has first tried to have their bank deal with the complaint);
                                and

                               FCAG might undertake a public awareness campaign of the availability of its
                                services.
                        Further, consideration should be given as to whether FCAG will have the necessary
                        resources once it takes on further supervisory functions under the proposed BSP
                        Financial Consumer Protection Framework.




77
     See Good Practice C.8 and MORB X320.14

                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 105
                                                                       I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice E.3   Publication of Information on Consumer Complaints
                     a. Statistics and data of customer complaints, including those related to a
                        breach of any code of conduct of the banking industry should be
                        periodically compiled and published by the ombudsman, financial
                        supervisory authority or consumer protection agency.
                     b. Regulatory agencies should publish statistics and data and analyses
                        related to their activities in respect of consumer protection regarding
                        banking products and services so as, among other things, to reduce the
                        sources of systemic consumer complaints and disputes.
                     c. Banking industry associations should also analyze the complaint
                        statistics and data and propose measures to avoid the recurrence of
                        systemic consumer complaints.
Description         Although it is understood that FCAG analyses complaint statistics and takes up any
                    systemic issues with the bank supervision team, It does not appear to be the case
                    that complaints statistics are published or that the various banking associations in
                    the Philippines analyze complaints as contemplated by this Good Practice.
Recommendation      It is recommended that BSP publish complaints statistics as contemplated by this
                    Good Practice.




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 106
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector




SECTION F.          GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Depositor Protection
                     a. The law should ensure that the regulator or supervisor can take
                        necessary measures to protect depositors when a bank is unable to meet
                        its obligations including the return of deposits.
                     b. If there is a law on deposit insurance, it should state clearly:
                          (i)     the insurer;
                          (ii)    the classes of those depositors who are insured;
                          (iii)   the extent of insurance coverage;
                          (iv) the holder of all funds for payout purposes;
                          (v)     the contributor(s) to this fund;
                          (vi) each event that will trigger a payout from this fund to any class of
                               those insured;
                          (vii) the mechanisms to ensure timely payout to depositors who are
                                insured.
                     c. On an on-going basis, the deposit insurer should directly or through
                        insured banks or the association of insured commercial banks, if any,
                        promote public awareness of the deposit insurance system, as well as
                        how the system works, including its benefits and limitations.
                     d. Public awareness should, among other things, educate the public on the
                        financial instruments and institutions covered by deposit insurance, the
                        coverage and limits of deposit insurance and the reimbursement
                        process.
                     e. The deposit insurer should work closely with member banks and other
                        safety-net participants to ensure consistency in the information provided
                        to consumers and to maximize public awareness on an ongoing basis.
                     f.    The deposit insurer should receive or conduct a regular evaluation of the
                           effectiveness of its public awareness program or activities.
Description         The Philippines has a comprehensive deposit insurance scheme, the Philippine
                    Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC), with the only issues from a consumer
                    protection point of view seeming to be the acknowledged need to increase public
                    awareness of the limits on the deposits which are protected and also the failure to
                    cover deposits in non-stock savings and loan associations.




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 107
                                                                                  I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                           Paragraph (a)
                           The PDIC Charter is provided for under RA 3591 and provides for a deposit
                           insurance scheme for member banks up to a prescribed limit which is currently
                           500,000 Pesos and which applies on a per customer / per institution basis. The
                           scheme is a wide reaching one which applies to both individual and corporate
                           customers of banks incorporated under Philippine laws (such as universal and
                           commercial banks, savings banks, development banks, rural banks, cooperative
                           banks and stock savings and loan associations and branches and agencies of
                           foreign banks in the Philippines. The relevant accounts include commercial,
                                                                        78
                           checking, savings, time and thrift accounts.
                           Insured banks are required to pay a premium for coverage of .02 percent of their
                           total deposits (as measured at the end of the relevant quarter). However, if deposit
                                                                                                         79
                           insurance will continue even if the premium is not paid by the relevant bank.
                           The PDIC scheme does not, however, extend to:
                                   Investment products such as bonds and securities, trust accounts, and other
                                    similar instruments;
                                   Deposit accounts or transactions which are unfunded, or that are fictitious or
                                    fraudulent;
                                   Deposit accounts or transactions constituting, and/or emanating from,
                                    unsafe and unsound banking practice/s, as determined by PDIC in
                                    consultation with BSP (we were not able to ascertain whether any such
                                    determinations had been made):
                                   Deposits that are determined to be the proceeds of an unlawful activity as
                                    defined under RA 9160; and
                                
                                                             80
                                    E-money issued by banks ; and
                                   non-stock savings and loan associations.
                           The PDIC Charter also gives the PDIC wide powers to deal with insolvent banks. In
                           particular the PDIC:
                                   May be appointed as a receiver of a bank on order of the BSP Monetary
                                             81
                                    Board; and
                                   If it is of the view that a bank is in danger of closing, the PDIC may make
                                    loans to, or purchase the assets of, or assume liabilities of, or make deposits
                                                          82
                                    in the insured bank; and
                                   The BSP Monetary Board may issue sanctions against banks which it
                                                                                                  83
                                    considers are engaging in “unsafe and unsound” practices.
                           BSP also has powers to deal with insolvent banks under the General Banking La,
                           including to:
                                
                                                                          84
                                    Place a bank under conservatorship; and
                                
                                                                                       85
                                    Place a bank under receivership or in liquidation.



78
     See definitions of “bank” and “banking institution” and “deposits” in s. 4 of the PDIC Charter and s.5
79
     S.7
80
     Definition of “deposits” in s. 4 of the PDIC Charter and E Money Circular 649
81
     S.10
82
     S.17
83
     S. 7
84
     S.67

                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 108
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                  The PDIC powers are widely used. The mission team were advised that, over the
                  last 5 years, on average around 25 banks per year have been closed. These are
                  mostly small banks with few branches, with the exception of the closure in 2011 of
                  the Bank of the Philippines (62 branches) and the closure in 2012 of the Export and
                  Industrial Bank (50 branches). To deal with this workload the PDIC have around 600
                  employees and 500 project based temporary employees.
                  The principal issues relating to the PDIC coverage and practices identified by the
                  mission team are:
                         The fact that non stock savings and loan associations are not covered. The
                          mission team were told that a recent review by the International Association
                          of Deposit Insurers identified this as an issue of concern;
                         The PDIC do not write to depositors of smaller banks which become
                          insolvent. Instead they rely on notices on bank premises, newspaper
                          notices and making available a toll free number; and
                  The PDIC has some concerns as to whether they have sufficient resources for the
                  depositor education programs they wish to run. At the moment the focus is on
                  education banks and the print media but they are also considering TV and radio
                  campaigns.
                  Paragraph (b)
                  Overall, there appears to be compliance with this Good Practice having regard to the
                  PDIC Charter and the practices which we understand are followed by the PDIC.
                  Paragraph (c)
                  The PDIC itself acknowledges that it needs to improve its public awareness
                  programs so that depositors understand the limits on which deposits are covered
                  and the effect of having a joint account. However they do currently undertake some
                  education campaigns and produce useful brochures as well as requiring banks to
                  provide notices on branch doors and on ATMS to the effect they are insured by the
                  PDIC. The PDIC has also been working with the Consumer Protection and Financial
                  Education Committee of the Finance Sector Forum to produce a poster highlighting
                  the need for consumers to “Protect their Money” by banking with insured entities.
                  Further, it is understood that questions concerning awareness of the PDIC scheme
                  are being included in the Household Financial Capability Survey to be conducted in
                  the Philippines with the support of the World Bank.
                  Paragraph (d)
                  See paragraph (c)
                  Paragraph (e)
                  The PDIC works with banks and bankers’ associations as well as other relevant
                  bodies (such as those representing pensioners).Their current areas of focus are on
                  retirees, overseas workers and their families and small companies.
                  Paragraph (f)
                  It is understood that the PDIC does not currently conduct evaluations of the
                  effectiveness of its programs. However, it has asked if questions on understand of
                  PDIC can be included in the forthcoming Financial Capability Household Survey.
Recommendations   Public awareness of the PDIC scheme, especially in relation to limits on coverage
                  and implications of holding funds in a joint account, should be improved.
                  Consideration might also be given to covering depositors in non –stock savings and
                  loan associations.



85
     S.68

                     Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 109
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice F.2   Insolvency
                     a. Depositors should enjoy higher priority than other unsecured creditors
                        in the liquidation process of a bank.
                     b. The law dealing with the insolvency of banks should provide for
                        expeditious, cost effective and equitable provisions to enable the
                        maximum timely refund of deposits to depositors.
Description         Although there do not appear to be specific provisions of the type contemplated by
                    this Good Practice, this is no doubt because of the deposit insurance scheme which
                    applies in the Philippines. See Good Practice F.1 for details.
Recommendation      We make no recommendation in this context.


SECTION G.          CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice G.1   Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                     a. A broadly based program of financial education and information should
                        be developed to increase the financial capability of the population.
                     b. A range of organizations, including those of the government, state
                        agencies and non-government organizations, should be involved in
                        developing and implementing the financial capability program.
                     c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central bank
                        or a financial regulator to lead and coordinate the development and
                        implementation of the national financial capability program.
Description         Issues related to Financial Capability are to be the subject of a separate diagnostic.
Recommendation      N/A



Good Practice G.2   Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media
                     a.   A range of initiatives should be undertaken by the relevant ministry or
                          institution to improve people's financial capability regarding banking
                          products and services.
                     b. The mass media should be encouraged by the relevant ministry or
                        institution to provide financial education, information and guidance to
                        the public regarding banking products and services.
                     c.   The government should provide appropriate incentives and encourage
                          collaboration between governmental agencies, banking regulators, the
                          banking industry and consumer associations in the provision of financial
                          education, information and guidance regarding banking products and
                          services.
Description         Issues related to Financial Capability are to be the subject of a separate diagnostic.
Recommendation      N/A




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 110
                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice G.3   Unbiased Information for Consumers
                     a.    Regulators and consumer associations should provide, via the internet
                           and printed publications, independent information on the key features,
                           benefits and risks –and where practicable the costs– of the main types of
                           banking products and services.
                     b.    The relevant authority or institution should encourage efforts to enable
                           consumers to better understand the products and services being offered
                           to consumers by banking institutions, such as providing comparative
                           price information and undertaking educational campaigns.
                     c.    The relevant authority or institution should adopt policies that encourage
                           non-governmental organizations to provide consumer awareness
                           programs to the public regarding banking products and services.
Description         Issues related to Financial Capability are to be the subject of a separate diagnostic.
Recommendation      N/A


Good Practice G.4   Consulting Consumers and the Financial Services Industry
                     a.    The relevant authority or institution should consult consumers, banking
                           associations and banking institutions to help them develop financial
                           literacy programs that meet banking consumers' needs and
                           expectations.
                     b.    The relevant authority or institution should also undertake consumer
                           testing with a view to ensuring that proposed initiatives have their
                           intended outcomes.
Description         Issues related to Financial Capability are to be the subject of a separate diagnostic.
Recommendation      N/A


Good Practice G.5   Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                          a. The financial literacy of consumers should be measured, amongst
                             other things, by broadly-based household surveys and mystery
                             shopping trips that are repeated from time to time.
                          b. The effectiveness of key financial literacy initiatives should be
                             evaluated by the relevant authorities or institutions from time to time.
Description         Issues related to Financial Capability are to be the subject of a separate diagnostic.
Recommendation      N/A




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 111
                                                                          I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


SECTION H.          COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

Good Practice H.1   Regulatory Policy and Competition Policy
                       Regulators and competition authorities should be required to consult one
                       another for the purpose of ensuring the establishment, application and
                       enforcement of consistent policies regarding the regulation of financial
                       services.
Description         At this stage, there are no formal requirements for consultation of the type described.
                    This is probably because the Philippines does not have a comprehensive
                    competition law (although it is understood that various attempts have been made to
                    have such a law passed by Congress in recent years). However the 1987
                    Constitution (Article XII, Section 19) prohibits anticompetitive conduct and unfair
                    competition and there are numerous Acts dealing with various competition issues.
                    So far as the banking sector is concerned, it is particularly relevant to note that
                    MORB X108.1 is to the effect that bank mergers and consolidations require BSP
                    approval (including as to terms and conditions).
                    Further, under Executive Order No. 45 the Department of Justice (DoJ) has been
                    designated as the Competition Authority and an Office for Competition (OFC) has
                    been established to exercise this function. Pursuant to Department Circular 011, the
                    DoJ has issued detailed guidelines as to how the Office for Competition is to operate
                    (OFC Guidelines). These Guidelines cover the process for investigating complaints
                    and contemplates the possibility of referrals to the relevant government agency.
                    Relevantly, the OFC Guidelines provide that:
                    “… the OFC shall adopt and implement a mechanism for cooperation with the
                    Department of Trade and Industry (DT!) to investigate anti-competitive conduct
                    within consumer welfare laws, including those that are implemented under Republic
                    Act No. 7394 or the Consumer Act of the Philippines, Republic Act No. 7581 or the
                    Price Act.
                    Such mechanisms shall consider the DOJ-DTI Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)
                    specifying measures on the promotion and protection of consumers’ economic
                    interests, along with standards for the safety and quality of consumer goods and
                    services; distribution facilities for essential consumer' goods and services; measures
                    enabling consun1ers to obtain redress; and education and information programmes,
                    among others.”
                    The OFC Guidelines are limited in scope as there is no general Competition Law in
                    the Philippines and so they can only apply to a fragmented range of Acts dealing
                    with different competition issues. Specifically, they apply to “investigations conducted
                    by the OFC on cartc1ization, monopolies and combinations in restraint of trade as
                    defined in competition laws” including various specified Acts, the most relevant of
                    which appears to be a 1925 “Act to prohibit Monopolies and Combinations in
                    Restraint of Trade”. It is also noted that the OFC Guidelines are an administrative
                    order only and do not appear to have the force of law.
                    The above described arrangements were presumably implemented as the proposed
                    new overarching Competition Law has not yet been passed by Congress.
                    Also relevant in this context are the competition provisions of the Consumer Act.
                    The Consumer Act imposes penalties for such behavior as deceptive, unfair and
                    unconscionable sales practices in relation to consumer goods and services (which
                    would seem to include financial services).
                    Finally, it is noted that the Philippines banking sector has a very wide range of
                    banking institutions which suggests that it is competitive (see Volume 1).




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 112
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendation      Whilst supporting the development of an overarching Competition Law (as exists in
                    many countries), it seems unlikely that such a law will be passed in the near future.
                    In the interim, we encourage BSP in the interim to liaise with DoJ as to anti-
                    competitive conduct concerning the banking industry.


Good Practice H.2   Review of Competition
                    Given the significance of retail banking to the economy as a whole and to the
                    welfare of consumers, competition authorities should:
                        (i) monitor competition in retail banking;
                        (ii) conduct, and publish for general consumption, periodic assessments
                             of competition in retail banking (such as the range of interest rates
                             across banks for specific products); and
                        (iii) make recommendations publicly available on enhancing competition in
                              retail banking.
Description         It is not clear to what extent either BSP or DoJ engages in activities the subject of
                    this Good Practice. However, the preliminary view of the mission team is that the
                    banking market is healthy from a competition perspective. This view is expressed on
                    the basis that:
                           The great variety in types of banks, and their numbers (see Volume 1 of this
                            report for details); and

                           The mission team were told customers often hold more than one bank
                            account and frequently have more than one credit card.
                    From the interviews conducted, but with at least one exception, it appears that it is
                    not common practice to impose fees beyond an administrative cost for customers
                    who prepay their loan contracts (even fixed rate contracts). This is apparently
                    because of the Consumer Act provisions to the effect that all credit contracts can be
                                                   86
                    prepaid early, without penalty. The General Banking Law also provides that the
                    credit can be pre-paid in whole or in part subject to “such reasonable terms and
                                                     87
                    conditions as may be agreed”. There is also apparently no cost for closing a
                    deposit account.
Recommendations     We do not make any recommendations in this context.




86
     Article 119
87
     S. 45

                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 113
                                                                      I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice H.3   Impact of Competition Policy on Consumer Protection
                    The competition authority and the regulator should evaluate the impact of
                    competition policies on consumer welfare, especially regarding any limitations
                    on customer choice and collusion regarding interest and other charges and
                    fees.
Description         The mission team did not see any evidence of BSP and DoJ undertaking this
                    activity.

Recommendations     The only recommendation is, as stated above, to express support for an overarching
                    completion Law and an appropriately resourced regulator.




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 114
          II.


SECTION A.            PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice A.1     Consumer Rights in Credit Reporting
                      Laws and regulations should specify basic consumer rights in these respects.
                      These rights should include:
                          a. The right of the consumer to consent to information-sharing based upon
                             the knowledge of the institution’s information-sharing practices.
                          b. The right to access the credit report of the individual, subject to proper
                             identification of that individual and free of charge (at least once a year).
                          c.   The right to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-
                               optimal conditions/prices due to credit report information. In this process,
                               consumers should be provided with the name and address of the credit
                               bureau.
                          d. The right to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such as
                             six months.
                          e. The right to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted.
                          f.   The right to mark (flag) information that is in dispute.
                          g. The right to decide if the consumer's credit information (for purposes not
                             related to the granting of credit) can be shared with third parties.
                          h. The right to have sensitive information especially protected (not included in
                             the credit report), such as race, political and philosophical views, religion,
                             medical information, sexual orientation or trade union membership.
                          i.   The right to reasonable retention periods such as those for positive
                               information (for example, at least two years) and negative information (for
                               example, 5-7 years.)
                      The right to have information kept confidential and with sufficient security
                      measures in place to prevent unauthorized access, misuse of data, or loss or
                      destruction of data.




                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 115
                                                                      II. Good Practices: Credit Reporting System




Description                Debtors whose credit records are maintained by private credit bureaus do not have
                           the same credit record –specific protections as debtors whose records will be
                                                                                                 88
                           maintained by the new Credit Information Corporation (CIC)              once it is
                           operational. There are two private credit bureaus operating in the banking sector in
                           the Philippines:
                                     The BAP Credit Bureau is operated by the Bankers Association of the
                                      Philippines, which provides positive and negative information
                                      (http://www7.bapcb.com/v2_services.bap.htm); and
                                     The other credit reporting service is provided by TransUnion in relation to
                                      credit    cards      (http://www.transunion.ph/philippines/business/service-
                                      solutions/credit-reporting.page).
                           These private credit bureaus would be subject to the new Data Privacy Act of 2012
                           and the banks using their services would be required to comply with relevant BSP
                           rules (for example, the rule requiring banks to keep up to date information they
                                                           89
                           have given credit bureaus).         However, private credit bureaus and their
                           subscribers are not subject to data protection rules specific to credit reports.
                           This position is in contrast to that which applies to the CIC under the Credit
                           Information System Act 2008 (CIS Act). Under the CIS Act, a number of the
                           protective provisions mentioned above apply in relation to the records maintained
                           by the CIC. The CIC is, however, not yet operational as it is still in the process of
                           procuring the computer systems it will need to operate.
                           The specific position in relation to each of the paragraphs in this Good Practice is
                           as follows:
                           Paragraph (a)
                           Although there is no provision specifically requiring borrowers to consent to the
                           submission of data to either the CIC or a private credit bureau, there are some
                           helpful provisions in the CIS Act and the Data Privacy Act. The Data Privacy Act
                           allows for the “processing” of information with the consent of the data subject
                           where it is necessary for contract formation purposes (such as to process a loan
                                        90
                           application). The data subject must also be informed when information about him
                           has been “processed” (which is very broadly defined and would seem to include
                                                             91
                           disclosures to a credit bureau). Further, the CIS Act requires banks to inform
                                                                                                  92
                           borrowers that they are required to submit “ basic credit data” to CIC. The term
                           “basic credit data” is defined (in summary) to include both positive and negative
                           information and any information on credit worthiness but does not include
                           information on deposits and clients’ funds protected by the Secrecy of Bank
                                                                                              93
                           Deposits Act, the Foreign Currency Act or the General Banking Act. .




  88
    http://creditinfo.gov.ph/
  89
       MORB X306.7
  90
       Data Privacy Act s.12
  91
       Data Privacy Act s.16(a)
  92
       CIS Act s. 4(f)
  93
       CIS Act s. 3(b)

                     Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 116
                                                 II. Good Practices: Credit Reporting System


      Paragraph (b)
      Broad access and correction rights are provided for by s. 4(o) of the CIS Act. In
      summary, these rights include:
             A right of “ready and immediate access” to their credit information; and
             A right to dispute “erroneous, incomplete, outdated or misleading credit
              information” and the CIC must respond within 5 working days, failing which
              the borrower has a right of indemnity.
      Although these credit report –specific rights do not apply to debtors whose
      information is held by a private credit bureau, broad access and correction rights
      apply under s.16 (c) and (d) of the Data Privacy Act. Private credit bureaus should
      be required to comply with these obligations.
      Paragraph (c)
      A borrower covered by the CIS Act has the right to know of credit being refused
      where the financial institution uses basic credit data as a reason for the decision.
      S.4(n) of the CIS Act provides in this regard that: ”The borrower has the right to
      know the causes of refusal of the application for credit facilities or services from a
      financial institution that uses basic credit data as basis or ground for such refusal. ”
      There is not an equivalent obligation imposed on private credit bureaus. For
      example, there is no obligation to inform a loan applicant that their information will
      be disclosed to a credit bureau and private credit bureau debtors do not have the
      right to be informed if credit is refused because of an adverse credit report. As a
      result, they have no opportunity to seek correction of any alleged incorrect
      information or to request that disputed information be flagged on the system. On
      the contrary, the loan and credit card application forms reviewed by the mission
      team all contained a provision to the effect that the debtor has no right to be
      informed of the reason why credit is refused.
      Paragraph (d)
      There does not appear to be any such provision in the Philippines.
      Paragraphs (e) and (f)
      See the comments on paragraph (b).
      Paragraph (g)
      This right would seem to be implicit so far as the CIC is concerned, given the
      strong provisions on confidentiality provided for in the CIS Act (see paragraph (j)
      below). Further private credit bureaus should be required to comply with the
      limitations on data processing provided for by s. 12 of the Data Privacy Act. With
      specified exceptions, data processing can only occur with the consent of the data
      subject.




Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 117
                                                                   II. Good Practices: Credit Reporting System


                         Paragraph (h)
                         Private credit bureaus would be subject to the provisions of the Data Privacy Act
                                                                                                            94
                         relating to sensitive information, but these provisions do not apply to the CIC.
                         The Data Privacy Act, in summary, provides, in summary, that the processing of
                         broadly defined “sensitive information” is prohibited, subject to limited exceptions
                                                                          95
                         (such as with consent or where required by law).
                         Paragraph (i)
                         The CIS is required to maintain negative credit information for no more than 3
                                 96
                         years , but there does not seem to be any limitation on the amount of time for
                         which positive credit information must be held. The Data Privacy Act does not
                         have any particular provisions applying to credit reports, although its general rules
                         of the retention of personal information are helpful. S. 11(e) provides in this regard
                         that personal information can be “retained only for as long as necessary for the
                         fulfillment of the purposes for which the data was obtained or for the
                         establishment, exercise or defense of legal claims, or for legitimate business
                         purposes, or as provided by law;”.
                         Paragraph (j)
                         The CIC, and all related parties, are required to keep credit information strictly
                                                                                                         97
                         confidential and to only use the information to establish credit worthiness.
                         Although these provisions do not apply to private credit bureaus, they are subject
                         to provisions in s. 12 of the Data Privacy Act relating to confidentiality of
                         information.
                         Both the CIS Act and the Data Privacy Act contain provisions concerning security
                         of information. S. 5(i) of the CIS Act requires that the CIC “ acquire and use state-
                         of-the art technology and facilities in its operations to ensure its continuing
                         competence and capability to provide up to date negative and positive credit
                         information: …and to insure accuracy of collected, stored and disseminated credit
                         information.”
                         S. 20 (a) of the Data Privacy Act requires a personal information controller to
                         “implement reasonable and appropriate organizational, physical and technical
                         measures intended for the protection of personal information against any
                         accidental or unlawful destruction, alteration and disclosure, as well as against any
                         other unlawful processing”.




94
     CIS Act s.4 (e)
95
     Data Privacy Act s.13
96
     CIS Act s. 3(h)
97
     CIS Act s.6

                   Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 118
                                                                    II. Good Practices: Credit Reporting System


Recommendations            The data protection rules applying in relation to credit reports maintained by the
                           private credit bureaus should be revised so as to include a requirement for debtors
                           to specifically consent to the inclusion and correction of their information, to be
                           informed if credit is refused because of an adverse credit report and to have
                           access and correction rights and a right to have disputed information flagged. At a
                           minimum, the same protective provisions as exist under the CIS Act should apply
                           in relation to credit reports maintained by private credit bureaus.
                           Credit bureaus should also be asked to conduct a public awareness campaign
                           about their activities and relevant consumer rights. This would be consistent with
                           the obligation imposed on CIC under s.7 of the CIS Act. The design of effective
                           methods for financial education can be informed by the new evidence and insights
                                                                                      98
                           on financial education produced recently by the World Bank .
                           It is also suggested that consideration be given to allowing a data subject one free
                           request for correction of a report per year. This would be consistent with the World
                           Bank’s Credit Reporting Principles, 2011.
                           Finally, consideration could be given to requiring private credit bureaus to be
                           licensed and appropriately supervised.


SECTION B.                 CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice B.1          Unbiased Information for Consumers
                           Financial regulators should provide, via the internet and printed
                           publications, independent information for consumers that seek to improve
                           their knowledge for actively managing the credit report.
Description                Issues related to Financial Capability are to be the subject of a separate
                           diagnostic. This diagnostic should cover issues the subject of this Good Practice.
Recommendation
                           We make no recommendations in this context.



Good Practice B.2          Awareness of Credit Reporting
                           In order to ensure that financial consumer protection and educational
                           initiatives are appropriate, it is necessary to measure financial capability
                           with large-scale surveys that are repeated periodically. These surveys
                           should include questions on credit reporting and scoring.
Description                The Philippines is conducting a household survey on financial capability, with the
                           assistance of the World Bank.
Recommendation             We make no recommendations in this context.



                                                      .




  98
       Additional information can be found in www.finlitedu.org .

                    Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 119
The principal laws relevant to consumer protection for credit and debit products in the Philippines at the time of
the mission were as follows (in summary):
                                                                                              REGULATOR /
   NAME OF LAW / CIRCULAR                            TOPIC COVERED
                                                                                               SUPRVISOR
 BANKING
                                      Provides for the establishment and
 New Central Bank Act                                                                   BSP
                                      organization of BSP
                                      Provides for the creation, organization and
                                      operations of banks (especially universal,
 General Banking Law of 2000
                                      commercial, rural, thrift, cooperative and        BSP
 (General Banking Law)
                                      savings banks), non-banks with quasi-banking
                                      functions and trusts
 Rural Banks Act of 1992, RA          Provides for the creation, organization and
                                                                                        BSP
 7353 (Rural Banks Act)               operations of rural banks
 Thrift Banks Act R.A .7906           Provides for the creation, organization and
                                                                                        BSP
 (Thrift Banks Act)                   operations of thrift banks
                                                                                        The DTI is stated to be
                                                                                        the implementing
                                                                                        authority for most of the
                                                                                        provisions applicable to
                                                                                        banks but the Act is
                                                                                        silent on the question as
                                                                                        to who is the
                                                                                        implementing authority
                                                                                        for Title IV, which
                                      The Consumer Act has general consumer
                                                                                        contains specific
 The Consumer Act of the              protection provisions which apply to all
                                                                                        provisions concerning
 Philippines of 1991 RA 7394          service providers (including financial services
                                                                                        credit contracts. The
 (Consumer Act)                       providers) and specific provisions which apply
                                                                                        mission team was told
                                      to providers of credit products.
                                                                                        that the DTI relies on
                                                                                        two opinions from the
                                                                                        DoJ to the effect that the
                                                                                        BSP is to be considered
                                                                                        as the implementing
                                                                                        agency for the
                                                                                        application of the
                                                                                        Consumer Law to BSP
                                                                                        regulated institutions.
 Pawnshop Regulation Act of           Regulates the establishment and operations
                                                                                        BSP
 1973 (Pawnshop Act)                  of pawnshops
 Revised Non-Stock Savings
 and Loan Association Act of          Provides for the registration and operations of
                                                                                        BSP
 1997, RA 8367 (Savings and           non-stock savings and loan associations
 Loan Act)
                                      Provides a compilation of banking regulations
 Manual of Banking Regulations
                                      and policy issuances of the Monetary Board        BSP
 2008 (MORB)
                                      of BSP up until 2008
 Batas PambansaBlg. 22: An Act        Imposes penalties for the drawing of              BSP
 Penalizing the Making or             dishonored checks. See also MORB X203
 Drawing and Issuance of a
 Check Without Sufficient Funds
 or Credit, 1979 (Dishonored
 Checks Act)




                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|120
                                                                 Annexure I. Legal and Regulatory Framework


TRUTH IN LENDING
Truth in Lending Act 1963 RA
                                                                                         BSP
3765 (Truth in Lending Act)
                                    Updated Rules implementing the Truth in
Circular 730 of 2011
                                    Lending Act to Enhanced Loan Transaction
(Circular 730)
                                    Transparency Rules for Banks.
Circular 754 of 2012                Loan Transaction Transparency for NBFIs and
                                                                                         BSP
((Circular 754)                     Penal Provisions
                                    Registration with the BSP of lending / financing
                                    facilities granted by entities registered with the
                                    SEC and the DTI. As part of the registration
Circular 755 (Circular 755)                                                              BSP
                                    process the relevant entities undertake to
                                    comply with all relevant laws and may have
                                    their registration revoked if they fail to do so.
Memorandum No. 18 of 2012
                                    Effective interest Rate Calculations for NBFIs.      BSP
(EIR Circular for NBFIs)
Memorandum No. 20 of 2012
(EIR Circular for Loans not         Effective interest Rate Calculations for Loans
                                                                                         BSP
covered by Truth in Lending         not covered by the Truth in Lending Act.
Act )
Memorandum No. 30 of 2012           Poster requirements for Truth in Lending Act
                                                                                         BSP
(Poster Requirements Circular)      requirements under Circulars 730 and 754.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
                                    Provides for the legal recognition of electronic
                                                                                         BSP, DTI and
Electronic Commerce Act 2000        data messages and documents, electronic
                                                                                         Department of Budget
RA 8792 (E Commerce Act)            contracts and electronic transactions with
                                                                                         and Management
                                    government agencies.
Circular No. 542 of 2006 (E
Banking Consumer Protection         Consumer Protection for Electronic Banking           BSP
Circular)
Circular No. 649 of 2009
                                    Guidelines for the issuance of E-Money               BSP
(Issuance of E-Money Circular)
Circular No. 704 of 2010
                                    Guidelines on the Outsourcing by E-Money
(Outsourcing by E-Money                                                                  BSP
                                    Issuers to E-Money Network Service Providers
Issuers Circular)
DEPOSIT INSURANCE
                                                                                         Board of Philippine
                                                                                         Deposit insurance
                                                                                         Corporation (the
                                                                                         Secretary of the
PDIC Charter, RA 3591 (PDIC         Provides for the establishment and operations
                                                                                         Ministry of Finance is
Charter)                            of the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation
                                                                                         the Chairman of the
                                                                                         Board and the
                                                                                         Governor of the BSP is
                                                                                         a member).




                              Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|121
                                                                  Annexure I. Legal and Regulatory Framework


DATA PRIVACY
Secrecy of Bank Deposits Act         Provides for the “absolute
of 1955 RA 1405 (Secrecy of          confidentiality” of bank           BSP
Bank Deposits Act)                   deposits
                                     Provides for the protection of
Data Privacy Act of 2012 RA          individual personal information
                                                                        National Privacy Commissioner
10173 (Data Privacy Act)             and the creation of the
                                     National Privacy Commission.
COMPETITION
                                     Designates the Department of
Executive Order No. 45 of 2011
                                     Justice as the Competition         Department of Justice
(DoJ Competition Order)
                                     Authority
Department of Justice Circular       Implementation Guidelines for
No. 11 of 2013 (DoJ Competition      Executive Order No. 45 of          Department of Justice
Guidelines)                          2011
INSOLVENCY
The Rehabilitation and
                                     Provides for the rehabilitation
Liquidation of Financially
                                     or liquidation of insolvent
Distressed Individuals and                                              Courts of the Philippines
                                     natural persons and
Enterprises Act of 2010 RA
                                     corporations.
10142 (Insolvency Act)
MICROFINANCE
                                     Sets limits on loans, interest
                                     rates and deals with
                                     amortization of “microfinance
                                     loans” as defined. This
Circular No. 272 of 2001 (MF         Circular also provides an
                                                                        BSP
Loans Circular)                      exemption for microfinance
                                     facilities from BSP
                                     requirements for evidence of
                                     income and assets and
                                     liabilities etc.
                                     Extends the exemption from
Circular No. 746 of 2012 (MF         documentary requirements
                                                                        BSP
Credit Exemption Circular)           applicable on grant of credit to
                                     micro and small enterprises.
                                     Regulates Marketing, Sales
Circular No. 683 of 2010 (Micro      and Servicing of Micro
                                                                        BSP
Insurance Circular)                  Insurance Products (including
                                     in banks).
Senior Citizens Priority Lane in
                                     Requires senior citizens to be
BSP Supervised Institutions
                                     given express lanes in all         BSP
Circular No. 805 Series of 2013
                                     banking establishments.
(Senior Citizens Circular)




                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|122
                                                                  Annexure I. Legal and Regulatory Framework


SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
                                    Regulates the operations of
                                    “Lending Companies” which
Securities and Exchange             are defined to mean (in
Commission Lending                  summary) organizations
                                                                       SEC
Companies Act RA 9474 (SEC          making loans from their own
Lending Companies Act)              capital funds or from funds
                                    sourced from not more than 19
                                    persons.
Circular No. 7 of 2011 (SEC         Applies BSP Circular 730 to
                                                                       SEC
Truth in Lending Circular)          lending companies.
INSURANCE
                                    Updates rules for
Circular No. 31 of 2011 (IC Truth   implementing the Truth in
                                                                       Insurance Commission (IC)
in Lending Circular)                Lending Act, following BSP
                                    Circular 730.
COOPERATIVES
                                    Provides for the
Cooperative Development             establishment, functions,
Authority Act of 1990 RA 6939       powers and responsibilities of     CDA
(CDA Act)                           the Cooperative Development
                                    Authority (CDA).
Cooperative Code of the             Deals with the organization,
Philippines of 1990 RA 6938         registration and operations of     CDA
(Cooperatives Act)                  cooperatives.
Circular No. 5 of 2012 (CDA         Applies BSP Circular 730 to        Cooperative Development Authority
Truth in Lending Circular)          cooperatives                       (CDA)
ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING
                                    Designed to preserve the
                                    integrity and confidentiality of
                                    bank accounts and to ensure
Anti- Money Laundering Act of       that the Philippines shall not     BSP, IC and SEC (depending on the
2001, RA 9160 (AML Act)             be used as a money                 institution covered by the Act)
                                    laundering site for the
                                    proceeds of any unlawful
                                    activity




                              Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|123
NOTE: The purpose of the table below is to highlight the extent to which key provisions of the Consumer
Act deal with issues apparently applicable to credit providers which issues are also, to a least a limited
extent, covered by covered by laws, regulations, circulars etc. applicable to entities regulated by the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilpinas (BSP Laws).

 CONSUMER ACT                                               BSP LAWS
 DEFINITIONS
 The relevant Art. 4 definitions in the Consumer
 Act are as follows:
 “Services” are defined to include any that are the
 subject of a “consumer transaction” and the latter
                                                            No equivalent.
 term is defined to include “(ii) grant or provision of
 credit to a consumer” and “Consumer” is defined to
 mean “a natural person who is a purchaser, lease,
 recipient or prospective purchase, lease or recipient
 of consumer products, services or credit”.
 TITLE III, CHAPTER 1, PROTECTION AGAINST
 DECEPTIVE, UNFAIR, AAND UNCONSCIONABLE
 SALES ACTS OR PRACTICES
 Article 49: Implementing Agency. The Department
 of Trade and industry is the implementing agency for
 Chapter I of Title III. Relevant provisions in the         No equivalent, although it is clear that the BSP
 Chapter apply to “consumer transactions” which are         administers its own Laws.
 defined to include the grant or provision of credit to a
 consumer.
                                                            The mission team was not able to find an equivalent
 Article 50: Prohibition against Deceptive Sales
                                                            provision for credit or debit products. However there is
 Acts or Practices. Such practices are defined to
                                                            a general provision in MORB X104 (c) relating to
 include “whenever the … supplier or seller, through
                                                            depositors that would appear to have a similar effect
 concealment, false representation of fraudulent
                                                            (emphasis added). It provides that:
 manipulation induces a consumer to enter into a sales
                                                            ‘c. No bank shall place or cause to be
 or lease transaction of any product or service”.
                                                            placed any advertisement tending to
                                                            mislead a depositor into believing that he
                                                            will get more in benefits than what the bank
                                                            is legally authorized to give. No bank advertisement
                                                            shall contain any false claim or exaggerated
                                                            representation as to its liquidity, solvency,
                                                            resources, deposits and banking services.’
                                                            No equivalent.
 Article 52: Unfair or Unconscionable Sales Act or
 Practice. Such practices are defined to include
 “whenever the … supplier or seller, by taking
 advantage of the consumer’s … ignorance, illiteracy,
 lack of time or the general conditions of the
 environment or surroundings, induces the consumer
 to enter into a sales or lease transaction grossly
 inimical to the interests of the consumer or grossly
 one-sided in favor of the … supplier or seller”.




                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|124
                                                           Annexure II. Comparison between Consumer Law of the
                                                                                    Philippines and BSP Laws

Articles 54 - 58: Home Solicitation Sales. These
Articles prohibits home solicitation sales of any
“consumer product or service” without a permit from        No equivalent.
DTI and contain other restrictions on when and how
such sales may be concluded.
TITLE III, CHAPTER VI ADVERTISING AND SALES
PROMOTION
Article 109: Implementing Agency. The Department
of Trade and industry (DTI) is the implementing            No equivalent.
agency for Chapter VI of Title III, which applies to
consumer services (and products).
Article 110: False, Deceptive or Misleading
Advertisement. This Article contains a general             See comments on Article 50.
prohibition on false, deceptive and misleading
advertising.
Article 111: Price Comparisons. This Article               See comments on Article 50.
imposes restrictions on comparative advertising.
Article 113: Credit Advertising. This Article in effect
prohibits advertisements making claims about
amounts of credit payments or installments or down         No equivalent.
payments unless the credit provider customarily
arranges the relevant payment, installment or amount.
Article 114: Advertising of Open-end Credit Plan.
Advertisements about open-ended credit plans (e.g.         No equivalent.
for credit cards or checks) must disclose “the rate of
interest and other material features of the plan…”
TITLE IV CONSUMER CREDIT TRANSACTION
NOTE: The Consumer Act does NOT say who the
implementing agency is for this Title.
Article 131: Declaration of Policy. This Article
declares the policy of the State in relation to these
credit provisions to be as follows (emphasis added):
The State shall simplify, clarify and modernize the
laws governing credit transactions and encourage           No equivalent.
the development of fair and economically sound
consumer credit practices. To protect the consumer
from lack of awareness of the true cost to the user,
the State shall assure the full disclosure of the
true cost of credit.
Article 132: Determination of Finance Charges.             MORB s. 307.1(g) (as provided for by BSP Circular
This Article in summary provides that “finance             730) has a definition of “finance charges” which is
charges in connection with any consumer credit             comprehensive, but apparently more limited, than that
transaction shall be determined as the sum of all          in the Consumer Act (for example, it does not refer to
charges, payable directly or indirectly by the person to   insurance charges). It provides as follows (emphasis
whom the credit is extended and imposed directly or        added):
indirectly by the creditor as an accident to the
extension of credit, including {various specified          ‘Finance charge includes interest, fees, service
charges]”. The specified charges include (in               charges, discounts, and such other charges incident
summary) interest, collection fees, credit investigation   to the extension of credit.’
fees, notarial fees and fees for any guarantee or
insurance protecting against default.

                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|125
                                                       Annexure II. Comparison between Consumer Law of the
                                                                                Philippines and BSP Laws


Article 133: Determination of Simple Annual Rate.      MORB X307.1(h) (as provided for by BSP Circular
This rate is required to be determined in accordance   730) provides the following definition of a simple
with prescribed rules and regulations. The mission     annual rate:
team was unable to ascertain whether any such
                                                       ‘Simple annual rate is the uniform percentage which
regulations have been made.
                                                       represents the ratio between the finance charge and
                                                       the amount to be financed under the assumption that
                                                       the loan is payable in one year with single payment
                                                       upon maturity and there are no upfront deductions to
                                                       principal.’
Article 134: Delinquency Charges. This Article         MORB X320.4 (g) and (h) requires disclosure of the
allows for a delinquency charge, subject to a 10 day   method of determining delinquency charges in a
grace period.                                          credit card contract as follows:
                                                       ‘g. the method of determining the balance upon which
                                                       interest and/or delinquency charges may be imposed;
                                                       h. the method of determining the amount of interest
                                                       and/or delinquency charges, including any minimum
                                                       or fixed amount imposed as interest and/or
                                                       delinquency charge;’
                                                       The MORB X320.8 also makes it clear that a late
                                                       payment fee cannot be charged unless it is disclosed
                                                       in a credit card contract, and requires such a fee to be
                                                       based on the unpaid minimum amount or a prescribed
                                                       minimum amount. However there is provision for the
                                                       total amount to be payable if there is an acceleration
                                                       fee in the contract.
                                                       The above provisions only apply to credit cards.
                                                       Further, there is no requirement for a grace period (as
                                                       contemplated in the Consumer Act).
Article 135: Deferral Charge. Such charges are         MORB X320.7 contains a similar provision for credit
allowed for provided they have been previously         cards:
disclosed.
                                                       Deferral charges. The bank and the cardholder may,
                                                       prior to the consummation of the transaction, agree in
                                                       writing to a deferral of all or part of one (1) or more
                                                       unpaid installments and the bank may collect a
                                                       deferral charge which shall not exceed the rate
                                                       previously disclosed pursuant to the provisions on
                                                       disclosure.
                                                       The above provisions only apply to credit cards.
                                                       There is no equivalent, for example, for loan products.
Article 136: Finance Charge on Refinancing. Such
charges are permitted for an open – ended credit
contract based on the refinanced amount to an extent   No equivalent.
allowed for by DTI rules. The mission team was
unable to ascertain whether any such rules have been
made.




                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|126
                                                            Annexure II. Comparison between Consumer Law of the
                                                                                     Philippines and BSP Laws


Article 137: Right to Prepay. This Article makes            S. 45 of the General Banking Act contains a similar
clear the right to prepay any credit in whole or in part,   provision:
without penalty
                                                            ‘SECTION 45. Prepayment of Loans and Other Credit
                                                            Accommodations. — A borrower may at any time prior
                                                            to the agreed maturity date prepay, in whole or in
                                                            part, the unpaid balance of any bank loan and other
                                                            credit accommodation, subject to such reasonable
                                                            terms and conditions as may be agreed upon
                                                            between the bank and its borrower.’
Article 138: Rebate on Prepayment. On prepayment
of a consumer credit transaction, the unearned part of
                                                            No equivalent.
the finance charge must be rebated in accordance
with this clause.
Article 139: General Requirement on Credit Cost
Disclosure. This Article is to the effect that the
disclosures required by the Act must be made by a
credit provider in accordance with the regulations          No equivalent.
of the implementing agency. The mission team was
unable to ascertain whether any such regulations
have been made.
Article 140: Credit Sales, Required Disclosures:            There is no equivalent specifically for credit sales
this Article contains detailed disclosure requirements      contracts. However some aspects of the Consumer
for credit sale contracts (other than pursuant to an        Act requirements are covered by Circular 730.
open – ended credit plan).                                  However this does not include the requirements under
                                                            Article 140 to disclose, for example, the cash price of
                                                            the relevant goods or the amount of any down
                                                            payment.
Article 141: Required Disclosure on Open-end                There are disclosure requirements for credit card
Credit Plan. This Article contains disclosure               contracts but not, for example, specific to overdrafts
requirements for open-ended credit plans (such as           and other lines of credit which also have revolving
credit cards, overdrafts and lines of credit).              balances.
                                                            The credit card contract disclosure requirements are
                                                            contained in MORB 320.4 and to some extent are
                                                            more extensive than those in the Consumer Act (for
                                                            example, there are no requirements in the Consumer
                                                            Act for the disclosure of the fees and charges).
Article 142: Required Disclosures on Consumer               MORB X307.2 (as set out in Circular 730) provides
Loans Not Under Open-End Credit Plan. This                  that:
Article contains detailed disclosure requirements for       ‘As a general rule, loan terms shall be disclosed to all
other consumer loans.                                       types of borrower. For small business/retail/consumer
                                                            credit the following are the minimum information to be
                                                            disclosed (sample form in Appendix 19):
                                                            a. The total amount to be financed;
                                                            b. The finance charges expressed in terms of pesos
                                                            and centavos;
                                                            c. The net proceeds of the loan; and
                                                            d. The percentage that the finance charge bears to
                                                            the total amount to be financed expressed as a simple
                                                            annual rate or an effective annual interest rate (EIR)
                                                            as described in item h of


                               Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|127
                                                         Annexure II. Comparison between Consumer Law of the
                                                                                  Philippines and BSP Laws

                                                         Subsection x307.1. EIR may also be quoted as a
                                                         monthly rate in parallel with the quotation of the
                                                         contractual rate.
                                                         Banks are required to furnish each borrower a copy of
                                                         the disclosure statement, prior to the consummation
                                                         of the transaction.”
                                                         The principal difference between the above
                                                         requirements and those of the Consumer Act appears
                                                         to be that Circular 730 does not require disclosure of
                                                         details of security interests.
Article 143: Form and Timing of Disclosures. All         There is not a general requirement to this effect
disclosures required by the Act must be “ made clearly   although, as noted above, Circular 730 requires the
and conspicuously in writing before the transaction is   mandated disclosures for loans to be provided “ prior
consummated”.                                            to the consummation of the transaction”. Further,
                                                         X320.4 requires credit card information about fees
                                                         and charges and interest rates (and other matters) to
                                                         be disclosed “prior to the imposition of the charges
                                                         and to the extent applicable”
Article 144: Periodic Statement of Charges. This         Periodic statements of account are only required in
Article contains disclosure requirements for periodic    relation to check accounts (MORB X185.2(c)).
statements of account (but does not require credit
providers to provide them)
Article 145: Exempted Transaction. This Article          The Circular 730 requirements are stated to apply
makes clear that the above requirements do not apply     only to “small business/retail/consumer credit” (see
to business or commercial purpose transactions or to     MORB X307.2).
consumer credit transactions “where the debtor is the
one setting the definite set of terms such as bank
deposits, insurance contracts, sale of bonds or
analogous transactions”.
Article 146: Sale of Consumer Products on
Installment Payment. This Article contains detailed      No equivalent.
disclosure requirements for installment sales.
Article 147: Penalties. The penalties for non-
compliance with the above provisions are minimal
(the greater of 1,000 pesos and an amount equal to       See Sections 35, 36 and 37 of R. A. No. 7653.
twice the finance charge, up to a maximum of 3,000
pesos).




                              Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector|128
