1
DISCLAIMER


This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.




                                                                                                2
                                      .............................................................................ii
                            .............................................................................. 4
      CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS ............................................................ 5
      DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES ................................................................ 14
      CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE ................................ 27
      PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ....................................................................... 43
      DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ................................................................. 50
      GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY ....................................................... 56
      CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ................................................................................. 58
      COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ................................................ 62
                                 ....................................................................... 64
      INVESTOR PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS ............................................................. 65
      DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES ................................................................ 72
      CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE ................................ 83
      PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ....................................................................... 87
      DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ................................................................. 88
      GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY ....................................................... 91
      CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT................................................................................. 93
                                 ....................................................................... 95
      CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS .......................................................... 96
      DISCLOSURE & SALES PRACTICES .................................................................... 100
      CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE .............................. 105
      PRIVACY & DATA PROTECTION ........................................................................... 106
      DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ............................................................... 107
      GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY ..................................................... 108
      CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ............................................................................... 109
                                                       ................................................. 111
      CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS ........................................................ 113
      DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES .............................................................. 117
      CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE .............................. 123
      PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ..................................................................... 129
      DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM.................................................................. 131
      CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ............................................................................... 132

GRAPH
Graph 1: Concentration in the Microfinance (2012) ............................................................................ 112
Graph 2 – NPL Ratio (IMF Vietnam’s Financial Sector Presentation, 2012) ...................................... 113




                                                                                                                                 i
ADB                  Asian Development Bank
ADR                  Alternative dispute resolution
ATM                  Automatic Teller Machine
AML Law              Law on Prevention of Money Laundering (No. 07/2012/QH13)
AUM                  Assets under management
AVI                  Association of Vietnamese Insurers
BISA                 Banking Inspection and Supervision Agency
BOD                  Board of Directors
CCP                  Central Counterparty
CGAP                 Consultative Group to Assisst the Poor
CI                   Credit institution as defined by the CI Law
CI Law               Law on Credit Institutions (No. 47-2010-QH12)
CIS                  Collective investments
CPE                  Continuous professional education
CP Law               Law on Protection of Consumers’ Rights (No.59/2010/QH12)
CPFL                 Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
CPFL                 Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
CPD                  Consumer Protection Department of VCA
Credit Information   Decree on Credit Information Activities (No. 10/2010/ND-CP)
Decree
DIV                  Deposit Insurance of Vietnam
ETF                  Exchange-Traded Fund
GDP                  Gross Domestic Product
HNX                  Hanoi Stock Exchange
HOSE                 Ho Chi Minh City Stock Exchange
IAIS                 International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) and
                     the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
                     (OECD)
IB Law               Law on Insurance Business (No. 24/2000/QH10)
IFC                  International Finance Corporation
IOSCO                International Organization of Securities Commissions
ISA                  Insurance Supervision Authority
MFI                  Micro-Finance Institution
MFWG                 Microfinance Working Group
MoCI                 Ministry of Culture and Information
MoET                 Ministry of Education and Training
MoF                  Ministry of Finance

                                                                                     ii
MoIT       Ministry of Industry and Trade
MoJ        Ministry of Justice
NBCI       non-bank credit institution
NCIC       National Credit Information Center of Vietnam
NGO        non-governmental organization
OECD       Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PCB        Private Credit Bureau
PCF        People’s Credit Fund
PCR        Public Credit Registry
ROSCA      Rotating Savings and Credit Association
SBV        State Bank of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam
SBV Law    Law on State Bank of Vietnam (No. 46/2010/QH12)
SC Law     Securities Law (No. 70/2006/QH11)
SME        Small and medium enterprise
SOE        State-owned enterprise
SSC        State Securities Commission
STI        Securities Training Institute
UPCOM      A platform for trading in unlisted public companies
VBARD      Vietnam Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
VBSP       Vietnam Bank for Social Policies
VCA        Vietnam Competition Authority
VINASTAS   Vietnam Standards and Consumers Association
VND        Vietnamese Dong
VSD        Vietnam Securities Depository
WB         World Bank




                 Currency and Equivalent
                          Units
                      (As of 1 May 2014)
                 Currency Unit = Vietnamese
                        Dong (VND)
                   US$ 1 = VND 21,124.79

                  Government Fiscal Year
                   January 1–December 31




                                                                    iii
The Vietnamese banking sector has evolved dramatically over the past twenty
years. In the early 1990s, the entire commercial banking sector consisted of four wholly
owned state banks. Today, the credit industry that includes both banks and non-bank credit
institutions is made up of:
     a)     commercial banks (of which 2 are wholly state-owned, 3 are some 70 percent state
            owned, 4 are classified as “joint-ventures”, 37 are classified as “joint-stock”, 5 are
            wholly foreign-owned, and 50 are branches of foreign banks);
     b)     one development bank and one social policy bank;
     c)     one cooperative bank and some 1,130 People’s Credit Funds; and
     d)     2 licensed microfinance institutions.
Taken together, the banking system’s1 total assets in 2012 were US$258.9 billion,
which accounted for 166 percent the country’s 2012 GDP. As noted in the IFC
Responsible Finance report, commercial banks were responsible for 89 percent of the
total assets in the banking sector, while VBSP represented 2 percent of the total assets. 2
Given the considerable number of newly established joint-stock Vietnamese
banks, the merger and consolidation of many of these has now become a
Government policy imperative.3 There is significant concentration in the banking industry
with the top 10 banks accounting for approximately 78 percent of the assets of the entire
banking system.4 The largest bank in the country in terms of assets, capital, customer base
and the extent of its network is the Vietnam Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(VBARD) that is wholly owned by the State. It alone controls some 10 percent of the banking
sector’s total assets5 and, with some 3,800 offices throughout all parts of the country, has by
far the largest network of bank branches in Vietnam.




1
  Including also 17 finance companies, 12 finance leasing companies, 1,146 People’s Credit Funds and 2 licensed microfinance
institutions.
2
  Responsible Finance in Vietnam, 50 (IFC, 2014).
3
  See, Decision 254 of 2012 of the Prime Minister on restructuring the system of credit institutions to 2015; and
Circular 04 of 2010 of SBV’s Governor on Regulating the Merger, Consolidation and Acquisition of Credit Institutions.
4
  Source: SBV.
5
  VBARD 2011 Annual Report and the authors’ calculation.
                                                                                                                               4
                                                                  I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


SECTION A           CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS
Good Practice A.1   Consumer Protection Regime
                    The law should provide clear consumer protection rules regarding banking
                    products and services, and all institutional arrangements should be in
                    place to ensure the thorough, objective, timely and fair implementation and
                    enforcement of all such rules.
                       a. Specific statutory provisions should create an effective regime for
                           the protection of a consumer of any banking product or service.
                       b. A general consumer agency, a financial supervisory agency or a
                           specialized financial consumer agency should be responsible for
                           implementing, overseeing and enforcing consumer protection
                           regarding banking products and services, as well as for collecting
                           and analyzing data (including inquiries, complaints and disputes).
                       c. The designated agency should be funded adequately to enable it to
                           carry out its mandates efficiently and effectively.
                       d. The work of the designated agency should be carried out with
                           transparency, accountability and integrity.
                       e. There should be co-ordination and co-operation between the
                           various institutions mandated to implement, oversee and enforce
                           consumer protection and financial system regulation and
                           supervision.
                       f. The law should also provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for
                           the private sector, including voluntary consumer organizations and
                           self-regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer protection
                           regarding banking products and services.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    There are two main laws that provide for consumer protection rules in the banking
                    sector: (i) the Law on the Protection of Consumers’ Rights (CP Law)6; and (ii) the
                    Law on Credit Institutions (CI Law)7. Whereas the former establishes a general
                    framework for consumer protection that applies to all “organizations or individuals
                    trading goods, services”,8 the latter regulates exclusively credit institutions as
                    defined by the law.9
                    More specifically, the CP Law provides clear consumer protection rules
                    applicable to the products and services of all business organizations and imposes
                    numerous statutory obligations on all business entities in their dealings with
                    consumers.10
                    The CI Law applies to all credit institutions defined by the Law (including banks)
                    and provides for a limited number of market conduct rules, particularly in a single
                    article headed “Protection of Client Interests”11. This article requires credit
                    institutions and branches of foreign banks to fulfill five obligations:
                           to participate in deposit insurance and publish information regarding
                            deposit insurance at their head offices and branches;
                           to “create favorable conditions for customers to deposit and withdraw
                            money” and ensure the full and timely payment of principal and interest
                            of any sum of deposit;
                           to refuse any investigation or transfer of a customer’s deposits, except
                            when requested by a competent state authority or with the consent of
                            the customer;
                           to publish interest rates applicable to deposits and service fees, and
                            the rights and responsibilities of customers regarding each type of
                            product and service supplied; and
                           to announce their official hours for transactions and maintain operations
                            during such times.




                                                                                                          5
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                         Beside the CP Law and the CI Law, there are general laws providing limited rules
                         relating to market conduct rules, for instance: the Civil Code 12, the Commercial
                         Law13 and the Law on Enterprises14. Indirectly, consumer protection is also
                         promoted by the Law on Competition.15 The Law on Advertising16 also contains
                         rules for consumer protection regarding advertising activities.
                         The views regarding the application of the CP Law to financial institutions,
                         however, differ. According to the principle for the application of laws in Vietnam,
                         sector specific laws take precedence over generic laws. In the area of consumer
                         protection, currently the CP Law is the generic law and therefore sector specific
                         laws such as the Law on Credit Institutions precede. Thus, the CP Law is
                         applicable, unless otherwise specified or stipulated by sector-specific laws. This
                         view seems to be shared by Vietnamese state authorities including SBV.
                         However, the mission team noticed alternative interpretations regarding the issue
                         of precedence. Some Vietnamese experts argue that the CP Law takes
                         precedence over sector laws since it covers all services by all business
                         organizations. The CI Law itself does not shed much light on the issue. Article
                         3(2) of the CI Law provides that “[w]here this Law and another law contain
                         different provisions on establishment, organization, operation, special control,
                         restructuring and dissolution of credit institutions….the provisions of this Law
                         shall prevail.” Regarding market conduct and consumer protection, the quoted
                         provision is only relevant with respect to Article 10 of the CI Law which provides
                         for protection of client interests and thus may potentially interfere with provisions
                         of the CP Law. In any event, the CP Law is monitored and enforced by sector
                         supervisors and VCA only to a limited extent so far as the financial sector is
                         concerned. There has also not yet been any issuance by SBV of a Circular or
                         Decision specifically aimed at guiding comprehensively the operation of banks in
                         respect of matters of consumer protection. 17 Nor has there apparently been any
                         continuous SBV management and evaluation of banks’ observance of current law
                         regarding matters of consumer protection in banking and the handling by it of any
                         bank’s failure to comply properly with the law in these respects. 18 Moreover,
                         meetings held by the mission team with banks, and the terms and conditions,
                         which were reviewed, suggest that there are common breaches of the laws that
                         apply19 and only basic internal monitoring of compliance with the relevant
                         requirements exercised by banks.
                         Besides the consumer protection rules established by the above-mentioned laws,
                         there is implementing subsidiary legislation including decrees, decisions,
                         ordinances and circulars. Subsidiary legislation is crucial as the mission team was
                         told that financial institutions primarily apply subsidiary legislation, with laws being
                         rarely referred to given their rather vague formulation. This means that where
                         subsidiary legislation is missing rules as prescribed by laws may not be actively
                         implemented and followed.

6
  Law No. 59/2010/QH12.
7
  Law No. 47/2010/QH12.
8
  Article 2 of the CP Law.
9
  Article 1 and 2 of the CI Law.
10
   These include rules regarding: (a) the protection of consumers’ information; (b) prohibition on business entities providing
misleading or inaccurate information to consumers; (c) the public display of prices; (d) information to be provided to consumers
before a transaction takes place; (e) the obligations of third parties in providing a consumer with information; (f) the form of
contracts with consumers; (g) contractual terms which are null and void; (h) the abolition or revision of standard contractual
language which violates the rights of consumers; and (i) the methods of dispute resolution between consumers and businesses.
11
   Article 10 of the CP Law.
12
   See, e.g. Article 630 of the Law No. 33/2005/QH11 Civil Code.
13
   See, e.g. Article 14 of the Commercial Law as promulgated by the Presidential Order No. 10/2005/L-CTN.
14
   See, e.g. Article 28 of the Law No. 60/2005/QH11 on Enterprises.
15
   Law No. 27/2004/QH11 on Competition.
16
   Law No. 16/2012/QH13 on Advertising.
17
   As potentially could be forthcoming by the powers granted to SBV under Article 88, Clause 1 of Government Decree no. 59 of
2009. In the same vein, see also the requirement of SBV to prepare guidelines and conditions for banking operations contained
in Article 2, Section 2, item c) of Prime Ministerial Decision no. 83 of 2009 regarding BISA.
18
   This is contrary to the requirement of Article 88, Clause 2 of Decree no. 59 of 2009.
19
   Examples in these respects are provided under Paragraph (b) of Good Practice B. 7 below.


                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                         Consumers appear to be unaware of their rights and obligations under the
                         abovementioned laws. Moreover, the complexity and scattered character of the
                         Vietnamese regulatory framework makes it challenging for consumers to learn
                         of their rights and obligations, to understand them and, thus, to be able to rely
                         on them.
                         Paragraph (b)
                         Institutional arrangements reflect the diffuse regulatory framework as well as
                         country-specific features. In general, pursuant to the CP Law, “ the protection of
                         consumers’ rights” is a function of the Government.20 Within the Government, it
                         is MoIT, which is primarily responsible for implementation of “ the state
                         administration on the protection of consumers’ rights.”21 In order to exercise this
                         role, MoIT has established the Vietnam Competition Administration
                         Department22, also known as the Vietnam Competition Authority.
                         VCA’s organizational structure is built on multiple expert committees, including
                         the Committee of Consumer Protection. While VCA has broad powers under the
                         CP Law to issue regulations regarding matters of consumer protection applicable
                         to all business organizations (including credit institutions), and to monitor and
                         supervise the proper application of these regulations, as well as to see that
                         penalties are applied for infractions, with minor exceptions23. VCA has just a
                         limited capacity to exercise its supervisory functions with regard to the whole
                         financial industry. Specifically, VCA:
                                  considers matters of competition its primary focus;24
                                  has a total staff of about 100 of whom only 11 make up the Consumer
                                   Protection Department (CPD);
                                  is authorized by the CP Law to play significant roles in respect of matters
                                   of consumer protection for Vietnam’s entire population of some 90 million
                                   people, and understandably focuses its attention on issues it deems of
                                   highest priority, namely those posing risks to health and physical safety;
                                   and
                                  tends naturally to defer to SBV on consumer protection matters of
                                   relevance to the banking industry, especially since it has only one CPD
                                   staff member with any practical experience of Vietnam’s financial
                                   services industry and, since CPD’s inception in 2011, only some 18 cases
                                   of consumer complaints have been received by it regarding financial
                                   institutions and the services they provide.25
                         However, it is to be noted that VCA is in the process of undertaking training
                         sessions regarding consumer protection issues for the finance industry 26 and is
                         considering standard form contract issues in relation to banking matters.
                         Moreover, VCA and SBV are willingn to cooperate in different relevant areas: for
                         instance, the VCA have colaborated with SBV on multiple occasions (e.g.
                         intervention with regard to e-banking, bank accounts, ATM withdrawals) as noted
                         in the IFC report.27




20
   Article 47(1) of the CP Law.
21
   Article 47(2) of the CP Law.
22
   Decree No. 06/2006/ND-CP on Functions, Duties, Powers and Organizational Structure of Vietnam Competition Administration
Department.
23
   As noted in an IFC report “[t]the VCA has tried to solve issues arising in the [financial] market, but it has not played a
comprehensive role in financial consumer protection.” See Responsible Finance in Vietnam, 15 (IFC, 2014).
24
   See VCA’s Annual Report for 2012.
25
   This represents some 1 percent of all consumer complaints received to date by CPD. Source: interview with VCA/CPD officials
May 2014.
26
   The Task Team Leader for the mission, Ms. Ros Grady, spoke at one of these training sessions in Ho Chi Minh City on 19 May
2014.
27
   Responsible Finance in Vietnam, 15 (IFC, 2014).


                                                                                                                            7
                                                                          I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                            On the local level, People’s Committees, that is, local government entities “ shall
                            state-manage the protection of the interests of consumers at their localities. ”28
                            In addition, although rules regarding the content and method of advertising are to
                            be followed by all businesses in accordance with the Law on Advertising, the
                            mission team was not able to find any evidence that this Law is actively
                            supervised in respect of credit institutions by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and
                            Tourism (also known as the Ministry of Culture and Information - MoCI) as
                            referred to in that Law.29
                            Paragraph (c)
                            With a staff of only eleven individuals focused on matters of consumer protection
                            within VCA’s Consumer Protection Department, VCA has limited capacity to
                            perform its role of protecting consumers effectively across all sectors of the
                            Vietnamese economy, including the financial (or specifically banking) sector.
                            Likewise, there has been no funding within SBV to employ specialized staff to
                            focus exclusively on matters of consumer protection in the banking industry,
                            including the formulation of relevant subsidiary legislation, the monitoring of the
                            application of all relevant laws and subsidiary legislation and the seeking of
                            remedies for any violations of the resulting rules.
                            Paragraph (d)
                            At this point, it is premature to consider any matters of transparency,
                            accountability and integrity.
                            Paragraph (e)
                            In compliance with the requirement of the CP Law30, more co-ordination and co-
                            operation among the various institutions mandated to implement, oversee and
                            enforce consumer protection and financial system regulation and supervision is
                            needed. Beside the example of cooperation between SBV and VCA mentioned
                            above, no memorandum of understanding exists among SBV, MoF, MoIT, VCA,
                            MoCI, and sector supervisors such as SSC and the Insurance Supervisory
                            Authority regarding their respective roles in dealing with consumer protection
                            matters in the financial services industry generally or among SBV, MoF, MoIT,
                            VCA and MoCI in respect of credit institutions, in particular. However, SBV and
                            VCA (CPD) are now cooperating in hosting day-long seminars devoted to
                            consumer protection issues of particular relevance to the banking industry.
                            Paragraph (f)
                            The CP Law provides for the establishment of social organizations to protect
                            consumers’ rights.31 The CP Law grants such social organizations important
                            powers, including the power to file a lawsuit on behalf of consumers harmed by a
                            credit institution.32 The CP Law sets forth other extensive provisions in respect
                            of voluntary consumer organizations.33 Although it is not entirely clear which
                            entities might be considered “social organizations to protect consumers’ rights, ”
                            it is plausible to include VINASTAS and its member associations among them.
                            However, VINASTAS has limited resources and does not have a clear focus on
                            financial consumer protection issues, although relevant officers indicated interest
                            in the subject and they deal with very occasional complaints about financial
                            products and services.
                            The establishment of industry associations is permitted by Article 9 of the
                            Commercial Law and is governed by the Law on Associations. See Good Practice
                            A.2 concerning the Vietnam Banks’ Association (VBA).


28
     Article 47(4) of the CP Law.
29
     Article 5(2) of the Law on Advertising.
30
     See Article 47 (3) of the CP Law.
31
     Chapter 3 of the CP Law.
32
     Article 28(1)(b) of the CI Law.
33
     See Articles 27, 28 and 29 of the CP Law.


                                                                                                              8
                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Recommendation   The Government should reconsider the institutional arrangements
                 regarding financial consumer protection, and especially the role of MoIT
                 (and VCA).34 One option would be to have each financial sector regulator clearly
                 delineated by law as the sole agency in charge of business conduct supervision
                 in the relevant part of the financial sector. This option would presumably easily fit
                 the specialized, multi-agency model of supervision currently existing in Vietnam.
                 Also, such arrangements have been implemented in many jurisdictions with the
                 specialized (multi-agency) model. This option offers multiple advantages: (i)
                 responsibility for business conduct supervision would reside with an agency
                 responsible for the segment of the financial sector concerned, (ii) such agency
                 would have knowledge of the segment concerned, emerging issues and inherent
                 risks and would already establish working relationship with relevant stakeholders,
                 (iii) financing of business conduct activities would be secured through budget of
                 each individual supervisory agency, (iv) there would be no need to create and
                 finance establishment of a new agency, (v) multiple agencies would promote
                 competition of supervisory approaches, and importantly (vi) implementation of
                 this option should not require too much resources in terms of time and funding.
                 On the other hand, scattered institutional framework with multiple agencies
                 responsible for only one sector of the financial market may lead to regulatory
                 arbitrage, uneven playing field, and lack of a holistic view of the financial market
                 and the industry as a whole. Multiple agencies may also engage in ‘turf wars’ and
                 competition over scarce resources - particularly in terms of supervision staff with
                 required expertise and skills.
                 A second option would be to establish a specialized supervisory agency
                 with jurisdiction to deal with all aspects of financial consumer protection.
                 Such an agency would be responsible for consumer protection and market
                 conduct issues throughout Vietnam’s financial services sector, while having a
                 separate branch or department focused exclusively on each separate segment of
                 the financial sector. Although this option may only be considered in the longer-
                 term perspective, as it would require a substantial review of the existing
                 institutional arrangements, it offers some important advantages: (i) economy of
                 scale and scope; (ii) a holistic view of the whole market; (iii) highly specialized
                 and focused expertise; and (iv) clearly defined responsibility for the area of
                 financial consumer protection and financial literacy. On the other hand,
                 establishing such an agency would require substantial resources. Moreover, it is
                 not a common solution in the specialized (multi-agency) model of institutional
                 arrangements (the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in the U.S. is a rare
                 example of such arrangements). Alternatively, SBV could take on such a role of
                 the specialized supervisory agency given the depth of its experience in relation
                 to the financial sector and with a view to minimizing the costs associated with
                 establishing a new agency.35
                 A third option would be for VCA to build its capacity significantly so as, in
                 fact, to become the lead agency regarding financial consumer protection.
                 The biggest disadvantage of this option is the fact that VCA currently has only
                 limited expertise and experience with financial markets and even if enough
                 resources were spent building the needed expertise, the agency would likely
                 remain detached from the industry and relevant supervisory agencies, thus
                 creating cooperation and coordination issues. Thus, in the short term the first
                 option appear to be more practicable, while the second option is the preferred
                 one in the long term. Each of these options would require sufficient resources and
                 capacity to be provided to the authority responsible for financial consumer
                 protection.
                 In the short-term, it is recommended that a coordination mechanism for financial
                 consumer protection be formalized among all relevant regulators, including SBV,
                 MoF, VCA, SSC and the ISA.
                 Careful consideration should also be given to developing a single regulatory
                 regime that would:




                                                                                                     9
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                                     introduce a banking-specific consumer protection regime (including in
                                      respect of the relationship between credit institutions and their actual and
                                      potential retail customers and the products and services provided by
                                      credit institutions to their customers) which, where appropriate, would
                                      adopt, adapt and add to the existing general consumer protection regime.
                                      In the longer term such a regime could be applied to the financial sector
                                      more generally. Such a regime should, for example, cover transparency
                                      and disclosure, responsible lending standards, sales practices, staff and
                                      intermediary training requirements, advertising, privacy and data
                                      protection, and dispute resolution mechanisms;
                                   ensure that SBV is the primary institution with sole authority to devise all
                                      consumer protection-related Decrees, Circulars and Decisions in respect
                                      of credit institutions and their retail customers and other consumers; and
                                   require SBV to monitor the application of all of these regulations and any
                                      relevant Laws, and other Decrees, Circulars and Decisions with a view
                                      to ensuring consistent industry-wide application and enforcement.
Good Practice A.2              Code of Conduct for Banks
                                  a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for banks that
                                      is devised by all banks or the banking association in consultation
                                      with the financial supervisory agency and consumer associations,
                                      if possible. Monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-
                                      regulatory agency, this code should be formally adhered to by all
                                      sector-specific institutions.
                                  b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized
                                      and disseminated to the general public.
                                  c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary
                                      codes of conduct for banks on such matters as facilitating the easy
                                      switching of consumers’ current accounts and establishing a
                                      common terminology in the banking industry for the description of
                                      banks’ charges, services and products.
                                  d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                                      disseminated.
Description                    Paragraph (a)
                               No principles-based code of conduct for Vietnamese commercial banks has been
                               devised by these banks or by any banking association whether in consultation
                               with SBV and any consumer association or otherwise.
                               Vietnam Banks’ Association (VBA) exists to promote the interests of its 55
                               financial institution members. Membership in the VBA is voluntary and not all-
                               inclusive. There is no association of all credit institutions or of all commercial
                               banks. The VBA is currently drafting a Code of Conduct with the objective of
                               having the Code formally approved by the VBA’s membership by end of 2014. In
                               its present form, the most relevant provisions of the draft:
                                           Require honesty and fairness on the part of members in dealing with
                                            retail customers;
                                           Set criteria for the professional training of members’ front-line staff;
                                           Require members “to support” retail customers;
                                           Provide for the quality of members’ financial products and services;
                                           Require help to be provided by members to disadvantaged consumers
                                            and prohibit discrimination in members’ dealings with retail customers;
                                            and
                                           Deal with issues regarding the protection of customers’ data.
                               However, the Code does not deal with important matters such as facilitating the
                               easy switching of consumers’ current accounts and establishing a common


   34
        As required by Article 47 of the CP Law.
   35
        See also responsible Finance in Vietnam, 2, 14 and 16 (IFC, 2014).


                                                                                                                  10
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                                 terminology in the banking industry for the description of banks’ charges, services
                                 and products.
                                 Once approved, the Code of Conduct is to be placed on VBA’s website. However
                                 there are no plans at this stage to do more to publicize and disseminate it more
                                 widely to the general public or to allow retail customers to bring complaints to
                                 VBA-member credit institutions based on any alleged violation of the terms of the
                                 Code. Rather, strict application of the Code is intended to be monitored by VBA,
                                 with what it deems to be relatively minor infractions resulting in “ naming and
                                 shaming”, while more serious transgressions could, in the worst case, result in
                                 widely publicized expulsion of the member institution from VBA.
                                 Paragraph (b)
                                 Not applicable.
                                 Paragraph (c)
                                 All commercial banks interviewed have their own internal codes of conduct that,
                                 among other things, inform their staff members on how they are to treat each
                                 other and to deal with matters of ethics. These internal codes are not for external
                                 publication and appear to have little direct relevance to a bank’s relationship with
                                 its retail customers.
                                 Paragraph (d)
                                 Not applicable
Recommendation                   Consideration should be given to encouraging VBA to strengthening their
                                 proposed Code to deal with the following issues (and requiring all banks to join
                                 VBA or an equivalent industry association), or developing a statutory Code of
                                 Conduct which does so:
                                          Governing principles and objectives of the code;
                                          Complaints handling and alternative dispute resolution;
                                          Good conduct relating to communication, privacy and disclosure;
                                          Design of appropriate products and services;
                                          The switching of consumers’ current accounts;
                                          The establishment of a common terminology in the banking industry
                                           for the description of banks’ charges, services and products;
                                          Issues relating to different payment methods;
                                          Credit, debit and ATM cards, liability and merchant card services;
                                          Internet and mobile phone banking;
                                          Issues regarding the provision of credit;
                                          Safeguarding PINs and passwords; and
                                          Statements and account information.
                                 Compliance by banks with the requirements of the Code should be actively
                                 monitored and enforced by VBA and SBV (with appropriate powers for the VBA
                                 as a self-regulatory organization).
Good Practice A.3                Appropriate Allocation between Prudential Supervision and Consumer
                                 Protection
                                 Whether prudential supervision of banks and consumer protection
                                 regarding banking products and services are the responsibility of one or
                                 two organizations, the allocation of resources to these functions should be
                                 adequate to enable their effective implementation.
Description                      SBV’s mandate in respect of consumer protection issues concerning credit
                                 institutions comes from the SBV Act and the CI Law.
                                 The SBV Law provides that ”The State Bank shall conduct the State’s
                                 management over … banking activities”.36 SBV is also responsible for “State
                                 administration of organization and operation of credit institutions and foreign bank

   36
        SBV Law, Article 2(3).


                                                                                                                   11
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

                           branches” and is further obliged to carry out the examination, inspection and
                           supervision of all credit institutions and foreign bank’s branches, representative
                           offices of foreign credit institutions and of any other foreign institutions engaging
                           in banking activities.37 Further, SBV has responsibility for consumer protection:
                           “[banking inspection and supervision shall be aim at ensuring the safe and sound
                           development of the credit institution system and finance system; protecting legal
                           rights and interests of depositors and customers of the credit institutions;
                           maintaining and enhance the confidence of the public in the credit institution
                           system…”38
                           CIs are required to:
                                Provide timely, sufficient and accurate information and documents as
                                   requested by SBV during the process of its inspections and
                                   supervisions;
                                Be responsible for the accuracy and truthfulness of the information and
                                   documents provided;
                                Report and make clarifications regarding any recommendations and
                                   warnings on risks and safety made by SBV;
                                Implement recommendations and warnings on risks and safety made
                                   by SBV; and
                                Implement SBV’s inspection conclusions.39
                           Under the current regulatory framework, SBV is not specifically required to
                           monitor, supervise or enforce market conduct rules as compared to prudential
                           norms, with exceptions mentioned in this report (e.g. Article 50 of the SBV Law
                           quoted above). Against this background, SBV has limited focus on the inspection
                           and supervision of matters regarding the conduct of credit institutions towards
                           their retail customers.
                           At present, the on-site and off-site prudential supervisory work of SBV is carried
                           out by staff within BISA and SBV’s Departments 1 and 2, while on-site and off-
                           site supervision both for prudential and market conduct regulation is performed
                           by the same staff. Apparently, the essential purpose of BISA and SBV’s
                           Departments I and II is to ensure that SBV’s prescribed prudential rules are
                           properly applied so as to ensure the stability of Vietnam’s banking system and,
                           thus, the country’s entire financial system .
Recommendation             Early consideration should be given to having on-site and off-site prudential and
                           business conduct supervision of credit institutions carried out by separate
                           departments or teams within SBV. Having prudential and business conduct
                           supervision performed by the same individuals creates a risk of conflict of
                           interests.40 Also, there is the need for quite different skills and training for those
                           who are to perform either one of the two quite distinct supervisory roles. Training
                           should cover, for example, the details of consumer protection laws and
                           regulations; analysis of consumer disclosure documents; review of
                           advertisements and distribution arrangements; analysis of consumer complaints
                           and any systemic issues verification of calculations of fees and rates; and the
                           design and implementation of market testing arrangements. Given the breadth if
                           its functions and related responsibilities, it is suggested that SBV be the first
                           regulator to implement this approach.




  37
     CI Law, Articles 158(2) and 159.
  38
     SBV Law, Article 50.
  39
     Id., Article 160.
  40
     For instance, there may be cogent reasons from a prudential standpoint to allow interest rates on consumer loans to increase
  over time with a view to improving institutional financial stability, while such increases may well prove hard to manage by
  consumers.


                                                                                                                             12
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice A.4   Other Institutional Arrangements
                       a. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any
                           dispute regarding a consumer protection matter in respect of a
                           banking product or service is affordable, timely and professionally
                           delivered.
                       b. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in
                           promoting banking consumer protection.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    The mission team was advised that consumers rarely initiate court actions against
                    their banks or other credit providers. The reasons are likely to include the extent of
                    the formalities and delays involved, concerns regarding knowledge about financial
                    products and services,41 costs associated with legal proceedings, the
                    unpredictability of results, as well as cultural concerns and the availability of
                    alternative informal dispute resolution avenues at the village commune level.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    The State has responsibility for promoting the press, radio, television, cinema,
                    publishing, libraries and other means of mass communication. 42 SBV also
                    disseminates information to the media about SBV’s activities, particularly regarding
                    its monetary policy43 and new regulations.44 The interaction between SBV and the
                    media is also illustrated by the participation of SBV’s Governor in a Vietnamese
                    Television channel program called “People ask, Ministers answer,” where he has
                    touched upon various issues regarding consumer finance. 45 Furthermore, SBV
                    publishes a periodical entitled “Banking Review”. The immediate or lasting impacts
                    of any such activities on consumers have, however, not yet been studied.
                    Although a role is prescribed for public media in order to publicize court judgments
                    and decisions that settle civil cases initiated by consumer protection associations in
                    order to protect the interests of consumers,46 the mission team was not able to
                    identify any such judgment or decision.
                    While the CP Law provides important roles for voluntary consumer organizations
                    generally in respect of consumer protection in Vietnam and requires state funding to
                    be made available to these organizations to allow these roles to be performed in
                    accordance with this Law,47 to date, there has apparently been little state funding for
                    voluntary consumer organizations in Vietnam dealing with financial services issues.
                    As the main consumer protection NGO, VINASTAS has minimal resources to enable
                    it to carry out an effective role in relation to financial products or services or
                    complaints about the conduct of financial institutions towards their retail customers.
Recommendation      SBV should continue and further strengthen its cooperation with the media in the
                    area of consumer protection and financial literacy, for example, by coordinating
                    financial education activities targeted to journalists.
                    SBV, perhaps with the support of financial industry associations, should cooperate
                    to develop financial education training for judges that cover consumer disputes in
                    financial services.
                    SBV should support the strengthening of consumer organizations, starting by
                    coordinating training programs for members of these organizations, so that they
                    better understand financial services. SBV should also consider initiatives where the
                    consumer organizations could support SBV’s work on consumer protection and
                    financial education, such as by frequently reporting on consumer complaints in
                    financial services, conducting mystery shopping, distributing financial education
                    materials, organizing consumer roundtables or focus groups, etc. SBV could also
                    usefully initiate such activities with mass organizations and local authorities
                    (People’s Committees).
                    It is also recommended that, in the near to medium-term, consideration be given to
                    providing state funding to VINASTAS on a sustainable annual basis. The aim should
                    to enable VINASTAS to perform its Government-decreed consumer protection roles
                    effectively in respect of the financial services industry.
Good Practice A.5   Licensing

                                                                                                         13
                                                                                           I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                            All banking institutions that provide financial services to consumers should
                            be subject to a licensing and regulatory regime to ensure their financial safety
                            and soundness and effective delivery of financial services. 48
Description                 While all banking institutions that provide financial services to consumers are subject
                            to SBV licensing and a regulatory regime to ensure their financial safety and
                            soundness, there is no explicit requirement that, in order to be licensed, they must
                            demonstrate their capability to deliver financial products and services to consumers
                            effectively, thoroughly and in accordance with all relevant laws and subsidiary
                            legislation.
Recommendation              By means of a future amendment to the CI Law, SBV should be required: (i) to
                            assess the degree to which any applicant for a banking license demonstrates the
                            capability to deliver financial products and services to consumers effectively,
                            thoroughly and in accordance with all relevant laws and subsidiary legislation; and
                            (ii) to reject any application for a banking license that does not - or is unlikely to -
                            meet each of SBV’s criteria, including in respect of market conduct towards retail
                            customers in accordance with all relevant laws and subsidiary legislation.

SECTION B                   DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1           Information on Customers
                               a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a bank should gather,
                                   file and record sufficient information from the consumer to enable the
                                   bank to render an appropriate product or service to that consumer.
                               b. The extent of information the bank gathers regarding a consumer
                                   should:
                                   (i)    be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the product
                                           or service either being proposed to or sought by the consumer;
                                           and
                                   (ii)   enable the bank to provide a professional service to the
                                           consumer in accordance with that consumer’s capacity.
Description                 Paragraph (a)
                            Provisions of the type described are provided for in relation to credit products but no
                            other types of products (such as term deposits, or investment or insurance products
                            distributed by a bank).
                            Before making a decision approving extension of credit, a credit institution must
                            request data from a customer in order to assess whether (i) the purpose of the loan
                            is feasible and lawful; (ii) the customer has relevant financial capability; and (iii) the
                            customer has means to secure the loan.49 Credit institutions must also maintain loan
                            files, including information about the purpose of the loan an d customer’s financial
                            status for a period specified by law. 50
                            Regarding responsible lending requirements, credit institutions are required to set
                            lending limits based on the borrowing requirements of clients and their capacity to

    41
       As in many other countries, very few judges in first instance courts are trained in respect of matters concerning financial products
    and services and the prevailing rights and obligations of consumers and banks in respect of them.
    42
       See the Constitution, Article 33.
    43
       See, e.g. Press release: SBV meets with journalists on Vietnam Revolutionary Journalism Day available at www.sbv.gov.vn (last
    visited on June 13, 2014).
    44
       See, e.g. Press release Initial results in implementation of Circular 35 available at www.sbv.gov.vn (last visited on June 13,
    2014).
    45
       Verbatim of the interview - SBV Governor participates in VTV program of “People ask, Ministers answer” is available at
    www.sbv.gov.vn (last visited on June 13, 2014).
    46
       See CP Law, Article 45.
    47
       See Articles 27, 28 and 29 of the CP Law.
    48
       Based on Basel Core Principle 3, this Good Practice constitutes the basis for enforcement of consumer protection in any banking
    system.

    49
       Article 94(1) of the CI Law. The requirement is further detailed by the provision of Article 7 of the Regulations on Lending by
    Credit Institutions to Clients issued with Decision 1627-2001-QD-NHNN1 of the Governor of the State Bank dated 31 December
    2001).
    50
       Article 96 of the CI Law.
                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                             I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                             repay.51 Moreover, credit institutions must consider and evaluate the feasibility and
                             effectiveness of a loan and its purposes (“investment project or plan for production”)
                             or a relevant plan for servicing living conditions and the capacity of the client to repay
                             the loan.52
                             Also, anti-money laundering legal requirements require every credit institution
                             governed by the CI Law to obtain53 and store54 detailed personal information
                             regarding every retail customer. However this does not include advice about the
                             suitability of products or services for a specific customer – they are more aimed at
                             identifying the customer and detecting suspicious or unlawful transactions.
                             Paragraph (b)
                             The Good Practice described under paragraph (b) also seems to be met in relation
                             to credit products, but not other types of products.
                             There is a general requirement that a potential borrower must submit to the credit
                             institution a loan proposal and the documents necessary to prove that all conditions
                             for borrowing (as listed under the paragraph a. above) have been satisfied. Clients
                             are responsible for the accuracy and lawfulness of the documents that they submit
                             to credit institutions, while credit institutions must guide clients on the types of
                             documents that they require from them.55 When conditions for borrowing have not
                             been met, credit institutions are required to refuse provision of a loan.56
Recommendation               SBV should actively monitor compliance with the abovementioned responsible
                             lending rules and consider the introduction of new provisions to deal with the
                             consequences for a financial institution if it makes a loan in breach of these rules (for
                             example, by allowing a court to unilaterally change the credit contract terms to
                             reduce the re-payment obligations of the customer under the contract or to change
                             the loan term or the applicable interest rate).
                             Consideration should also be given to introducing more general product suitability
                             standards for non–credit products sold or distributed by a bank which are consistent
                             with this Good Practice.




    51
       Article 12(1) of the Regulations on Lending by Credit institutions.
    52
       Article 15(2) of the Regulations on Lending by Credit institutions.
    53
       See Government Decree no. 74 of 2005, Article 8, Sections 1, 2 and 3.
    54
       Id., Article 8, Section 5. All credit institutions are responsible for keeping customer identification information for at least 5 years
    after the closing of all accounts of the customer or the completion of all transactions of the customer, whichever comes later.
    55
       Article 14 of the Regulations on Lending by Credit institutions.
    56
       Article 25(1)(a) and (b) od the Regulations on Lending by Credit institutions.
                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice B.2               Affordability
                                   a. When a bank makes a recommendation regarding a product or
                                       service to a consumer, the product or service it offers to that
                                       consumer should be in line with the need of the consumer.
                                   b. The consumer should be given a range of options to choose from to
                                       meet his or her requirements.
                                   c. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided
                                       to the consumer to enable him or her to select the most suitable and
                                       affordable product or service.
                                   d. When offering a new credit product or service significantly
                                       increasing the amount of debt assumed by the consumer, the
                                       consumer’s credit worthiness should be properly assessed.
Description                     Paragraphs (a) to (d)
                                There are some provisions in the regulatory framework regarding this Good
                                Practice – see Good Practice B.1 and B.7 – although no provision in law or any
                                subsidiary legislation deals explicitly with the issue of affordability.
                                Further, without Key Facts Statements,57 it is inevitably difficult for any consumer
                                to have sufficient information on any product or service so as to enable his or her
                                selection of what is most suitable and affordable or to compare products offered
                                by different banks.
Recommendation                  The disclosure requirements referred to in this Good Practice should appear in a
                                future draft Circular that deals with the disclosure of information to retail customers
                                of credit institutions (hereinafter “the Disclosure Notice”) and this draft should then
                                be circulated widely for review and comment before being revised, as appropriate,
                                and then promulgated, applied and enforced.
                                See also the recommendations in Good Practice B.1 and B.7.
Good Practice B.3               Cooling-off Period
                                   a. Unless explicitly waived in advance by a consumer in writing, a bank
                                       should provide the consumer a cooling-off period of a reasonable
                                       number of days (at least 3-5 business days) immediately following
                                       the signing of any loan agreement between the bank and the
                                       consumer.
                                   b. On his or her written notice to the bank during the cooling-off period,
                                       the consumer should be permitted to cancel or treat the agreement
                                       as null and void without penalty to the consumer of any kind.
Description                     Paragraph (a) and (b)
                                While there is no provision that deals with these matters in the CI Law or any
                                subsidiary legislation that flows from it, upon entry into a standard contract with a
                                consumer, the CP Law requires every business organization (including every credit
                                institution) to provide “a reasonable period of time for the consumer to consider the
                                contract”.58
                                However the aforementioned provision does not define what constitutes a
                                reasonable period; nor does it deal with any aspect of the second part of this Good
                                Practice. Further, as mentioned in Good Practice A.1, the CP Law is not enforced
                                in relation to credit institutions.
Recommendation                  The regulatory framework should be amended in order to clearly provide for
                                cooling-off periods regarding consumer credit (e.g. 14 days), including an explicit
                                provision banning NBCIs from charging termination fees, penalties or
                                unreasonable additional costs in the case of early termination during the cooling-
                                off period in accordance with this Good Practice.




   57
        See Good Practice B. 9 below.
   58
        See CP Law, Article 17, Section 1.
                                                                                                                     16
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice B.4   Bundling and Tying Clauses
                       a. As much as possible, banks should avoid bundling services and
                           products and the use of tying clauses in contracts that restrict the
                           choice of consumers.
                       b. In particular, whenever a borrower is obliged by a bank to purchase
                           any product, including an insurance policy, as a pre-condition for
                           receiving a loan from the bank, the borrower should be free to choose
                           the provider of the product and this information should be made
                           known to the borrower.
Description         Paragraph (a) and (b)
                    According to the provisions in Article 5 of the Draft Inter-Circular between the
                    Ministry of Finance and SBV on the distribution of insurance through credit
                    institutions: “[c]redit institutions, overseas bank branches must not influence
                    customers to purchase insurance, providing wrong information or providing no
                    necessary information to life insurers; must not advise or prompt, in any way,
                    customers to cancel an effective insurance policy .”
                    Currently, there are no other provisions dealing explicitly with the matter of tying
                    and bundling.
                    The mission team found that banks have insurance requirements for customers
                    taking out a loan and provide borrowers with a list of approved insurance
                    companies. This list is likely to include any insurance company that is affiliated with
                    the bank (i.e. has direct or indirect common ownership), without necessarily
                    disclosing that affiliation to the customer.
                    In many countries, bundled products are offered to consumers, especially low-
                    income consumers who do not fully understand that the bundled product requires
                    additional monthly payments, the commissions that may be payable or the nature
                    of the related insurance product.
Recommendation      Although in practice it seems that tying and bundling is not yet a significant issue
                    in Vietnam, it is important that legal provisions are in place as the market develops.
                    It is accordingly recommended that a clear prohibition on insurance forcing
                    practices be introduced, coupled with disclosure and rebate provisions. The
                    ‘insurance forcing’ prohibition would apply to a requirement to acquire insurance
                    from a particular supplier as a condition of providing a banking service (such as a
                    loan) and to a requirement to pay for such insurance. However there could be an
                    exception to such a prohibition in certain cases – for example, where the
                    requirement is for insurance over mortgaged property or where insurance is
                    required by law. Further, where there is a tied insurance contract, credit providers
                    should be required to give a proportionate refund of the applicable premium if the
                    consumer pays out a loan early. It is further recommended to introduce a
                    requirement for disclosure of insurance commissions and premiums.
                    Finally, it is recommended that there be a requirement for at least three insurers
                    on the list presented to the consumer when there is a tying and bundling situation,
                    and that notice of any affiliation between the bank and the listed insurance
                    company be provided.
                    SBV could also play a more active role in this area, by undertaking studies on the
                    level of bundling and tying practices and the effect of these practices in the cost of
                    credit offered by credit institutions.




                                                                                                         17
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice B.5             Preservation of Rights
                              Except where permitted by applicable legislation, in any communication or
                              agreement with a consumer, a bank should not exclude or restrict, or seek
                              to exclude or restrict:
                                   (i) any duty to act with skill, care and diligence toward the consumer in
                                        connection with the provision by the bank of any financial service or
                                        product; or
                                   (ii) any liability arising from the bank’s failure to exercise its duty to act
                                        with skill, care and diligence in the provision of any financial service
                                        or product to the consumer.
Description                   In cases where a standardized contract contains provisions exempting the liability
                              of the credit institution that has offered the standardized contract, while abolishing
                              or seeking to abolish any legitimate interest of a retail customer, such provisions
                              are invalid, unless otherwise agreed by the institution and its customer.59
                              And furthermore, no business organization (including any credit institution) has the
                              right to dispossess or reduce the legitimate rights and interests of any consumer.60
                              Also, any business organization that abuses the law and subsidiary legislation on the
                              protection of consumers’ rights and thereby violates the legitimate rights and interests
                              of any individual is responsible before the law.61 And, finally, any clause of a contract
                              entered into by a business organization with a consumer is null and void if it
                              purports to exclude the business organization from liability to the consumer in
                              accordance with the law.62
                              Thus, for example, the legitimacy should be questioned of any statement in a
                              standard form contract to the effect that a bank’s maximum liability to a customer
                              will be limited to actual direct loss in the principal amount wrongfully or erroneously
                              withdrawn from the customer’s account due to the bank’s gross neglige nce or
                              willful misconduct. And likewise, so should the legality of any statements in a
                              standard contract to the effect that: (i) the customer must indemnify the bank
                              against any and all liabilities, costs and losses whatsoever, and however and
                              wherever arising, in connection with the provision of the bank of an account to the
                              customer of the granting to the customer of any banking service or facility; and (ii)
                              the bank may debit any account of the customer with any such liabilities, costs and
                              losses.
Recommendation                No recommendation
Good Practice B.6             Regulatory Status Disclosure
                              In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio or otherwise, a
                              bank should disclose the fact that it is a regulated entity and the name and
                              contact details of the regulator.
Description                   No bank is required by law or subsidiary legislation to disclose the fact that it is a
                              regulated entity and the name and contact details of the regulator. The mission
                              team did not see any examples of any bank doing this voluntarily.
Recommendation                It is suggested that SBV give consideration in the medium- to long- term to
                              requiring the application of this Good Practice by the issuance of a Circular or
                              other appropriate legislative instrument. In particular, all commercial banks and
                              other credit institutions should state in their advertisements that they are regulated
                              by SBV.




   59
      See the Civil Code, Article 407, Clause 3.
   60
      See CP Law, Article 4, Section 2.
   61
      Id., Article 4, Section 4.
   62
      Id., Article 16, Section 1, items a) and b).
                                                                                                                     18
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice B.7   Terms and Conditions
                       a.     Before a consumer opens a deposit, current (checking) or loan
                              account at a bank, the bank should make available to the consumer
                              a written copy of its general terms and conditions, as well as all terms
                              and conditions that apply to the account to be opened. Collectively,
                              these Terms and Conditions should include:
                               i.    disclosure of details of the bank’s general charges;
                              ii.    a summary of the bank’s complaints procedures;
                             iii.    a statement regarding the existence of the office of banking
                                     ombudsman or equivalent institution and basic information
                                     relating to its process and procedures;
                             iv.     information about any compensation scheme that the bank is
                                     a member of;
                              v.     an outline of the action and remedies which the bank may take
                                     in the event of a default by the consumer;
                             vi.     the principles-based code of conduct, if any, referred to in A.2
                                     above;
                            vii.     information on the methods of computing interest rates paid
                                     by or charged to the consumer, any relevant non-interest
                                     charges or fees related to the product offered to the
                                     consumer;
                            viii.    any service charges to be paid by the consumer, restrictions,
                                     if any, on account transfers by the consumer, and the
                                     procedures for closing an account; and
                             ix.     clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer
                                     should follow in the case of unauthorized transactions in
                                     general, and stolen cards in particular, as well as the bank’s
                                     liability in such cases.
                       b.  The Terms and Conditions should be written in plain language and
                           in a font size and spacing that facilitates the reading of every word.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    The mission team was advised that, before a consumer opens a deposit, current
                    (checking) or loan account at a bank, the bank will make available to the consumer
                    a written copy of its general terms and conditions, as well as all terms and
                    conditions that apply to the account to be opened. Any bank or other business
                    organization that uses any general transaction conditions in a contract with a
                    consumer must make these conditions public: (a) before any such contract is
                    entered into; and (b) at so-called “viewable places” for the transaction in question.63
                    The terms and conditions form part of a standard contract that the retail customer
                    is required to sign if he or she wants the product or service on offer. That contract
                    typically states that: (a) the customer has read, agrees to and is bound by the terms
                    and conditions (as may be unilaterally amended by the bank from time to time);
                    and (b) these terms and conditions form part of a valid, binding contract between
                    the customer and the bank.
                    From a limited survey by the mission team it appears that bank terms and
                    conditions include:
                             reference to the bank’s general charges, but without any indication of how
                              these are calculated;
                             the interest rate to be paid or charged to the consumer, but without a
                              complete and easily understood statement of the method for calculating
                              that rate;
                             relevant non-interest charges or fees related to the product offered to the
                              consumer, but, again, without any indication as to how these are
                              calculated;
                             allowance for unilateral amendments, revisions to or cancelations of any
                              term and condition (including any bank charge) at the sole discretion of
                              the bank, with the amendment, revision or cancellation taking effect once
                                                                                                         19
                                                                                  I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                          it is brought to the attention of the customer (whether actually or notionally)
                                          by whatever means the bank deems fit;
                                         references to other specific terms and conditions which apply to particular
                                          services and types of accounts but which are only available upon the
                                          customer’s request;
                                         a requirement for the customer to pay charges in accordance with the
                                          bank’s policy from time to time in the event a time deposit is terminated
                                          early;
                                          the right of the bank to revise, at any time and without prior notice, the
                                          minimum amount and the minimum time for each time deposit;
                                         the right of the bank at any time to close any account of a customer,
                                          without notice to or cause given to the customer and without incurring any
                                          liability in so doing;
                                         the right of the bank to suspend the operation of an account when there
                                          has been no transaction on such account for 6 months but to apply a
                                          charge over any amount remaining on deposit as fixed by the bank’s tariff
                                          from time to time until the account balance reaches zero and the account
                                          is then closed without notice;
                                         the requirement that the customer take all steps as may be desirable in
                                          the discretion of the bank to ensure that all check transactions comply with
                                          the laws of Vietnam;
                                         the right of the bank to impose a service charge as it deems appropriate
                                          in the event of a returned or overdrawn check;
                                         the imposition by the bank of deposit charges on credit balances from time
                                          to time as the bank, in its sole discretion, thinks fit;
                                         the request of the customer to the bank that, to the maximum extent
                                          permitted by applicable laws, the bank should collect, use, store, process,
                                          transfer, compile, match, obtain and/or exchange information and
                                          personal data relating to the customer (the “Data”) to or with such persons
                                          or organizations as the bank may consider necessary for whatever
                                          purpose;
                                         the declaration of the customer that no part of the Data constitutes a
                                          private secret of the consumer;64 and
                                         a requirement for the customer to defend and indemnify the bank against
                                          any and all liabilities, costs and losses whatsoever and howsoever and
                                          wherever arising in connection with the provision by the bank of any
                                          product or service to the customer, with the bank being entitled to debit
                                          any account of the customer with any such liabilities, costs and losses.

                              And, also from the limited survey, it would appear to be typical for a bank’s terms
                              and conditions only rarely to provide:
                                         a summary of the bank’s complaints procedures;
                                         procedures for the switching of retail customer accounts;
                                         the restrictions, if any, on account transfers by the consumer;
                                         information about the DIV scheme the bank is a member of;
                                         an outline of the action and remedies the bank may take in the event of a
                                          default by the consumer;
                                         an easily understandable and comparable means of computing interest
                                          rates paid or charged to any retail customer, as well as any relevant non-
                                          interest charges or fees related to the product offered to the consumer;
                                         the service charges that are to be paid by the consumer and how they are
                                          calculated;
                                         the procedures to be followed for closing an account; or




63
     Id., Article 18, Sections 1 and 2.
64
  This is to prevent the application of Article 3 of Government Decree no. 19 of 2012 on Consumer Protection which allows a
consumer to declare that certain of his or her personal information is “secret” and cannot be disclosed.
                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                       clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer should follow in
                                        the event of unauthorized transactions in general, and stolen cards in
                                        particular, as well as the bank’s liability in such cases.

                              Paragraph (b)
                              Contrary to this Good Practice, it appears that terms and conditions are frequently
                              written in less than plain language and in a very small font size and with narrow
                              spacing that makes reading the text difficult.
                              The terms and conditions in standard contracts must be written in a font size not
                              less than 12. Otherwise, a fine of merely from 10,000,000 VND to 20,000,000
                              VND (i.e. about $475 to $950) may be imposed on any bank or other
                              organization.65
                              In the above-respects, what is apparently common practice simply does not accord
                              with legal requirements. And, without adequate or any SBV supervision and
                              inspection of standard consumer contracts in banking, such non-compliance is
                              likely to continue.
Recommendation                Of high priority in the short-term, subsidiary legislation should be issued that
                              requires every credit institution - before a consumer opens any account - to provide
                              to the consumer a written copy of the credit institution’s general terms and
                              conditions, as well as all terms and conditions that apply to the account to be
                              opened. Collectively, these terms and conditions should:
                                       disclose details of the credit institution’s general charges;
                                       provide a summary of the credit institution’s complaints procedures;
                                       provide information about the DIV deposit insurance scheme the credit
                                        institution is a member of;
                                       outline the action and remedies which the credit institution may take in the
                                        event of a default by the consumer;
                                       make it clear that whenever a borrower is obliged to purchase any product,
                                        including an insurance policy, as a pre-condition for receiving a loan from
                                        the bank, the borrower is free to choose the provider of the product;
                                       state the methods of computing interest rates paid by or charged to the
                                        consumer, and any relevant non-interest charges or fees related to the
                                        product offered to the consumer;
                                       set forth when, and on what basis, a floating interest rate may adjust, in
                                        respect of a loan, ideally with reference to an objective and widely-
                                        publicized reference point;
                                       indicate that the customer will be notified in writing of any change in the
                                        applicable interest rate and any fees and charges a reasonable period in
                                        advance of the effective date of the change (say 20 days although there
                                        might be some exceptions for variable interest rates where movements in
                                        rates are outside the control of the credit institution);
                                       state the rights of the customer to exit the contract if the revised terms are
                                        unacceptable to the customer (subject to reasonable break costs in
                                        respect of fixed rate contracts and a reasonable administrative fee);
                                       disclose any service charges to be paid by the consumer, restrictions, if
                                        any, on account transfers by the consumer, and the procedures for closing
                                        an account;
                                       provide clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer should
                                        follow in the case of unauthorized transactions in general, and stolen cards
                                        in particular, as well as the credit institution’s liability in such cases;
                                       provide an explicit cooling-off period as indicated in Good Practice B.3
                                        above;
                                       have its terms and conditions and all related contractual language written
                                        in plain language and in a font size of not less than 12 and with spacing
                                        between lines that facilitates the reading of every word; and


  65
       See Government Decree no. 19 of 2012, Article 10, Clause 1, item a).
                                                                                                                    21
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                           ensure that its Terms and Conditions and all related contractual language
                            complies with the requirements of the CP Law, the CI Law, and the Law
                            on Advertising, as well as all pertinent Decrees, Circulars and Decisions;
                            and
                           provide each retail customer a written copy of his or her contract on
                            signing.
                    The rules concerning minimum font size should be actively enforced and expanded
                    to apply to all terms in a consumer contract and new rules should be introduced
                    requiring contractual documents to be expressed in simple, clear language.
                    It is also considered that every credit commercial bank should be required to
                    provide the business conduct supervision department of SBV - for its review and
                    appropriate supervisory follow-up – all of its standard form contracts (including all
                    terms and conditions) required to be signed by a consumer before acquiring any
                    product or service.
                    Furthermore, of high priority in the medium-term, SBV in cooperation with relevant
                    industry associations and consumer associations should develop - and SBV
                    should require the application by all credit institutions of - a standard methodology
                    for all credit institutions to disclose the price or cost of any financial product to
                    consumers, being the interest rate consisting of a publicized reference rate (if
                    applicable) plus a stated margin, as well as all applicable fees, commissions and
                    charges (‘effective interest rate‘).

                    And finally, given the lack of transparency specifically as to how, when and why
                    floating interest rates may legitimately be adjusted, it is suggested that the SBV, in
                    technical discussions, look to these issues as a matter of some urgency so that
                    clear guidance in these respects can be forthcoming to all banks and their retail
                    customers as soon as possible.
Good Practice B.8   Key Facts Statement
                       a. A bank should have a Key Facts Statement for each of its accounts,
                           types of loans or other products or services and provide these to its
                           customers and potential customers.
                       b. The Key Facts Statement should be written in plain language and
                           summarize in a page or two the key terms and conditions of the
                           specific banking product or service.
                       c. Prior to a consumer opening any account at, or signing any loan
                           agreement with, the bank, the consumer should have delivered a
                           signed statement to the bank to the effect that he or she has duly
                           received, read and understood the relevant Key Facts Statement
                           from the bank.
                       d. Key Facts Statements throughout the banking sector should be
                           written in such a way as to allow consumers the possibility of easily
                           comparing products that are being offered by a range of banks.
Description         Paragraph (a) to (d)
                    Although commercial banks typically issue brochures on their products available to
                    consumers for sales or marketing purposes, apparently no commercial bank
                    provides consumers a short-form Key Facts Statement which highlights the most
                    important information and features of a product.
Recommendation      Of high priority in the medium term, SBV should require all commercial banks to
                    issue Key Facts Statements which comply with all aspects of this Good Practice.
                    A standardized Key Facts Statement for each type of standard retail financial
                    service would help consumers understand the key conditions of their contracts.
                    For financial services, consumers need a short standardized description written in
                    plain language that is comparable across products provided by different
                    institutions. The format for key facts disclosure should allow consumers easily and
                    quickly to identify the key terms and conditions of financial contracts. Requiring
                    that all financial institutions prepare their offers for commonly-used retail financial
                    services in a standardized format will further facilitate the ability of consumers to

                                                                                                         22
                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


shop around and compare offers—and, thus, ultimately increase transparency and
competition in the financial sector.
For example, for a standard consumer credit product, the Key Facts Statement
could summarize in a page or two the following key information:
       the Annual Percentage Rate (APR);
       the effective interest rate;
       the total amount of the credit;
       the amounts of monthly payments;
       the final maturity of the credit;
       the total amount of payments to be made;
       all mandatory fees—particularly application, prepayment and overdue
        penalty fees—and any other charges that could be incurred;
       the creditor’s right to unilaterally change the contractual terms and
        conditions;
       any required deposits or advance payments;
       if the interest rate is variable, the basis on which the calculation is made
        or the applicable reference rate and a published source (such as a
        newspaper) where the consumer can verify the base rate;
       if any insurance (such as car insurance) is required to maintain the credit
        and, if so, the nature and extent of necessary coverage; and
       the name of the department (with telephone number, fax number and
        email address) where inquiries, complaints and disputes can be submitted.
If the credit is being provided by a retailer to finance a consumer product, such as
a television or washing machine, the consumer should also be advised of the cash
price of the product without financing charges. Special attention should also be
paid to credit card disclosures, where consumers need to be clearly informed of
the financial impact on them of paying only the minimum amount due. For the credit
reporting system, a brochure could explain to consumers the procedures for
correcting inaccurate information in the credit registers.
Although Key Facts Statements obviously do not replace a contract for legal
purposes, each credit institution should be obliged to ensure that it ’s Key Facts
Statements include no incorrect or materially misleading information.
Key Facts Statements should also include information on risks and responsibilities
such as legal obligations and sanctions the consumer may face in case of breach
of contract. A similar warning should be included for guarantors when required.




                                                                                  23
                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice B.9   Advertising and Sales Materials
                       a. Banks should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
                           procedures do not mislead customers.
                       b. All advertising and sales materials of banks should be easily
                           readable and understandable by the general public.
                       c. Banks should be legally responsible for all statements made in their
                           advertising and sales materials (i.e. be subject to the penalties under
                           the law for making any false or misleading statements).
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    Banks are required to comply with the Law on Advertising 66 and the Government
                    Decree67 which elaborates on certain articles of this Law, as well as the
                    requirements regarding advertisements found in the CP Law and marginally in
                    other legislation.
                    Thus, banks are legally responsible for all statements made in their advertising and
                    sales materials (i.e. are subject to penalties under the law for making any false or
                    misleading statement). Among other things, advertisements are prohibited if they:
                           state anything incorrectly or cause confusion about business competence,
                            the ability to provide goods and services and/or the quantity, quality,
                            prices, features, kinds, and methods of service of any goods or services;
                            or
                           directly compare the prices, quality or efficiency of goods and services of
                            one business organization to that of another’s goods and services of the
                            same kind.68
                    Furthermore, all advertisers, including banks, must ensure that the quality of their
                    products and services is consistent with their advertisements.69
                    In addition, consumers are expressly entitled to receive truthful information about
                    the quality, features and effects of goods and services and to request a bank, as
                    advertiser, to pay compensation when any goods or services are inconsistent with
                    the quality, quantity, features, effects, prices or any other contents as advertised
                    by the bank.70 The contents of any advertisement must be truthful, accurate and
                    clear and not cause damage to any “advertisement receiver” (i.e. any consumer).71
                    Also, in theory at least, it is prohibited for any business organization (i.e. any bank
                    or other credit institution) to provide consumers with any inaccurate, misleading or
                    inexact information or to hide information about:
                           any good or service provided by that business organization;
                           the reputation, goodwill, business capacity, capacity to supply goods,
                            services and any other characteristic of that business organization; or
                           the nature or any characteristic of a transaction between a consumer and
                            that business organization.72
                    And finally, there is an obligation on third parties (such as media organizations
                    through their advertising services) that provide consumers with information about
                    products and services of any business organization to ensure that the information
                    supplied is complete and accurate. The third party will be jointly liable with the
                    business organization in question for any inaccurate information where that third
                    party has failed to take adequate steps to ensure the accuracy of the information.73
                    Paragraph (b)
                    There is no requirement for all advertising and sales materials of banks to be easily
                    readable and understandable by the general public. The Law on Advertising only
                    requires that the content of advertisements be in Vietnamese with some
                    exceptions, such as for media permitted to be published in Vietnam’s ethnic
                    languages.74 Moreover, there are some specific requirements regarding readability
                    of particular information prescribed for different types of advertisements.


                    Paragraph (c)
                                                                                                         24
                                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                           A credit institution that publishes an advertisement that either misleads or deceives
                           a consumer about any of its products or services, its business ability or the
                           contents and characteristics of any transaction with a consumer is subject to a
                           modest fine of between 20 and 30 million VND (i.e. some $940 to $1,400) and,
                           among other things, the requirement to make a public correction.75
                           The making of false advertisements regarding goods or services that cause
                           “serious consequences” can also carry significant penalties for the responsible
                           individuals, being a fine of between ten million and one hundred million VND, non-
                           custodial reform of up to three years or a prison term of between six months and
                           three years.76 And offenders may also be banned from working in or for a bank for
                           one to five years.77
                           In practice, however, apparently only very rarely, if ever, has an advertisement of
                           any bank been the subject of official scrutiny and the application of any penalty 78.
                           This is notwithstanding the fact that, at least on occasion, banks produce
                           advertising and sales materials that cannot possibly be easily read and understood
                           by the general public.
                           SBV, MoIT for VCA, and other ministerial-level agencies are required to cooperate
                           with the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism in managing advertising “within
                           their scope of duties and authority”. 79 However, formal cooperation arrangements
                           have not been established.
Recommendation             The content of advertisements should be monitored either by the Ministry of
                           Culture, Sports and Tourism or SBV. It should also be clear that banks bear
                           responsibility for their agents’ actions when advising or offering a product or
                           service to consumers. In many countries, banks place large font advertisements
                           claiming zero percent borrowing rates and hide the APR in small font fine print. In
                           other cases, banks disclose key information in small print that moves quickly at the
                           bottom of a television advertisement. Monitoring needs to occur in order to ensure
                           that such advertising does not occur.




  66
     Law no. 16 of 2012.
  67
     Decree no. 181 of 2013.
  68
     Id., Article 8, Clauses 9 and 10.
  69
     Id., Article 12, Section 2, item b).
  70
     Id., Article 16, Sections 2 and 3.
  71
     Id., Article 19, Section 1.
  72
     See CP Law, Article 10, Section 1.
  73
     Id., Article 13, Section 1.
  74
     Article 18 of the Law on Advertising.
  75
     See Sections 1 and 3 of Article 6 of Government Decree no. 19 of 2012 on Consumer Protection.
  76
     See the Criminal Code, Article 168, Section 1 - The term “serious consequences” is not defined.
  77
     Id., Section 2.
  78
     By Article 26, item 5 of Decree no. 181 of 2013, the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism is responsible for carrying out
  inspections and imposing penalties for violations pertaining to advertising as prescribed by law.
  79
     See Law no. 16 of 2012 on Advertising, Article 5, Clauses 2 and 3.
                                                                                                                             25
                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector

Good Practice B.10    Third-Party Guarantees
                      A bank should not advertise either an actual or future deposit or interest rate
                      payable on a deposit as being guaranteed or partially guaranteed unless
                      there is a legally enforceable agreement between the bank and a third party
                      who or which has provided such a guarantee.
                      In the event such an agreement exists, the advertisement should state:
                      the extent of the guarantee;
                      the name and contact details of the party providing the guarantee; and
                      in the event the party providing the guarantee is in any way connected to the
                      bank, the precise nature of that relationship.
Description           There is nothing in any law or subsidiary legislation (including the Advertising Law,
                      the CP Law, the CI Law and the Civil Code) that deals with advertisements of
                      guarantees of a bank deposit or of guarantees of an interest rate payable on a
                      bank deposit.
Recommendation        The law should require that no advertisement by a bank may be made that
                      describes either an actual or future deposit or interest rate payable on a deposit as
                      being guaranteed or partially guaranteed unless:
                             there is a legally enforceable agreement between the bank and a third
                              party who or which has provided the guarantee; and
                             the advertisement states:
                             the extent of the guarantee;
                             the name and address of the party providing the guarantee; and
                           in the event that that party is in any way connected to the bank, the
                              precise nature of that connection.
Good Practice B.11.   Professional Competence
                         a. In order to avoid any misrepresentation of fact to a consumer, any
                             bank staff member who deals directly with consumers, or who
                             prepares bank advertisements (or other materials of the bank for
                             external distribution), or who markets any service or product of the
                             bank should be familiar with the legislative, regulatory and code of
                             conduct guidance requirements relevant to his or her work, as well
                             as with the details of any product or service of the bank which he or
                             she sells or promotes.
                         b. Regulators and associations of banks should collaborate to
                             establish and administer minimum competency requirements for any
                             bank staff member who: (i) deals directly with consumers, (ii)
                             prepares any Key Facts Statement or any advertisement for the bank,
                             or (iii) markets the bank’s services and products.
Description           Paragraph (a)
                      Requirements exist in terms of the qualifications of administrators, managers and
                      certain other senior positions in all credit institutions. 80 It is also obviously in the
                      interests of banks and their customers to ensure their staff members are
                      appropriately qualified, experienced and trained and the mission team is aware
                      that some efforts are made in this regard. However there are no statutory
                      requirements as to the minimum qualifications and experience for staff members
                      and there are no mandated training requirements to ensure that staff members
                      have up to date knowledge of relevant laws and of the specific financial products
                      and services that are on offer.
                      There can accordingly be no certainty that consistent standards are applied by all
                      banks for any bank staff member who deals directly with consumers, prepares
                      any documentation for consumers, drafts any advertisement for a bank or markets
                      a bank’s services and products (or indeed those of a third party where a bank acts
                      as an intermediary).



                      Paragraph (b)
                                                                                                             26
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                There is no industry-wide training program for bank employees or minimum
                                competency requirements for bank staff. Further, to the mission team’s knowledge
                                SBV and VBA have never collaborated in relation to these matters.
Recommendation                  As a high priority in the short term, it is recommended that requirements be
                                introduced for a training program for bank staff dealing with retail customers
                                covering the rights and obligations of consumers in their dealings with commercial
                                banks and the features of relevant products and services. Enrollment and a
                                passing grade should be prerequisites for all staff and agents of commercial banks
                                who:
                                     deal directly with consumers and retail customers;
                                     prepare any sales, marketing and/or advertising materials within or for any
                                       commercial bank;
                                     prepare any standard account opening, standard loan or other standard
                                       agreement for retail customers within or for any commercial bank;
                                     market any bank services and products; or
                                     in the future, prepare any Key Facts Statement for any bank.
                       13.      Refresher courses should be required from time-to-time to ensure that all staff
                                members in question receive training regarding changes in relevant laws,
                                subsidiary legislation and the specific products and services on offer to retail
                                customers of banks.


SECTION C                       CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1               Statements
                                        a. Unless a bank receives a customer’s prior signed authorization to
                                           the contrary, the bank should issue, and provide the customer free
                                           of charge, a monthly statement of every account the bank operates
                                           for the customer.
                                        b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions concerning
                                           the account during the period covered by the statement; and (ii)
                                           provide details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during
                                           the period covered by the statement.
                                        c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment
                                           required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder
                                           makes only the required minimum payment.
                                        d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly
                                           indicate the amount paid during the period covered by the statement,
                                           the total outstanding amount still owing, the allocation of payment to
                                           the principal and interest and, if applicable, the up-to-date accrual of
                                           taxes paid.
                                        e. A bank should notify a customer of long periods of inactivity of any
                                           account of the customer and provide a reasonable final notice in
                                           writing to the customer if the funds are to be treated as unclaimed
                                           money.
                                        f. When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such
                                           statements should be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable
                                           format.




   80
        See Article 50 of the CI Law.
                                                                                                                 27
                                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description                   Paragraph (a)
                              There is no statutory obligation on the part of a bank or other credit institution to
                              issue and provide its retail customers free of charge, a monthly statement of every
                              account the bank operates for the customer, unless the bank receives a customer’s
                              prior signed authorization to the contrary. Rather, a bank is simply required to notify
                              account holders of transactions and the balances in their accounts at the latter’s
                              request.81
                              Paragraph (b)
                              There are neither requirements nor guidelines as to what any such statement is to
                              provide, whether in terms of transactions concerning the account, the details of the
                              interest rate(s) applied to the account or otherwise.
                              Paragraph (c)
                              In addition, although credit card statements may set out the minimum payment
                              required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the cardholder makes only
                              the required minimum payment, there is no provision in law or subsidiary legislation
                              that requires this to happen.
                              Paragraph (d)
                              Furthermore, there is no provision in law or subsidiary legislation that requires a
                              mortgage or other loan account statement to indicate (whether clearly or not) the
                              amount paid during the period covered by the statement, the total outstanding
                              amount still owing, the allocation of payment to the principal and interest and, if
                              applicable, the up-to-date accrual of taxes paid.
                              Paragraph (e)
                              Also, there is no obligation on the part of a credit institution to notify a customer of
                              any long period of inactivity of any account of the customer and to provide a
                              reasonable final notice in writing to the customer if the funds are to be treated as
                              unclaimed money.
                              Paragraph (f)
                              When a customer signs up for paperless statements, there is no statutory
                              requirement that such statements be in an easy-to-read and readily
                              understandable format.
                              Notwithstanding the above, however, on the basis of a narrow sampling, it appears
                              that bank statements in respect of transaction accounts: (i) set out all transactions
                              concerning the account during the period covered by the statement; and (ii) provide
                              details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during the period covered by
                              the statement. In addition, it appears that credit card statements set out the
                              minimum payment required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the
                              cardholder makes only the required minimum payment. Furthermore, it appears
                              that mortgage or other loan account statements indicate the amount paid during
                              the period covered by the statement, and the total outstanding amount still owing,
                              as well as the allocation of payment to principal and interest.
                              Invariably, the practice in respect of all aspects concerning statements varies from
                              bank to bank and according to their specific contracts with customers. Some banks
                              provide monthly statements while others do not. Some charge fees for the
                              privilege, while others do not. What is contained in such statements varies as well.
                              In addition, there is no requirement for banks to track down the holders of
                              inoperative accounts, just as there is no regulation providing for the forfeiture of
                              funds to the State on the expiry of a specified number of years, provided proven
                              attempts to notify the account holder have been made but have failed.




   81
        Article 84, Section 1 of Government Decree no. 59 of 2009 on Commercial Banks.
                                                                                                                    28
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendation                  The proposed new disclosure requirements should deal with all aspects of this
                                Good Practice, with all banks being required to apply each aspect subject to
                                possible exceptions for certain accounts (e.g. where there interest rates, fees and
                                charges and repayments cannot be changed or where the debt has been written
                                off).
                                Statements from a bank should be regarded by the bank and customer alike as the
                                most valid record and evidence of all of the customer’s transactions. Thus,
                                statements need to be self-explanatory and clear. They should allow the customer
                                to comprehend the financial consequences of the " number" in the statement and
                                take necessary action based on the statement. This is particularly important in the
                                case of any statements that carry finance charges, penalty interest and state the
                                serious consequences of default or of delay in payment.
                                Also, when customers choose paperless statements, the access to the statements,
                                their format and details should be a fair substitute for paper statements.
Good Practice C.2               Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-interest Charges
                                       a. A customer of a bank should be notified in writing by the bank of any
                                          change in:
                                          (i)    The interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the
                                                 customer as soon as possible; and
                                          (ii)   A non-interest charge on any account of the customer a
                                                 reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the change.
                                   b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she
                                       should have the right to exit the contract without penalty, provided
                                       such right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                                   c. The bank should inform the customer of the foregoing right whenever
                                       a notice of change under paragraph a. is made by the bank.
Description                     Paragraph (a)
                                There is no law or subsidiary legislation that requires a bank to notify its retail
                                customers in writing of any change in the interest rate to be paid or charged on any
                                account of the customer as soon as possible. Nor is there any law or subsidiary
                                legislation that requires a bank to notify a retail customer of any change to a non-
                                interest charge on any account of the customer a reasonable period in advance of
                                the effective date of the change. What governs these events, are the standard form
                                contractual provisions that are part of each bank’s own general terms and
                                conditions. These typically specify when and by what means any notice of any such
                                change is to be brought to the attention of the retail customer. Inevitably, therefore,
                                the practice differs from bank to bank.
                                However, there is also a regulatory issue regarding this practice. Pursuant to Article
                                16(1)(c) of the CP Law a contract shall have no effect if it allows a subject acting
                                for a business purpose to unilaterally change conditions agreed in advance with
                                the consumer. The general prohibition is partially overridden by the CI Law, which
                                provides that “[a] credit institution shall have the right to make decisions exempting
                                or reducing interest rates and fees for clients in accordance with its own internal
                                rules”82 and that credit institutions shall have the right to fix interest rates for raising
                                capital and fees for provided services. 83 These provisions are further detailed by
                                Article 23 of the Regulations on Lending by Credit Institutions, which provides that
                                credit institutions may decide on exemptions from, and reduction of, loan interest
                                payable by a client when the client suffers losses in respect of the assets relating
                                to the loan, resulting in financial difficulties. In such cases the rate of exemption
                                from or reduction of, loan interest must be consistent with the financial capacity of
                                the credit institution in accordance with relevant regulations. A possible
                                interpretation of these provisions is that any unilateral change is possible only if it
                                is in favor of the customer. That is, it is not possible to unilaterally increase interest
                                rates or fees. However, such a conclusion would effectively ban variable interest

   82
        Article 95(4) of the CI Law.
   83
        Article 91(1) of the CI Law.
                                                                                                                          29
                                                                                  I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                rates as well as variable deposit rates, which does not correspond to the current
                                practice as revealed during the mission (see paragraphs (b) and (c) below) and
                                was probably not intended.
                                Paragraph (b)
                                It follows from the above, that there is no law or subsidiary legislation that grants
                                the right to a retail customer of a credit institution to exit his or her contract without
                                penalty if: (i) the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer; and (ii) such
                                right is exercised by the customer within a reasonable period. Indeed, if a customer
                                wants to exit a contract before its term expires, he or she is typically subject to a
                                penalty in the range of 3 percent to 4 percent of the outstanding balance of the
                                credit in question (even though this may, in practice, be waived in whole or in part
                                if the bank is concerned about losing the customer as a result).
                                Paragraph (c)
                                Without any such right flowing to retail customers, there is nothing for a bank to
                                inform its customers in these respects.
                                While the CP Law provides that any clause of a standard form contract that has
                                been entered into with a consumer and that purports to provide a business
                                organization the right unilaterally to change the initially agreed commercial
                                obligations is supposedly null and void, 84 this provision, in practice, has no
                                relevance in respect of loan agreements that involve variable or floating rates of
                                interest.
Recommendation                  Consideration should be given to requiring advance notice of any unilateral change
                                in a contract’s terms and conditions. At a minimum, notice of changes in interest
                                charges, repayments and fees and charges be given as follows: (i) notice of a
                                change in interest rates should be given before the change takes effect, either
                                personally or by newspaper notice (in the latter case, the notice should be also be
                                given in the next statement of account); (ii) there should be at least 20 days
                                advance, personalized notice of a change in the amount of a repayment (but if it is
                                a reduction, it could be notified in the next statement of account); and (iii) 20 days
                                advance, personalised notice of a change in the amount of a fee, or a new fee
                                should also be given.
                                A prohibition should also be introduced on charging a fee payable on early
                                repayment of all or part of a consumer loan (pre-payment fee) to the extent the fee
                                exceeds reasonable costs (such as administrative costs and, in the case of a fixed
                                rate contract, a charge to reflect any loss to the credit institution due to an adverse
                                movement in interest rates).
Good Practice C.3               Customer Records
                                 a. A bank should maintain up-to-date records in respect of each customer
                                    of the bank that contain the following:
                                       (i)     a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and
                                               provide the customer’s profile;
                                       (ii)    the customer’s address, telephone number and all other
                                               customer contact details;
                                       (iii)   any information or document in connection with the customer
                                               that has been prepared in compliance with any statute, regulation
                                               or code of conduct;
                                       (iv)    details of all products and services provided by the bank to the
                                               customer;
                                       (v)     all documents and applications of the bank completed, signed
                                               and submitted to the bank by the customer;
                                       (vi)    a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in
                                               support of an application by the customer for the provision of a
                                               product or service by the bank; and
                                       (vii)   any other relevant information concerning the customer.

   84
        See CP Law, Article 16, Section 1, Item c).
                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                      b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period for
                                         retaining all such records and, throughout this period, the customer
                                         should be provided ready access to all such records free of charge or
                                         for a reasonable fee.
Description                          Paragraph (a)
                                     See Banking Sector Good Practice B.1.

                                     The Decree on Anti-Money Laundering85 sets out what information a commercial
                                     bank must receive before opening a consumer deposit or savings account and
                                     what a commercial bank must maintain thereafter. The list of information and
                                     documents regarding every retail customer is as follows:
                                            the date, month and year of opening of his or her account or conducting
                                             the transaction;
                                            his or her full name, passport number, copy of identity card or another
                                             personal identity paper, address of residence; and
                                            his or her tax payment registration number.86
                                     Missing from this list, however, are the following:
                                            the customer’s telephone number and email address, if any;
                                            any information or document in connection with the customer that has
                                             been prepared in compliance with any statute or regulation;
                                            details of all products and services provided by the bank to the customer;
                                            all documents and applications of the bank completed, signed and
                                             submitted to the bank by the customer; and
                                            a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in support of
                                             an application by the customer for the provision of a product or service by
                                             the bank.
                                     Paragraph (b)
                                     Every commercial bank is required to maintain all documents associated with their
                                     customers at least 5 years after the date of the closing of their accounts or the
                                     termination of transactions with them.87
Recommendation                       In addition to the requirements of the Anti-Money Laundering Decree, all
                                     commercial banks should be required by subsidiary legislation, in the medium to
                                     long-term, to maintain an up-to-date file in respect of each customer containing the
                                     following:
                                            the customer’s telephone number and email address, if any;
                                            any information or document in connection with the customer that has
                                             been prepared in compliance with any statute or regulation;
                                            details of all products and services provided by the bank to the customer;
                                            all documents and applications of the bank completed, signed and
                                             submitted to the bank by the customer; and
                                            a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer in support of
                                             an application by the customer for the provision of a product or service by
                                             the bank.
                                     Also, the customer should be provided the right to ready access to all of his or her
                                     records maintained by a commercial bank either free of charge or for a modest set
                                     fee.
                                     In the event the consumer seeks to borrow or has borrowed from a commercial
                                     bank, the same legislation could also usefully require the filing of:
                                            the employment certification and salary of the consumer or the amount of
                                             his or her income per year;

   85
        Decree no. 74 of 2005.
   86
        Id., Article 8, Section 3.
   87
        Id., Article 9, Section 5.
                                                                                                                       31
                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                            the materials needed to confirm and evaluate the borrower’s financial
                             condition and his or her capacity to repay the loan according to the agreed
                             conditions;
                            the decision regarding loan approval issued by the bank’s authorized body,
                             and containing the maturity date, interest rate and other conditions under
                             which the loan has been approved;
                            documents showing the collateral or guarantee related to the loan;
                            a record of the changes and additions to the loan agreement, if any, after
                             the loan approval;
                            documentation confirming and defining any required action; and
                            all correspondence and documents relating to communications between the
                             bank and the borrower after approval of the loan agreement.
                    And, finally, banks should be required to maintain any retail customer’s loan file as
                    long as the loan in question has not been repaid or liquidated in some other way
                    and for a reasonable period afterwards (for example, in case a dispute arises).
Good Practice C.4   Paper and Electronic Checks
                           a. The law and code of conduct should provide for clear rules on the
                              issuance and clearing of paper checks that include, among other
                              things, rules on:
                              (i)     checks drawn on an account that has insufficient funds;
                              (ii)    the consequences of issuing a check without sufficient
                                      funds;
                              (iii)   the duration within which funds of a cleared check should be
                                      credited into the customer’s account;
                              (iv)    the procedures on countermanding or stopping payment on
                                      a check by a customer;
                              (v)     charges by a bank on the issuance and clearance of checks;
                              (vi)    liability of the parties in the case of check fraud; and
                              (vii)   error resolution.
                           b. A customer should be told of the consequences of issuing a paper
                              check without sufficient funds at the time the customer opens a
                              checking account.
                           c. A bank should provide the customer with clear, easily accessible and
                              understandable information regarding electronic checks, as well the
                              cost of using them.
                           d. In respect of electronic or credit card checks, a bank should inform
                              each customer in particular:
                              (i)     how the use of a credit card check differs from the use of a
                                      credit card;
                              (ii)    of the interest rate that applies and whether this differs from
                                      the rate charged for credit card purchases;
                              (iii)   when interest is charged and whether there is an interest free
                                      period, and if so, for how long;
                              (iv)    whether additional fees or charges apply and, if so, on what
                                      basis and to what extent; and
                              (v)     whether the protection afforded to the customer making a
                                      purchase using a credit card check differs from that afforded
                                      when using a credit card and, if so, the specific differences.
                           e. Credit card checks should not be sent to a consumer without the
                              consumer’s prior written consent.
                           f. There should be clear rules on procedures for dealing with
                              authentication, error resolution and cases of fraud.




                                                                                                       32
                                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description                  Paragraph (a)
                             Law No. 49/2005/QH11 on Negotiable Instruments, Decision No. 30/2006/QD-
                             NHNN promulgating the regulation on Supply and use of Checks and Decree No.
                             101/2012/ND-CP on Non-Cash Payments are the source of the rules on the
                             issuance and clearing of (paper and electronic) checks that cover topics listed
                             under this Good Practice.88 Among others, this regulatory regime includes the
                             following provisions:
                                   i.      In case of insufficient funds, the drawee should be liable to make a
                                           partial payment if so requested by the beneficiary up to the amount of
                                           available funds of the drawer (Article 71(5) of the Law), otherwise the
                                           drawee’s consent to the overdraft is required to secure the necessary
                                           funds89. Further, the drawee must notify the drawer of insufficient funds,
                                           provide information necessary to identify the check concerned and
                                           inform the drawer of beneficiary rights under such circumstances; and
                                           the drawee must also concurrently notify the check presenter90.
                                  ii.      The beneficiary may request the drawee to make a written certification
                                           of refusal to pay the whole sum, or pay part of the sum 91.
                                 iii.      A check presented in a timely manner should be paid on the day of
                                           presentation or on the next working day92.
                                 iv.       A drawer has the right to require stop payment of a check drawn by the
                                           drawer by notifying the drawee in writing93.
                                  v.       The Decision includes a limited set of rules regarding charges,
                                           specifically (in multiple articles) it provides that collection charges can
                                           be charged.
                                 vi.       The Law provides for rights and obligations of the parties concerned
                                           regarding lost checks. In case of loss, the beneficiary must immediately
                                           notify in writing the drawee, the drawer or the issuer by telephone and/or
                                           other means if so agreed by the parties (where the person who lost the
                                           check is not the beneficiary, such person should immediately notify the
                                           beneficiary). Upon receipt of such notice, the issuer and the drawee
                                           should not be allowed to pay the check. Where a lost check is misused
                                           before the drawee or the issuer receives notice of loss, the drawee or
                                           issuer should be relieved from their responsibility if they conducted
                                           properly the check inspection (‘control’) and otherwise complied with
                                           rules prescribed by the Law. However, the drawee and/or issuer should
                                           be obliged to compensate the beneficiary for damage and loss if the
                                           drawee or issuer paid the check after receipt of notice of loss 94.
                                 vii.      Pursuant to Article 79(1) of the Law “disputes in relation to negotiable
                                           instruments may be settled at a court or a commercial arbitration body. ”
                             Paragraph (b)
                             It is not a common practice for a bank to notify its retail customers when opening
                             checking accounts of any consequences of issuing a paper check on an account
                             with insufficient funds.




   88
      It is to be noted, however, that cash is the primary payment medium in Vietnam, particularly for low-value retail transactions.
   And, checks are rarely used except apparently as well for low-value retail transactions. In fact, as noted by SBV, the use of checks
   in Vietnam consitues less than 1 percent of the total non-cash payments.
   89
      Article 13(1)(b) of the Decision.
   90
      Article 17(4) of the Decision.
   91
      Article 17(4) of the Decision.
   92
      Article 71(1) of the Law.
   93
      Article 73(1) of the Law.
   94
      Article 13 of the Law.
                                                                                                                                   33
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                 Paragraphs (c) to (e)
                                 There are no requirements of the kind described in the Good Practice specific to
                                 electronic checks. However, presumably the Law and Decision described above
                                 apply to electronic checks (Article 15 of the Decision). No rules have been explicitly
                                 adopted to apply to credit card checks as yet. This may be because such checks
                                 are not in widespread use in Vietnam.
                                 Paragraph (f)
                                 Upon receiving a check, the drawee is obliged to inspect the check to ensure,
                                 among other things, that it has been drawn in accordance with the Law and that it
                                 is valid. When detecting errors, the drawee is obliged to return the check to the
                                 presenter. When the drawee fails to comply with the obligation to inspect the check
                                 and such failure leads to abuse of the check or property loss, the drawee is liable
                                 for such loss.95 If a check payment is refused because the check is drawn
                                 improperly due to the drawer’s fault, the beneficiary may request the drawer to
                                 issue another check for replacement on the day of the request or the following
                                 working day96.
Recommendation                   Requirements relating to disclosures to consumers with regard to checks and
                                 electronic checks should be strengthened to reflect all the above requirements of
                                 this Good Practice. This is a long term recommendation given SBV’s advice that
                                 the use of checks in Vietnam now is limited (less than 1 percent of the total non-
                                 cash payments).
                                 Further, consideration should be given to establishing a regulatory framework for
                                 credit card checks that would reflect the Good Practices listed above if such
                                 facilities become commonly used in Vietnam.
Good Practice C.5                Credit Cards
                                        a. There should be legal rules on the issuance of credit cards and
                                           related customer disclosure requirements.
                                        b. Banks, as credit card issuers, should ensure that personalized
                                           disclosure requirements are made in all credit card offers, including
                                           the fees and charges (including finance charges), credit limit, penalty
                                           interest rates and method of calculating the minimum monthly
                                           payment.
                                        c. Banks should not be permitted to impose charges or fees on pre-
                                           approved credit cards that have not been accepted by the customer.
                                        d. Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment
                                           warnings on each monthly statement and the total interest costs that
                                           will accrue if the cardholder makes only the requested minimum
                                           payment.
                                        e. Among other things, the legal rules should also:
                                           (i)     restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing
                                                   of credit cards to young adults (below age of 21) who have no
                                                   independent means of income;
                                           (ii)    require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest
                                                   rates increase;
                                           (iii)   prevent the application of new higher penalty interest rates to
                                                   the entire existing balance, including past purchases made at
                                                   a lower interest rate;
                                           (iv)    limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
                                                   consumers exceed their credit limits;
                                           (v)     prohibit a practice called “double-cycle billing” by which card
                                                   issuers charge interest over two billing cycles rather than
                                                   one;
                                           (vi)    prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly payments
                                                   in ways that maximize interest charges to consumers; and

   95
        Article 17 of the Decision.
   96
        Article 3(2) of the Decision.
                                                                                                                     34
                                                                                            I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                          (vii)     limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards issued
                                                    to individuals with bad credit.
                                    f.There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of
                                      unauthorized transactions and of stolen cards, with the ensuing
                                      liability of the customer being made clear to the customer prior to his
                                      or her acceptance of the credit card.
                                  g. Banks and issuers should conduct consumer awareness programs
                                      on the misuse of credit cards, credit card over-indebtedness and
                                      prevention of fraud.
Description                    Paragraph (a)
                               Vietnam’s legal requirements regarding the issuance and use of bank cards 97 need
                               to be improved to comply with the essential matters of this Good Practice. Indeed,
                               the current regulatory framework does not offer substantial protection to
                               consumers regarding the issuance and use of credit cards, including any detailed
                               customer disclosure requirements.
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Credit card issuers are not required to ensure that personalized disclosure
                               requirements are made in all credit card offers, including the fees and charges
                               (including finance charges), credit limit, penalty interest rates and method of
                               calculating the minimum monthly payment.
                               Paragraph (c)
                               There is no prohibition on a bank imposing charges or fees on pre-approved credit
                               cards that have not been accepted by the customer. However, Article 10(4) of the
                               CI Law stipulates that credit institutions and branches of foreign banks are
                               responsible to “publicly announce the deposit rate, service fees, customer rights
                               and obligations for each type of products and services being supplied”. Further,
                               Article 20(1) of Decision No. 20/2007/QD-NHNN, promulgating the regulations on
                               the Issuance, Payment, Use and Supply of Bank Cards provides that: ”the card
                               issuers shall be obliged to notify the clients of full information on the fees payable
                               by the pre-paid card owner before the card is issued”. Accordingly, card issuers
                               must disclose all fees before the credit card is used so that consumers may decide
                               whether to use the card or not.
                               Paragraph (d)
                               Consumers are not required to be given personalized minimum payment warnings
                               on each monthly statement and to be informed in writing of the total interest costs
                               that will accrue if the cardholder makes only the requested minimum payment.
                               Indeed, there is no requirement for a card issuer to provide a cardholder a monthly
                               statement, although this may occur as a matter of practice.98
                               Paragraph (e)
                               There are no legal rules corresponding to the Good Practice such as:
                                    restricting or imposing conditions on the issuance and marketing of credit
                                        cards to those younger than 21 who have no independent means of
                                        income;99 or
                                    limiting fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
                                        consumers exceed their credit limits.100


   97
      See the Regulation on the Issuance, Use and Payment of Bank Cards promulgated by Decision no. 20 of 2007 of the Governor
   of SBV.
   98
       See, id., Article 21, Clause 3 which “entitles” a cardholder to be provided information by his or her card-issuing organization
   regarding his or her card transactions, balances and limits related to the use of his/her card simply in accordance with whatever
   regulations in these respects the card-issuing organization may have adopted and whether on a “regular or irregular basis”.
   99
       See, id., Article 11, Section 1, item a) which requires a cardholder to have full civil act capacity as prescribed by law. “ Civil act
   capacity” means 18 years of age or older as per Articles 17, 18 and 19 of the Civil Code.
   100
        Cardholders are required pay charges for the use of card services, with types and rates of charges being simply as prescribed
   by card-issuing organizations. See, id., Article 6, Section 1. And, as a corollary, by Article 22, Section 2, it is the obligation of every
                                                                                                                                          35
                                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                             Paragraph (f)
                             Although there are rules on error resolution 101 and the reporting of unauthorized
                             transactions and of stolen cards, in the latter respects the provisions are potentially
                             particularly favorable to the card issuer. While a cardholder is required to report a
                             loss of a card to the issuer of the card without delay, the card issuer has up to 10
                             working days to confirm a cardholder’s report of the loss. And, until such
                             confirmation is provided, the cardholder is wholly liable for any loss caused by the
                             illegal use of his or her card. 102 In addition, there is no requirement that the
                             possibility of ensuing liability for the customer be made clear to the customer prior
                             to his or her acceptance of the card.
                             Paragraph (g)
                             Banks and other card issuers have never conducted consumer awareness
                             programs on the misuse of credit cards, credit card over-indebtedness and
                             prevention of fraud.
Recommendation               Of high priority in the medium-term, legal requirements103 should be introduced that
                             deal comprehensively with all aspects of the issuance, use and payment of bank
                             cards, including in respect of specific matters of required disclosure and all other
                             issues of relevance for consumer protection. In particular, consideration should be
                             given to introducing requirements which reflect the terms of this Good Practice.
Good Practice C.6            Internet Banking and Mobile Phone Banking104
                                   a. The provision of internet banking and mobile phone banking (m-
                                      banking) should be supported by a sound legal and regulatory
                                      framework.
                                   b. Regulators should ensure that banks or financial service providers
                                      providing internet and m-banking have in place a security program
                                      that ensures:
                                         (i)      data privacy, confidentiality and data integrity;
                                         (ii)     authentication, identification of counterparties and access
                                                  control;
                                         (iii)    non-repudiation of transactions;
                                         (iv)     a business continuity plan; and
                                         (v)      the provision of sufficient notice when services are not
                                                  available.
                                   c. Banks should also implement an oversight program to monitor third-
                                      party control conditions and performance, especially when agents
                                      are used for carrying out m-banking.
                                   d. A customer should be informed by the bank whether fees or charges
                                      apply for internet or m-banking and, if so, on what basis and how
                                      much.
                                   e. There should be clear rules on the procedures for error resolution
                                      and fraud.
                                   f. Authorities should encourage banks and service providers to
                                      undertake measures to increase consumer awareness regarding
                                      internet and m-banking transactions.


   cardholder to pay to his or her card-issuing organization fully and on time all charges and interest arising from the use of the card
   as agreed upon in the card-issuer’s standard form card use contract.
   101
       See, id., Article 20, Clause 1, item a) and Article 21, Clause 5, item a).
   102
       Id., Article 13, Sections 1 and 2.
   103
       Article 35 of the Regulation on the Issuance, Use and Payment of Bank Cards, provides that SBV’s Governor may, at any time,
   make amendments and supplements as deemed appropriate.
   104
       “Internet banking” is defined as banking services that customers may access via the Internet. The access to the Internet could
   be through a computer, mobile phone (“mobile phone banking”), or any other suitable device. Payment services that are only
   initiated via the Internet using a mobile phone (e.g. by a mobile banking application using an app on a smart phone) are not
   considered to be mobile payments; instead they are categorized as internet payments. This interpretation is consistent with the
   view of the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), which is the
   relevant standard setting body on payment and settlement systems. However, for practical reasons and due to the potential
   importance of mobile money in Vietnam, Good Practice C.6 is intended here as also covering mobile payments and, to some extent,
   e-money.
                                                                                                                                    36
                                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description                   The growth of internet and mobile phone banking in Vietnam in recent years has
                              been remarkably robust from a very low base and is likely to expand exponentially.
                              However, while the existing legal regime provides for electronic payments, 105 as
                              well as for the modes of conducting banking e-transactions,106 Vietnam still needs
                              to build a legal regime that deals comprehensively with consumer protection
                              matters of relevance in the provision of digital financial services. 107 These services
                              are fundamentally different from conventional financial services due to:
                                       the high speed with which information is transmitted and transactions are
                                        completed;
                                       the limited records of accounts and transactions readily available to
                                        consumers;
                                       the provider of the service frequently not being regulated;
                                       the roles of agents;
                                       the involvement of numerous other entities;
                                       the rapidity of innovation; and
                                       the potentially large scale of these services and the risks related to them.
                              It needs to be noted, however, that after the mission SBV has adopted new rules
                              relevant to the area of digital payments: Circular No. 39/2014/TTR-NHNN, on
                              payment intermediary services and Circular No. 46/2014/TT-NHNN, on non-cash
                              payment services.
Recommendation                It is recommended that relevant authorities continue enhancing the regulatory
                              framework for digitally delivered financial products and services with input from
                              SBV regarding internet and mobile phone banking that, among other things,
                              requires: (i) providers to have and apply a comprehensive security program; (ii)
                              banks to monitor third-party control conditions and performance; (iii) disclosure to
                              consumers of all applicable fees and charges and their method of calculation; and
                              (iv) procedures to be followed in the event of errors or fraud. Among other things,
                              the regulatory framework should deal with:
                                       the protection of consumers’ funds;
                                       how electronic contracts and disclosures can be made with legal effect;
                                       electronic storage of records and the systems for their retrieval;
                                       who is liable for fraud, system malfunctions, identity theft, third party
                                        hacking, misuse of PINs, unauthorized payments, mistaken payments,
                                        and lost and stolen mobile devices;
                                       the requirements for privacy and data protection;
                                       recourse mechanisms in the event of a consumer complaint;
                                       product suitability rules;
                                       responsible lending rules;
                                       the collection and verification of information on identity;
                                       the supervision and training of agents and the liability of product issuers
                                        for their agents;
                                       the application of DIV’s deposit insurance program to e-money;
                                       the obligation to keep records regarding accounts and transactions;
                                       the security rules applicable to the systems used for digital finance; and
                                       the rules applicable to the licensing or registration of issuers of digital
                                        financial services.




   105
       See, Decision 226/2002/QD-NHNN of SBV’s Governor on the Issuance of the Regulation on Payment Activities through
   Payment Service Suppliers.
   106
       See, SBV Law, Chapter III; CI Law, Chapter III; the Law on Electronic Transactions; Government Decree 101/2012/ND-CP
   dated Nov. 22, 2012 on Non-cash Payments; Government Decree 35/2007/ND-CP on Electronic Transactions in Banking; Circular
   35/2012/TT-NHNN dated December 28, 2012, of SBV regulating fees of domestic debit cards; Circular 36/2012/TT-NHNN dated
   December 28, 2012, of SBV regulating the installment, management, operation and safety in the operation of ATMs; and
   Decision 20/2007/QD-NHNN dated May 15, 2007, issued by SBV’s Governor stipulating regulations on issuance, payment, use
   and provision of supporting services for bank cards.
   107
       This term covers the delivery of financial services using digital electronic means to access accounts with credit institutions and
   to permit the banked and unbanked access to e-payment and value storage services.
                                                                                                                                      37
                                                                               I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                               SBV should continue a project that has been set up in order to adopt
                               improvements in consumer protection rules applicable to agent banking.108
                               The project should benefit from both the experience with existing digital financial
                               services (e-wallets) and multiple pilot projects recently set up to explore the area
                               and further potential of mobile financial services (e.g. Viettel Mobile Plus Pilot, or
                               LienViet Post Bank’s mobile e-wallet).
                               See also the recommendations in relation to Good Practice C.7.
Good Practice C.7              Electronic Fund Transfers and Remittances
                                    a. There should be clear rules on the rights, liabilities and
                                       responsibilities of the parties involved in any electronic fund transfer.
                                    b. Banks should provide information to consumers on prices and
                                       service features of electronic fund transfers and remittances in easily
                                       accessible and understandable forms. As far as possible, this
                                       information should include:
                                          (i)      the total price (e.g. fees for the sender and the receiver,
                                                   foreign exchange rates and other costs);
                                          (ii)     the time it will take the funds to reach the receiver;
                                          (iii)    the locations of the access points for sender and receiver;
                                                   and
                                          (iv)     the terms and conditions of electronic fund transfer services
                                                   that apply to the customer.
                                  c. To ensure transparency, it should be made clear to the sender if the
                                      price or other aspects of the service vary according to different
                                      circumstances, and the bank should disclose this information
                                      without imposing any requirements on the consumer.
                                  d. A bank that sends or receives an electronic fund transfer or
                                      remittance should document all essential information regarding the
                                      transfer and make this available to the customer who sends or
                                      receives the transfer or remittance without charge and on demand.
                                  e. There should be clear, publicly available and easily applicable
                                      procedures in cases of errors and frauds in respect of electronic fund
                                      transfers and remittances.
                                  f. A customer should be informed of the terms and condition of the use
                                      of credit/debit cards outside the country including the foreign
                                      transaction fees and foreign exchange rates that may be applicable.
Description                    Paragraph (a)
                               Although the Law on E-transactions109 of 2005 establishes the beginnings of a
                               regulatory framework for electronic business, its application and scope is very
                               limited and mostly concerned with the issue of electronic signature. The
                               Government Decree of two years later on Banking E-transactions110 does,
                               however, set forth responsibilities of all organizations providing or using banking e-
                               transaction services,111 as well as certain responsibilities of individuals using
                               banking e-transactions.112 There is, though, no explicit statement of the rights of
                               the parties involved in any electronic fund transfer.
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Government Decree No. 101/2012/ND-CP, on non-cash payment requires credit
                               institutions to disclose to customers information about prices and services for
                               electronic money transfers, in particular:




   108
         Responsible Finance in Vietnam, 32 (IFC, 2014).
   109
         Law No. 51/2005/QH11.
   110
         Decree No. 35/2007/ND-CP of March 8, 2007.
   111
         Id., Article 5.
   112
         Id., Article 5, Section 2.
                                                                                                                   38
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                         Article 17(1) on the announcement of the payment fee schedule stipulates
                                          that: “payment service providers and the appointed payment intermediary
                                          service providers must publicly list the service fee rates”
                                         Article 22(2) on provision of transaction information to customers provides
                                          that: “payment service providers and the payment intermediary service
                                          providers are obliged to provide transaction and payment account balance
                                          information to the account owners in accordance with applicable
                                          legislations”
                               Paragraph (c)
                               Banks are, likewise, under no statutory obligation to inform the sender of an
                               electronic fund transfer if the price or other aspects of the service vary according
                               to different circumstances, let alone to disclose this information without imposing
                               any requirements on the consumer.
                               Paragraph (d)
                               While a bank that sends or receives an electronic fund transfer or remittance is
                               required to document all essential information regarding the transfer, 113 no bank is
                               under any statutory obligation to make this information available to the customer
                               who sends or receives the transfer or remittance, whether with or without charge
                               and with or without prior notice.
                               Paragraph (e)
                               Although there are statutory provisions dealing with the settlement of disputes,
                               complaints and denunciations and the handling of violations, 114 there is no
                               requirement that the applicable procedures be publicly available and easily
                               applicable.
                               Paragraph (f)
                               There is no statutory requirement for a consumer to be informed of the terms and
                               conditions of the use of credit/debit cards outside Vietnam, including the foreign
                               transaction fees and foreign exchange rates that may be applicable.
Recommendation                 As a matter of high priority in the medium-term, it is recommended that the
                               legislative framework for electronic fund transfers and remittances be expanded by
                               means of a Government Decree that will:
                                         strengthen requirements for the disclosure of information to consumers
                                          regarding prices and features of services (and notification of their
                                          changes);
                                         set out the documentation required for such operations;
                                         require this documentation to be made available to the consumer;
                                         provide for publically available and easily applicable procedures in cases
                                          of errors and frauds; and
                                         indicate the terms and conditions for the use of Vietnamese credit and
                                          debit cards outside Vietnam.
                               See also the recommendations in relation to Good Practice C.6.




  113
        Id., Articles 18 through 22 and 24.
  114
        Id., Chapter IV.
                                                                                                                   39
                                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice C.8           Debt Recovery
                                 a. A bank, agent of a bank and any third party should be prohibited from
                                    employing any abusive debt collection practice against any customer
                                    of the bank, including the use of any false statement, any unfair
                                    practice or the giving of false credit information to others.
                                 b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a bank, the person
                                    who can collect any such debt and the manner in which that debt can
                                    be collected should be indicated to the customer of the bank when
                                    the credit agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into between
                                    the bank and the customer.
                                 c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a bank
                                    customer’s debt without informing that party of the debt collector’s
                                    right to do so; and the type of information that the debt collector is
                                    seeking.
                                 d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed
                                    by law, the borrower should be:
                                      (i)       notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of
                                                days;
                                      (ii)      informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt;
                                                and
                                      (iii)     provided with information as to where to make payment, as
                                                well as the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact information.
Description                 Paragraph (a)
                            In all dealings with citizens, the Vietnamese Constitution strictly prohibits the use
                            of all forms of harassment, coercion, torture, and violation of their honor and
                            dignity.115 In addition, the specific requirements regarding the collection of debts
                            are governed by Decree.116 In any given case, a debt collection agency can act
                            either for a credit institution or for an individual debtor, but not for both. Also, before
                            doing so, the agency must be registered and its employees properly trained and
                            carrying appropriate and readily visible agency identification.
                            Whether acting for a creditor or debtor, debt collection agencies are prohibited
                            from:
                                     conducting, directly or indirectly, any activities that infringe upon life,
                                      health, dignity, honor, personal freedom, property rights and other civil
                                      rights of any creditor, debtor and any related organization and individual;
                                     using information obtained performing debt collection services for
                                      purposes other than those of activities they are mandated to conduct or
                                      disclose such information to other organizations and individuals to the
                                      disadvantage of any creditor or debtor, unless otherwise provided for by
                                      law; and
                                     conducting any activity or taking any action which is beyond their rights
                                      recognized by law or the scope of activities they are mandated by a creditor
                                      or debtor to conduct.117
                            There is, however, no explicit prohibition on the use of false statements by debt
                            collectors or their giving of false credit information to others.
                            Paragraph (b)
                            On the signing of consumer loan agreements, it is rarely the practice of banks to
                            inform their retail borrowers of the type of debt that can be collected on their behalf,
                            the person(s) who can collect any such debt and the manner in which that debt can
                            be collected.




   115
       See Article 71, 3rd paragraph.
   116
       See Government Decree 104 of 2007 on the Provision of Debt Collection Services.
   117
       Id., Article 11, Clause 2.
                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                  I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                Paragraph (c)
                                There is no provision in Vietnamese law or subsidiary legislation that prohibits a
                                debt collector from contacting any third party about a bank customer’s debt without
                                informing that party of: (i) the debt collector’s right to do so; and (ii) the type of
                                information that the debt collector is seeking.
                                Paragraph (d)
                                Finally, as a general rule, the Civil Code allows a business organization, as obligee,
                                to transfer its rights to a third party, with the obligee simply being required to notify
                                the obligor (such as an individual debtor) in writing of the transfer of these rights.
                                Also, unless otherwise agreed or “provided for by law”, any such transfer does not
                                require the consent of the obligor. 118 It is, however, otherwise provided for by the
                                CP Law, which declares that any clause of a contract (whether in general
                                transaction conditions or otherwise) that is entered into with a consumer is null and
                                void if it allows any business organization (including any credit institution) to
                                transfer its rights and obligations to a third party without the prior agreement of the
                                consumer.119 Thus, no sale or transfer of a debt of a consumer can be made
                                without that consumer’s consent.
Recommendation                  In the long-term, consideration should be given to amending the Decree on the
                                Provision of Debt Collection Services so as to:
                                      provide an explicit prohibition on the use of false statements by debt
                                       collectors or their giving of false credit information to others;
                                    require all credit institutions, on the signing of consumer loan agreements,
                                       to inform their retail borrowers of the type of debt that can be collected, the
                                       person(s) who can collect any such debt and the manner in which that debt
                                       can be collected; and
                                    prohibit a debt collector from contacting any third party about a retail
                                       customer’s debt to a credit institution without informing that third party of:
                                       (i) the debt collector’s right to do so; and (ii) the type of information that the
                                       debt collector is seeking.
Good Practice C.9               Foreclosure of mortgaged or charged property
                                     a. In the event that a bank exercises its right to foreclose on a property
                                        that serves as collateral for a loan, the bank should inform the
                                        consumer in writing in advance of the procedures involved, and the
                                        process to be employed by the bank to foreclose on the property it
                                        holds as collateral and the consequences thereof to the consumer.
                                     b. At the same time, the bank should inform the consumer of the legal
                                        remedies and options available to him or her in respect of the
                                        foreclosure process.
                                     c. If applicable, the bank should draw the consumer’s attention to the
                                        fact that the bank has a legal right to recover the balance of the debt
                                        due in the event the proceeds from the sale of the foreclosed property
                                        are not sufficient to fully discharge the outstanding amount.
                                     d. In the event the mortgage contract or charge agreement permits the
                                        bank to enforce the contract without court assistance, the bank
                                        should ensure that it employs professional and legal means to
                                        enforce the contract, including regarding the sale of the property.




   118
         See the Civil Code, Article 309, Clauses 1 and 2.
   119
         See CP Law, Article 16, Clause 1, item m).
                                                                                                                       41
                                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description                 Paragraph (a)
                            If a bank exercises its right to foreclose on a property that serves as collateral for
                            a loan, it is under no obligation to inform the borrower/consumer in advance of: (i)
                            the procedures involved and the process the bank will be employing to foreclose
                            on the property; and (ii) the consequences thereof to the borrower/consumer.120
                            Paragraph (b)
                            Likewise, there is no obligation on any bank to inform the consumer of the legal
                            remedies and options available to him or her in respect of the foreclosure process.
                            Paragraph (c)
                            If, however, the proceeds from the sale of the foreclosed property prove to be
                            insufficient fully to discharge the outstanding amount, the bank will likely draw the
                            consumer’s attention to the fact that the bank has a legal right to recover the
                            balance of the debt due, even though there is no legal obligation to do so.
                            Paragraph (d)
                            Although there is no prohibition on a mortgage or charge agreement permitting a
                            bank as creditor to enforce the agreement without first obtaining a court order, in
                            practice a court order will be needed whenever, as apparently proves to be
                            common, the mortgagor must be ordered to give up possession. While a bank that
                            is able to foreclose by agreement without proceeding to court must, of course,
                            employ legal means to do so and the hiring of professionals will undoubtedly be a
                            wise idea, no bank is under any legal obligation to employ professional assistance
                            in these respects, including for the purpose of selling the property.
Recommendation              Consideration should be given by SBV to requiring every bank to honor the
                            requirements of paragraphs a., b., and d. of this Good Practice.
Good Practice C.10          Bankruptcy of Individuals
                                 a. A bank should inform its individual customers in a timely manner and
                                    in writing on what basis the bank will seek to render a customer
                                    bankrupt, the steps it will take in this respect and the consequences
                                    of any individual’s bankruptcy.
                                 b. Every individual customer should be given adequate notice and
                                    information by his or her bank to enable the customer to avoid
                                    bankruptcy.
                                 c. Either directly or through its association of banks, every bank should
                                    make counseling services available to customers who are bankrupt
                                    or likely to become bankrupt.
                                 d. The law should enable an individual to:
                                       (i)      declare his or her intention to present a debtor’s petition for
                                                a declaration of bankruptcy;
                                       (ii)     propose a debt agreement;
                                       (iii)    propose a personal bankruptcy agreement; or
                                       (iv)     enter into voluntary bankruptcy.
                                 e. Any institution acting as the bankruptcy office or trustee responsible
                                    for the administration and regulation of the personal bankruptcy
                                    system should provide adequate information to consumers on their
                                    options to deal with their own unmanageable debt.




   120
      Secured transactions are governed by the Civil Code, Government Decree no. 163 of 2006 on security transactions, as amended
   by Decree no. 83 and Decree no. 11 of 2012, and Circular no. 05 of 2011 of the Ministry of Justice regarding registering and
   providing information about secured transactions and contracts, and enforcing foreclosure judgments.
                                                                                                                             42
                                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Description                 Vietnam has no laws or subsidiary legislation that deal with the bankruptcy of
                            individuals. Thus, the elements of this Good Practice are incapable of assessment.
                            In addition, banks do not provide counseling services as a matter of course to
                            customers who are either unable to pay their debts as they become due or are
                            likely to find themselves in this situation.
                            Furthermore, there is no statutory right provided to borrowers to propose debt
                            agreements with their banks.
Recommendation              In the long-term, Government should give consideration to formulating and
                            enacting a law on personal bankruptcy which, among other things, complies with
                            the provisions indicated above.
                            As part of this law, borrowers should have the statutory right to propose debt
                            agreements with their banks. Subject to certain criteria, including: (i) the inability to
                            pay debts as and when they fall due; (ii) regular employment; and (iii) unsecured
                            debts and equity in assets below a specified statutory minimum. The benefit of a
                            debt agreement to an insolvent consumer would potentially include:
                                     making affordable regular payments over a fixed period and having these
                                      payments tailored to the consumer’s budget;
                                     having unpaid debt legally written off (including interest); and
                                     making arrangements binding on all creditors of the consumer.

SECTION D                   PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1           Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                             a. The banking transactions of any bank customer should be kept
                                confidential by his or her bank.
                             b. The law should require a bank to ensure that it protects the
                                confidentiality and security of the personal data of its customers
                                against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of
                                such information, as well as against unauthorized access.
Description                 Paragraph (a)
                            The CI Law requires credit institutions and foreign bank branches to ensure the
                            confidentiality of all information relating to their customers’ accounts, deposits,
                            deposited properties and transactions at the institutions or branches in
                            question.121
                            Paragraph (b)
                            Vietnam has no consolidated data protection law. Rather, in addition to the
                            provision in the CI Law referred to in the previous paragraph above, the CP Law,
                            the Civil Code, the E-Transactions Law, the Law on Information Technology and
                            the Criminal Code122, as well as certain subsidiary legislation,123 all have provisions
                            dealing explicitly with - or having relevance to - privacy and data protection.

                            By the terms of the CP Law, unless “ authorized agencies” demand otherwise, a
                            consumer’s information is protected (i.e. must be maintained in confidence) when
                            he or she enters into a transaction to purchase goods or receive services. 124 In
                            case, however, that information on a consumer must be collected, used and
                            handed over by a business organization (including any credit institution) that
                            organization must:
                                     disclose to the consumer the purpose of collecting and using his or her
                                      personal information before doing so;

   121
       CI Law, Article 14, Section 2.
   122
       See Article 226 of the Criminal Code regarding the crime of illegally using information in computer networks and computers.
   123
       See, e.g. SBV Decision 1087 of 2007 on State Secrets in Banking, SBV Circular no. 1 of 2011 on Ensuring Safety and Keeping
   Secrets within Information Technology Systems in Banking Operations; and SBV Circular no. 29 of 2011 on the Safety and
   Confidentiality in the Provision of Banking Services over the Internet.
   124
       CP Law, Article 6, Section 1.
                                                                                                                              43
                                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                      use the received information for the purpose disclosed to the consumer;
                                      ensure the safety, integrity and preciseness of the consumer’s personal
                                       information during the process of collecting, using and storing it as well as
                                       the process of handing it over;
                                      take measures to update and adjust the received information if the
                                       consumer discovers that any of it is incorrect; and
                                      unless otherwise provided by law, transfer the received information to any third
                                       party only after obtaining the consent of the concerned consumer.125
                             According to the Civil Code, an individual has a right to so-called “personal secrets”
                             which must be respected and protected by law. 126 The basic premise is that the
                             collection and publication of information and materials regarding the private life of
                             an individual requires that individual’s consent. 127 In addition, the “safety” and
                             confidentiality of the letters, telephone conversations and telegrams of an individual
                             are guaranteed, as are all forms of an individual’s electronic information. 128
                             By the Law on e-Transactions, individuals have the right to select security
                             measures in accordance with the provisions of the law when conducting e-
                             transactions.129 Unless otherwise provided for by law and the consent of the
                             individual has been granted, Government agencies, business organizations and
                             individuals must not use, provide or disclose information on the private and
                             personal affairs of that individual or information regarding that individual from any
                             other government agency, business organization and/or individual which is
                             accessible by them or under their control in e-transactions.
                             In addition, the Law on Information Technology provides important rules regarding
                             the collection, processing and use of personal information in the so-called “network
                             environment”130 and the storage and supply of personal information in this
                             environment,131 as well as provisions regarding the safety and confidentiality of
                             information.132
Recommendation               An agency with a leading role in protection of consumers’ data and privacy should
                             be identified. Regarding financial institutions, it might be considered to entrust SBV
                             with these powers.
                             In the long-term, the Government might consider enacting a Personal Data
                             Protection Law that consolidates the existing disparate provisions referred to above
                             and requires all financial entities, including banks, to protect the confidentiality and
                             security of all personal data in respect of their customers, including all data
                             regarding them that are stored electronically. Protection should be against
                             unauthorized access and any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or
                             integrity of such information. This law could also apply generally to all personal
                             information.




  125
      Id., Section 2.
  126
      See the Civil Code, Article 38, Section 1.
  127
      Id., Section 2.
  128
      Id., Section 3. The inspection of an individual’s letters, telephone calls, telegrams and/or other forms of electronic information
  is only permissible when provided for by law and required by a competent state agency.
  129
      See the Law on e-Transactions, Article 46.
  130
      See Law on Information Technology, Articles 21. By Article 4, items 3 and 4, “network environment” means the environment in
  which information is provided, transmitted, collected, processed and exchanged via a system of equipment serving the production,
  transmission, collection, processing, storage and exchange of digital information, including telecommunications networks, the
  internet, computer networks and databases.
  131
      Id., Article 22.
  132
      Id., Article 72.
                                                                                                                                    44
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice D.2               Sharing Customer’s Information
                                     a. A bank should inform its customer in writing:
                                             (i)    of any third-party dealing for which the bank is obliged to
                                                    share information regarding any account of the customer,
                                                    such as any legal enquiry by a credit bureau; and
                                             (ii)   as to how it will use and share the customer’s personal
                                                    information.
                                   b. Without the customer’s prior written consent, a bank should not sell
                                       or share account or personal information regarding a customer of the
                                       bank to or with any party not affiliated with the bank for the purpose
                                       of telemarketing or direct mail marketing.
                                   c. The law should allow a customer of a bank to stop or ―opt out of the
                                       sharing by the bank of certain information regarding the customer
                                       and, prior to any such sharing of information for the first time, every
                                       bank should be required to inform each of its customers in writing of
                                       his or her rights in this respect.
                                   d. The law should prohibit the disclosure by a third party of any
                                       banking-specific information regarding a customer of a bank.
Description                     Paragraph (a)
                                A bank is under no statutory obligation to inform its customer in writing:
                                    of any third-party dealing for which the bank is obliged to share information
                                      regarding any account of the customer, such as any legal enquiry by a credit
                                      bureau; and
                                    as to how it will use and share the customer’s personal information.
                                Paragraph (b)
                                The general rule is that information can only be used in conformity with the purpose
                                informed to consumers and with the consent by these same consumers.133 Thus,
                                although there is no specific focus on the provision of information for telemarketing
                                or direct mail marketing, information, without its customer’s prior consent (whether
                                in writing or not), a bank cannot sell or share account or personal information
                                regarding that customer to or with any party not affiliated with the bank for either of
                                these purposes.
                                Paragraph (c)
                                There is no statutory provision that allows a customer of a bank to stop or opt out
                                of the sharing by the bank of certain information regarding the customer and, prior
                                to any such sharing of information for the first time, the requirement that a bank
                                inform each of its customers in writing of his or her rights in this respect.
                                Paragraph (d)
                                The law does not specifically prohibit the disclosure by a third party of any banking-
                                specific information regarding a customer of a bank.
Recommendation                  In the longer term, provisions should be introduced that deal specifically with each
                                aspect of this Good Practice.




   133
         See CP Law, Article 6, Section 2, Items a) and b).
                                                                                                                     45
                                                                                     I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice D.3             Permitted Disclosures
                              The law should provide for:
                               (i)   the specific rules and procedures concerning the release to any
                                     government authority of the records of any customer of a bank;
                               (ii)  rules on what the government authority may and may not do with any
                                     such records;
                               (iii) the exceptions, if any, that apply to these rules and procedures; and
                               (iv)  the penalties for the bank and any government authority for any
                                     breach of these rules and procedures.
Description                   Sub-paragraph (i)
                              There is a general obligation on the part of a private sector business organization
                              to maintain the confidentiality and security of all information it collects or receives
                              regarding a retail customer in respect of any transaction between the organization
                              and the customer. And the same general rule applies to a business organization
                              when information is received or collected by it regarding any of its retail customers
                              before, at or subsequent to the customer’s use of any goods or services provided
                              by the organization. In addition, there is also a broad exemption to these two
                              general requirements for state agencies. 134
                              And the same general rule also applies specifically to all credit institutions and
                              branches of foreign banks. All such entities are prohibited from providing
                              information concerning deposits, deposited properties and transactions of any of
                              their retail customers to any other organization and/or individual, except when
                              requested to do so by a competent state authority in accordance with the law or
                              in the event that the customer has given consent to do so.135
                              Furthermore, along the same lines, a bank may refuse a request by an organization
                              or individual for supply of information related to deposits and property of its clients
                              and its operations unless such request is made by a competent state agency under
                              law or agreed by its clients.136
                              Two statutorily recognized exceptions are: (a) the right that is given to any credit
                              institution to exchange information on its clients with any other credit institution;
                              and (b) the requirement for a bank to report and supply information to SBV on its
                              organization and business activities at the latter's request and may be supplied by
                              SBV with information related to banking operations of its clients. 137
                              Sub-paragraph (ii)
                              No law or subsidiary legislation, however, sets out any specific rules and
                              procedures concerning the release to any government authority of the records of
                              any customer of a bank. Therefore, no law or subsidiary legislation provides rules
                              on what any government authority may and may not do with any such records.
                              Sub-paragraph (iii)
                              In addition, it of course also follows that no statutory exceptions can be given that
                              are to apply to these rules and procedures.
                              Sub-paragraph (iv)
                              No penalties can be provided for a bank and for any government authority for any
                              breach of these rules and procedures.
Recommendation                In the longer term, provisions should be introduced that deal specifically with each
                              aspect of this Good Practice.




   134
         CP Law, Section 6, Section 1.
   135
         CI Law, Article 14, Section 3.
   136
         See Government Decree no.59 of 2009 on Commercial Banks, Article 85, Section 2.
   137
         Id., Article 84, Sections 2 and 3.
                                                                                                                   46
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice D.4             Credit Reporting
                                   a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with
                                      sufficient enforcement authority.
                                   b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and
                                      sufficient data. The system should also maintain rigorous standards
                                      of security and reliability.
                                   c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting
                                      system should be: (i) clear, predictable, non-discriminatory,
                                      proportionate and supportive of consumer rights; and (ii) supported
                                      by effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution mechanisms.
                                   d. In facilitating cross-border transfer of credit data, the credit reporting
                                      system should provide appropriate levels of protection.
                                   e. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the
                                      right of the consumer
                                         (i)     to consent to information-sharing based upon the knowledge
                                                 of the institution’s information-sharing practices;
                                         (ii)    to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once
                                                 a year), subject to proper identification;
                                         (iii)   to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-
                                                 optimal conditions/prices due to credit report information;
                                         (iv)    to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time, such
                                                 as six months;
                                         (v)     to correct factually incorrect information or to have it deleted
                                                 and to mark (flag) information that is in dispute;
                                         (vi)    to reasonable retention periods of credit history, for instance
                                                 two years for positive information and 5-7 years for negative
                                                 information; and
                                         (vii)    to have information kept confidential and with sufficient
                                                 security measures in place to prevent unauthorized access,
                                                 misuse of data, or loss or destruction of data.
                                   f.The credit registries, regulators and associations of banks should
                                     undertake campaigns to inform and educate the public on the rights
                                     of consumers in the above respects, as well as the consequences of
                                     a negative personal credit history.
Description                   Paragraphs (a) to (c)
                              Vietnam has already adopted some of the relevant international good practices,
                              yet, from a consumer rights perspective, the legal and regulatory framework for
                              credit reporting needs to be strengthened. While Vietnam has a legal and
                              regulatory framework for private credit reporting set by Decree No. 10/2010/ND-
                              CP on Credit Information Operations, National Credit Information Center of
                              Vietnam (NCIC), the public registry, remains the dominant source of credit
                              information in the economy and is not bound by these same legal and regulatory
                              guidelines as it is subject to provisions of Circular No. 3/2013/TT-NHNN providing
                              on credit information activity of the State Bank of Vietnam.
                              There seems to be only a limited off-site supervision of a private credit bureau
                              (PCB) and there is no clear mechanism in place for supervising the public credit
                              registry. There is also potentially a conflict of interest issue, as the Circular No.
                              16/2010/TT-NHNN which guides the operation of private credit registries gives the
                              NCIC a role in relation to oversight and supervisory supervision. For instance,
                              NCIC chekcs the completeness and validity of other information provided by
                              applicants for the credit bureau certificate (see Article 7(2)(a)(ii) of Circular No.
                              16/2010/TT-NHNN as amended). Further, during inspection of operations BISA
                              may request NCIC to appoint their officers to join the inspection team (see Article
                              16(2) of Circular No. 16/2010/TT-NHNN as amended).138.



   138
         Article 16(2) of Circular No. 16/2010/TT-NHNN as amended.
                                                                                                                 47
                                                                                      I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                           More generally, it is to be noted that there is limited competition in the credit
                           reporting sector due to the very strong position of NCIC and the potential conflict
                           of interest noted above. NCIC is operating in some ways more like a private credit
                           bureau. NCIC is self-sustaining financially, with fees collected from financial
                           institutions for credit data more than covering expenses.139 Further, the mission
                           team were advised that the NCIC has plans to expend their business to cover the
                           development of consumer credit scoring and collection of data from non-financial
                           firms and utilities. These are roles that more commonly the domain of private credit
                           bureaus.140 Thus, a space for establishment of private credit bureaus and their
                           mutual competition is highly limited.
                           A lack of competition in the credit reporting industry is also a consumer protection
                           issue because it increases the power of the sole or dominant firm, which is likely
                           to result in higher prices for consumer services, reduced incentives for data quality
                           (as there is no alternative) and reduced incentives to innovate.
                           Paragraph (d)
                           There are no specific provisions ensuring consumer protection in cases of cross-
                           border sharing of data.
                           Paragraph (e)
                           Although consumers have the right of consent to information sharing, (Article 11 of
                           Decree No. 10-2010-ND-CP) the law does not specify common language to be
                           used in credit applications or other aspects of how consent clauses are to be
                           presented and discussed with consumers. As a result, a concern is that consent to
                           information sharing may be placed at any point in a contract and consumers may
                           lack understanding, and even awareness, of the consent they are providing.
                           Article 16 of the Decree also provides for one free credit report each year for
                           consumers upon demand. It is not clear, however, to what extent consumers are
                           availing them of this opportunity.
                           There is no obligation on the part of financial providers to disclose to consumers
                           that data in their credit report was used to take a negative decision such as denial
                           of credit. Adverse action notification is important because it provides consumers
                           with the knowledge that their credit report exists (which not all people know,
                           especially in a market where consumer credit and credit reporting are relatively
                           new), that their credit history affects their financial opportunities and that they have
                           negative information in their credit report which is affecting their ability to secure
                           credit or other commercial activities. This information disclosure at the time of a
                           negative decision is timely and creates a “teachable moment” for consumers who
                           are especially interested in understanding their credit report and resolving any
                           problems with the data, whether this means correcting erroneous data or paying
                           outstanding obligations.
                           The legal and regulatory framework does not provide any guidance or rules relating
                           to the inclusion of inquiries to the data as part of the credit report. This is important
                           information for lenders, who can see the application history of clients, as well as
                           for borrowers who can identify instances of improper access to the data (where
                           consent was not provided and no lending operation was involved).
                           Article 19 of the Decree provides specific guidance for complaints handling
                           including acceptable timeframes for a first response from the credit reporting firm
                           (5 business days after the complaint is received). If this first response requires
                           going to the financial institution that reported the data, the response must be

139
    In 2013, revenues were approximately double expenses, creating a surplus which NCIC plans to use for various expansion
projects including the development of consumer credit scoring, collection of data from non-financial firms and utilities and
modernization of the technology used.
140
    In the vast majority of countries, the public credit registry only collects data from regulated financial institutions, in keeping
with the remit of the financial regulator (who usually has responsibility for the PCR) to oversee the financial system. According to
the World Bank’s Doing Business global data on credit reporting (2013), only 3 of the 88 countries which operate a public credit
registry collect alternative data from other sources such as utilities and retailers: Belgium, The Republic of Korea and Mauritius. It
is also worth noting that two of these countries – Belgium and Mauritius – do not have a private credit bureau.
                                                                                                                                  48
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                           provided to the consumer within another 10 business days. If no solution to the
                           contested information is possible, a conciliation process is also described in the
                           Decree. Similar provisions are to be found in Article 17 of the Circular No.
                           3/2013/TT-NHNN.
                           Further, since the mission SBV issued Decision No. 37/QD-TTTD regarding the
                           operations of NCIC and Decision No. 265/QD-TTTD promulgating regulations on
                           dispute resolution, particularly appeals and resolution of appeals with regard to
                           disputed credit information registered by NCIC.
                           However, there are only a few complaints being made to either the public or private
                           credit information providers (see below).
                           The legal and regulatory framework is silent on the ability of consumers to flag or
                           include a comment on disputed data, and the ability of consumers to determine the
                           extent to which their personal information is shared with third parties.
                           The Decree provides broad guidance on the types of consumer data which can be
                           collected and stored, indicating that the data should focus on identification and
                           credit behavior (payment behavior). However, Article 11(dd) of the Decree allows
                           for “other information” as long as it does not breach the rights of borrowers, but
                           with no specific guidance on this point. This ambiguity, together with a lack of
                           effective oversight and supervision (discussed below) create a potential area for
                           abuse.
                           Retention of data follows international good practices, and is set on a five year
                           window in Article 12 of the Decree. The Decree provides for transfer of credit
                           histories (data) in the context of a failure / closure of a private credit bureau. This
                           is important to safeguard the historical record and “reputation collateral” that
                           consumers develop through a credit reporting system. Private credit reporting firms
                           are also to follow specific rules and technical precautions to protect the data they
                           collect and store.
                           Paragraph (f)
                           There is currently limited outreach to consumers on credit reporting activities,
                           which are effectively all still handled by the NCIC. One indication of the lack of
                           outreach is the limited number of complaints sent to the NCIC in spite of the fact
                           that they are providing credit data on millions of Vietnamese consumers.141
                           The PCB has engaged in some outreach via the internet and newspapers,
                           however, these efforts are relatively limited in terms of media penetration and
                           impact on the national population in Vietnam.
                           Discussions in Vietnam with key stakeholders suggest that only relatively more
                           sophisticated financial consumers are aware of the credit reporting system in the
                           country. People who are borrowing from private or international banks are more
                           likely to be aware, but lower income consumers are not thought to be familiar with
                           the credit reporting system.
Recommendation             There is a need to strengthen the existing legal and regulatory framework for public
                           and private credit information sharing including, especially, regarding in the area
                           of adverse action notification, the sharing of data with third parties, general consent
                           laws and the creation of an effective (and well understood) mechanism for
                           complaints and dispute resolution. On the latter point, it is noted that, since the
                           CPFL Diagnostic Review mission, a Customer Support Department has been
                           established which may be able to fulfill this role.
                           An overall regulatory and supervisory arrangement for public and private sector
                           credit reporting should avoid any conflict of interest and promote competition
                           between credit information providers.
                           To make the credit reporting system more effective in Vietnam, by encouraging
                           consumer awareness of their rights and responsibilities, a public outreach

  141
     In 2014, NCIC processed written 24 complaints from both credit institutions and borrowers requesting a review of registered
  information, although they received over 1000 queries and requests for information review through various means of
  communication such as telephone calls or emails.
                                                                                                                            49
                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                    campaign should be developed. The appropriate media tools for this activity would
                    need to be assessed. Given the high level of cell phone penetration, mobile
                    technologies (apps, SMS) should be explored. Internet based approaches are also
                    likely to be useful, but may reach a more affluent or educated demographic than
                    some mobile-based technologies due to more limited access to computers or
                    3G/4G (internet enabled) mobiles. Print materials should be carefully evaluated as
                    this may be a relatively high cost approach which does not provide a return on
                    investment commensurate with the expense, or value compared to other
                    technology-based approaches.
                    While not specifically a consumer protection issue, it is also worth raising concerns
                    with several key components of the Decree and Circular for private credit reporting
                    which are limiting competition and having an adverse impact on development of
                    this activity in Vietnam. In order to initiate a credit reporting firm, at least 20
                    supervised financial institutions must sign on as members. Further, these
                    institutions may only be members of one private credit information firm. These rules
                    are effectively creating a monopoly in the private sector and have even made it
                    difficult for the first firm (PCB) to reach critical mass so that they can begin
                    operations. There is no clear rationale for this restriction, which is highly anti-
                    competitive. In many cases competition is in fact a consumer protection issue, in
                    that having an alternative provider allows consumers to choose firms with better
                    quality services. In this case the financial providers are typically the direct
                    “consumers” of credit reports, but even so, the lack of alternative private bureaus
                    is likely to increase costs and decrease quality over the long run which is
                    detrimental to both the financial institutions and to their customers.

SECTION E           DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Complaints Procedure
                        a. Every bank should have in place a written complaints procedure and
                           a designated contact point for the proper handling of any complaint
                           from a customer, with a summary of this procedure forming part of
                           the bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in B.7 abov e and an
                           indication in the same Terms and Conditions of how a consumer can
                           easily obtain the complete statement of the procedure.
                        b. Within a short period of time following the date a bank receives a
                           complaint, it should:
                            (i)     acknowledge in writing to the customer/complainant the fact
                                    of its receipt of the complaint; and
                            (ii)    provide the complainant with the name of one or more
                                    individuals appointed by the bank to deal with the complaint
                                    until either the complaint is resolved or cannot be processed
                                    further within the bank.
                        c. The bank should provide the complainant with a regular written
                           update on the progress of the investigation of the complaint at
                           reasonable intervals of time.
                        d. Within a few business days of its completion of the investigation of
                           the complaint, the bank should inform the customer/complainant in
                           writing of the outcome of the investigation and, where applicable,
                           explain the terms of any offer or settlement being made to the
                           customer/complainant.
                        e. When a bank receives a verbal complaint, it should offer the
                           customer/complainant the opportunity to have the complaint treated
                           by the bank as a written complaint in accordance with the above. A
                           bank should not require, however, that a complaint be in writing.
                        f. A bank should maintain an up-to-date record of all complaints it has
                           received and the action it has taken in dealing with them.



                                                                                                       50
                                                                                I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                     g. The record should contain the details of the complainant, the nature
                                         of the complaint, a copy of the bank's response(s), a copy of all other
                                         relevant correspondence or records, the action taken to resolve the
                                         complaint and whether resolution was achieved and, if so, on what
                                         basis.
                                     h. The bank should make these records available for review by the
                                         banking supervisor or regulator when requested.
Description                     Consumers have a statutory right to complain to or about - and give comments to
                                - the business organizations they deal with (including credit institutions) concerning
                                the price, quality of goods and services, manner of being served, method of
                                transaction and any other detail relating to any of their transactions with those
                                business organizations.142
                                Paragraph (a)
                                There is, however, no statutory requirement for banks to have in place a written
                                complaints procedure as contemplated by this Good Practice. Nevertheless, all
                                banks interviewed do have their own complaints procedures and either have a 24
                                hour hot-line line call center or are in the process of the establishing one to be the
                                initial contact point.
                                Paragraph (b)
                                There is no statutory requirement for banks, within a short period of time following
                                their receipt of a complaint:
                                        to acknowledge in writing to the customer/complainant its receipt of his or
                                         her complaint; and
                                        to provide the complainant with the name of one or more individuals
                                         appointed by the bank to deal with the complaint until either the complaint
                                         is resolved or cannot be processed further within the bank.
                                Paragraph (c)
                                In addition, there is no statutory requirement for a bank to provide a complainant
                                with a regular written update on the progress of its investigation of the complaint at
                                any intervals of time.
                                Paragraph (d)
                                Even though a bank invariably informs its customer/complainant of the results of
                                its investigation soon after it has been completed, there is again no statutory
                                requirement for it: (i) to do so within a few business days of its completion; (ii) to
                                inform the customer/complainant in writing of the outcome; and, where applicable,
                                (iii) to explain the terms of any offer or settlement being made to the
                                customer/complainant.
                                Paragraph (e)
                                When a bank receives a verbal complaint, there is also no statutory requirement
                                for it to offer the customer/complainant the opportunity to have the complaint
                                treated by the bank as a written complaint. Also, the law is silent on whether a
                                complaint must be in writing.
                                Paragraphs (f) and (g)
                                Furthermore, there is no statutory requirement for a bank to maintain an up-to-date
                                record of all complaints it has received and the action it has taken in dealing with
                                them.




   142
         See CP Law, Article 8, Section 4.
                                                                                                                    51
                                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                 Paragraph (h)
                                 And finally, there is also no statutory requirement for a bank to make all such
                                 records available for review by SBV on a regular basis or otherwise.
                                 It follows from the above that banks inevitably employ their own procedures and
                                 practices in dealing with consumer complaints, with some invariably treating
                                 customers more expeditiously and fairly than others as a result.
Recommendation                   Of high priority in the short-term, the Government should require all credit
                                 institutions:
                                       to have and to publicize a common, consistent process for their handling
                                        of any compliant of a retail customer;
                                     to have a unit (or, in the case of smaller institutions, a designated officer)
                                        in charge of receiving and handling all such complaints;
                                     to disclose the name, telephone number and street and email address of
                                        this unit;
                                     to provide in all agreements between a credit institution and any of its retail
                                        customers a synopsis of the procedures to be followed by the credit
                                        institution and its retail customers with a view to resolving any dispute;
                                     to publicize for all actual and potential retail customers the procedures to
                                        be followed in dealing with any complaint of a retail customer; and
                                     to deliver regularly to SBV all data compiled consistently across all credit
                                        institutions regarding all complaints.
Good Practice E.2                Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                                    a. A system should be in place that allows customers of a bank to seek
                                        affordable and efficient recourse to a third-party banking
                                        ombudsman or equivalent institution, in the event the complaint of
                                        one or more of customers is not resolved in accordance with the
                                        procedures outlined in E.1 above.
                                    b. The existence of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution
                                        and basic information relating to the process and procedures should
                                        be made known in every bank’s Terms and Conditions refe rred to in
                                        B.7 above.
                                    c. Upon the request of any customer of a bank, the bank should make
                                        available to the customer the details of the banking ombudsman or
                                        equivalent institution, and its applicable processes and procedures,
                                        including the binding nature of decisions and the mechanisms to
                                        ensure the enforcement of decisions.
                                    d. The banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                                        appropriately resourced and discharge its function impartially.
                                    e. The decision of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution
                                        should be binding upon the bank against which the complaint has
                                        been lodged.
Description                      Paragraphs (a) to (e)
                                 Every citizen has the right to file complaints and denunciations with the competent
                                 State authorities against the illegal doings of any so-called “economic body”
                                 (including any credit institution). 143 And, all acts that damage the rights and lawful
                                 interests of individual citizens are required to be dealt with severely and equitably
                                 by the law.144 Individuals have also rights to protect their rights by the means set in
                                 Article 25 of the Civil Code (e.g. “[r]equest the infringer or competent agencies or
                                 organizations to order the infringer to pay compensation for damage”145).
                                 Furthermore, consumers have the right to complain about, denounce or file a
                                 lawsuit against any business organization in accordance with the CP Law and all
                                 other relevant laws.146 They are also empowered to seek enforcement of all laws


   143
         See The Constitution, Article 74.
   144
         Id., Article 28, paragraph 1.
   145
         Civil Code, Article 25, Section 3.
   146
         CP Law, Article 8, Section 6.
                                                                                                                      52
                                                                                  I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                         dealing with the protection of consumers147 as well as propose a social organization
                         to take a lawsuit in order to protect their rights. 148
                         Chapter 4 of the CP Law establishes a framework for settlement of disputes
                         between consumers and organizations or individuals trading goods and/or
                         services. Consumers may choose primarily one of the following options to have
                         their dispute resolved:
                                  negotiation;
                                  reconciliation;
                                  arbitration; or
                                  lawsuit.
                         The CP Law includes general rules for each of the abovementioned methods for
                         dispute resolution. Negotiation and mediation is not permitted when a dispute may
                         cause damage to the interests of the state, the interests of many consumers or the
                         public interest.149 Negotiation must not last longer than seven working days after
                         receipt of the request sent by a consumer. 150 If successful, the result of a
                         negotiation shall be made in writing if not agreed otherwise by the parties. 151
                         Mediation is required to be conducted by a third party in a way that ensures
                         objectivity, honesty and confidentiality of the process. 152 Mediation proceedings
                         must be recorded. When the agreed solution is not implemented within the
                         specified timeframe, the other party has right to file a lawsuit at court to enforce the
                         settlement. Under specific circumstances prescribed by the Law, a specialized
                         mediation organization may be established. 153
                         In case of arbitration154 (and also civil cases), which is governed by the Law on
                         Commercial Arbitration, consumers are not required to prove the fault of the service
                         provider, while the provider must prove that he/she did not cause the
                         damage/loss.155 Where an arbitration clause forms part of a business’s standard
                         form contract with a consumer, the CP Law entitles the consumer to choose
                         whatever other method of dispute resolution he or she would prefer. 156
                         Pursuant to Article 41 of the CP Law, civil cases regarding consumer disputes are
                         being decided in a simplified procedure and consumers are not required to pay
                         court charges in advance.157
                         Further, consumers have the right to file a complaint with the MoIT158, People’s
                         Committee159 or file a lawsuit. Nevertheless, there is no evidence that consumers
                         actually complain about financial services. The mission team was repeatedly told
                         by different stakeholders that complaints are not an issue for the industry. Although
                         this may well indicate that products and services meet high standards of quality
                         keeping a vast majority of consumers satisfied, it is reasonable to assume that the
                         low number of “recorded” complaints may be attributed to a lack of consumer
                         awareness or other challenges consumers face when filing a complaint.
                         SBV also has the power to inspect and examine complaints and denunciations and
                         handle violations of law in the monetary and banking sector according to its
                         competence.160 Handling of denunciations and complaints is regulated by the Law
                         on Complaints and the Law on Denunciations and related Decrees and Circulars,

147
      Id., Section 5.
148
    Article 8(7) of the CP Law.
149
    Article 30(2) of the CP Law.
150
    Article 31(2) of the CP Law.
151
    Article 32 of the CP Law.
152
    Article 33 and Article 34 of the CP Law.
153
    Article 35 of the CP Law.
154
    Article 40 of the CP Law.
155
    Article 42(1) and (2) of the CP Law.
156
    CP Law, Article 38.
157
    Article 43(2) of the CP Law.
158
    Article 48(5) of the CP Law.
159
    Article 49(4) of the CP Law.
160
    Article 22 of the Decree No. 96/2008/ND-CP Defining the Functions, Tasks, Powers and Organizational Structure of the State
Bank of Vietnam.
                                                                                                                            53
                                                                 I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                 which establish a regulatory framework for a formal procedure to handle and solve
                 complaints and denunciations regarding acts of state agencies and their staff but
                 do not apply directly to complaints of consumers against providers of financial
                 services. Relevant CIs are required to report complaints to SBV on a quarterly
                 basis and the mission team was told they receive notice of around 1,000 complaints
                 per quarter. SBV also receives denunciations and suggestions from consumers,
                 which it refers to the relevant financial institution for resolution. However SBV does
                 not have power to make binding decisions on consumer complaints.
                 Beside the abovementioned options, consumers may also complain to a consumer
                 association - VINASTAS - that offers mediation. Nevertheless, a low number of
                 complaints regarding financial services that are sent to VINASTAS (circa 50 a year)
                 indicates that consumers are not aware of this option. Moreover, VINASTAS does
                 not have any formal power to bring the parties to the negotiating table, or make a
                 binding decision.
                 There is no system in place that allows customers of a bank or other credit
                 institution to seek affordable and efficient recourse to a third-party banking
                 ombudsman or equivalent institution, in the event the complaint of one or more of
                 customers is not resolved internally.
Recommendation   In the long-term, SBV, MoF and MoJ should analyze the likely costs and benefits
                 of establishing an independent ombudsman or other Alternative Dispute Resolution
                 (ADR) service by law in order to deal with all disputes of retail customers of credit
                 institutions or any other financial services institutions that do not get resolved
                 satisfactorily internally. In the interim, it is also suggested that consideration be
                 given to having SBV perform the role of a financial ombudsman (at least in respect
                 of complaints against CIs).
                 The analysis should take account of issues of independence, sustainability,
                 accessibility for consumers, and capacity to make binding decisions to ensure the
                 effectiveness of the formal dispute settlement system. Several institutional options
                 can be evaluated based upon international experience. A scheme could be
                 established by law to function as an independent institution as has been the case
                 in the United Kingdom. Alternatively, there could be a requirement for financial
                 institutions to join an ombudsman scheme with binding rules for all such institutions
                 which would replicate the Armenian model. The purpose in carrying out such an
                 assessment would be to ensure the expeditious, independent, professional and
                 inexpensive handling of consumer disputes that are not resolved internally by
                 banks or other financial institutions.
                 Regardless of how the service is established, however, it should be developed by
                 SBV in close consultation with all relevant stakeholders, including all relevant
                 Ministries, the financial services industry, industry associations and consumers’
                 associations. The funding for the Ombudsman could be shared among banks and
                 other financial institutions on a sliding scale, with the Government perhaps making
                 a modest contribution.
                 The rules of an Ombudsman service would need to cover:
                        the institutions which would be members (i.e. the institutions with
                         unresolved consumer disputes which would be required to submit to the
                         Ombudsman service’s jurisdiction);
                        the nature of disputes which could be dealt with by the Ombudsman and
                         any applicable claims’ limits (bearing in mind that the service would be for
                         consumers);
                        compensation caps;
                        the fees for membership and for dealing with disputes (which should be
                         paid by the financial institutions and not by consumers);
                        how the service would be resourced so as to discharge its functions
                         impartially;
                        how the office would operate throughout Vietnam;
                        the fact that decisions are to be binding on financial institutions;
                        the confidentiality of complainant information;
                                                                                                     54
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                    the circumstances in which legal action could be launched in court while a
                                     matter is with the Ombudsman (for example, if a statutory limitation period
                                     is about to expire);
                                    record keeping and publication of information about caseloads, processing
                                     times, systemic issues and cases of serious misconduct, such as fraud;
                                    wide-ranging publication of the existence of the service, including in every
                                     bank’s Terms and Conditions referred to in B.7 above; and
                                    the requirement that, at any customer’s request, every bank make
                                     available to the customer the details of the ombudsman service and its
                                     applicable processes and procedures, including the binding nature of
                                     decisions and the mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of decisions.
                            An Ombudsman should also identify complaints that are high in importance for
                            consumer confidence in the banking sector, thereby enabling banks, SBV and any
                            other relevant authority to take measures to their root cause.
                            Further guidance m ay be obtained from the World Bank’s 2012 publication on
                            Resolving Disputes between Consumers and Financial Businesses: Fundamentals
                            for a Financial Ombudsman.161
                            Pending the establishment of a financial sector ombudsman or equivalent scheme,
                            all financial sector regulators should establish a dedicated unit to address
                            consumer complaints, publicize complaints data and with power to make binding
                            decisions. Each regulator should publicize the processes and procedures for
                            making complaints and the timelines for dealing with them. They should also
                            provide on their websites consolidated data regarding complaints on a regular
                            basis (including details of the most common complaints); set up a complaints
                            hotline and have power to make binding decisions. If this option is pursued, it will
                            also be important that the financial sector regulators have a clear mandate to
                            investigate, assess and finally decide disputes between consumers and financial
                            institutions.
Good Practice E.3           Publication of Information on Consumer Complaints
                             a. Statistics and data of customer complaints, including those related to
                                 a breach of any code of conduct of the banking industry, should be
                                 periodically compiled and published by the ombudsman, financial
                                 supervisory authority or consumer protection agency.
                             b. Regulatory agencies should publish statistics and data and analyses
                                 related to their activities in respect of consumer protection regarding
                                 banking products and services generally and regarding consumer
                                 complaints in particular so as, among other things, to reduce the
                                 sources of systemic consumer complaints and disputes.
                             c. Banking industry associations should also analyze the complaint
                                 statistics and data and propose measures to avoid the recurrence of
                                 systemic consumer complaints.
Description                 Paragraph (a)
                            Statistics and data regarding the complaints that retail customers have with their
                            credit institutions are not periodically compiled and published by SBV, VCA or any
                            other agency.
                            Paragraph (b)
                            Neither SBV nor VCA publishes statistics, data and analyses related to consumer
                            protection regarding banking products and services generally and regarding
                            consumer complaints in particular so as, among other things, to learn of the
                            sources of systemic consumer complaints and disputes with a view to taking steps
                            to see these reduced.

   161
       Resolving disputes between consumers and financial businesses: Fundamentals for a financial ombudsman (World Bank,
   2012), available at:
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Financial_Ombudsmen_Vol1_Fundamentals.pdf (last
   visited on September 02, 2014).

                                                                                                                            55
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                              At present, there is no requirement for SBV to analyze data provided by commercial
                              banks on the complaints these banks have received with a view to devising
                              appropriate changes in regulations to deal with any issues of general concern.
                              Paragraph (c)
                              The Vietnam Banks’ Association does not receive and analyze complaint statistics
                              and data and then propose measures to avoid the recurrence of systemic
                              consumer complaints.
Recommendation                SBV (and other financial regulators) should be required to: (a) analyze all data
                              concerning consumer complaints in respect of the business practices of credit
                              institutions; (b) publicize widely, at least once every year, the total number of
                              consumer complaints, the most common concerns of consumers, and the
                              percentage of cases that have been acknowledged in writing by the consumer as
                              having been resolved satisfactorily; and (c) take appropriate corrective measures
                              and publicize these measures as a result.162
                              SBV should also give consideration to requiring all banks, by regulation, to
                              centralize all data on the complaints they receive and to analyze these data
                              periodically.
                              The analysis performed by each bank would be to identify the most common
                              reasons for consumer complaints, and, thus, to change business practices so as
                              to avoid these, to the extent feasible, in the future. The complaint data analysis
                              showing categories of complaints, time to resolve, unresolved complaints, etc.,
                              should be sent at least quarterly to SBV and should permit SBV to analyze and
                              publish aggregate data on its website on a regular basis. Reviewing and checking
                              such reports should be part of SBV’s on-site and off-site supervision activities in
                              respect of the business conduct of every bank.
                              Publication of the statistics and data regarding consumer complaints should be
                              required in order to inform the public of common problems affecting consumers
                              and to increase consumer awareness regarding these issues.
                              By analyzing the statistics and data, SBV will be able to identify recurring problems
                              and areas of weakness in banking practices. Steps can then be taken to deal with
                              the source of these problems. The analyses in time may also be critical in terms of
                              identifying correlations between issues raised in complaints and systemic issues
                              or weaknesses that may affect the soundness of the Vietnamese banking system
                              itself.

SECTION F                     GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1             Depositor Protection
                                   a. The law should ensure that the regulator or supervisor can take
                                      necessary measures to protect depositors when a bank is unable to
                                      meet its obligations including the return of deposits.
                                   b. If there is a law on deposit insurance, it should state clearly:
                                        (i)     the insurer;
                                        (ii)    the classes of those depositors who are insured;
                                        (iii)   the extent of insurance coverage;
                                        (iv)    the holder of all funds for payout purposes;
                                        (v)     the contributor(s) to this fund;
                                        (vi)    each event that will trigger a payout from this fund to any class
                                                of those insured; and
                                        (vii)   the mechanisms to ensure timely payout to depositors who
                                                are insured.
                                   c. On an on-going basis, the deposit insurer should directly or through
                                      insured banks or the association of insured commercial banks, if any,


   162
         In future, these functions may be taken over by the Ombudsman when deemed appropriate.
                                                                                                                 56
                                                                              I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                      promote public awareness of the deposit insurance system, as well
                                      as how the system works, including its benefits and limitations.
                                  d. Public awareness should, among other things, educate the public on
                                      the financial instruments and institutions covered by deposit
                                      insurance, the coverage and limits of deposit insurance and the
                                      reimbursement process.
                                  e. The deposit insurer should work closely with member banks and
                                      other safety-net participants to ensure consistency in the information
                                      provided to consumers and to maximize public awareness on an
                                      ongoing basis.
                                  f. The deposit insurer should receive or conduct a regular evaluation of
                                      the effectiveness of its public awareness program or activities.
Description                    Paragraph (a)
                               The Law on Deposit Insurance provides for SBV and Deposit Insurance of Vietnam
                               (DIV) to take necessary measures to protect depositors when a bank is unable to
                               meet its obligations, including the return of deposits.
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Vietnam’s law on deposit insurance163 states clearly all the information listed under
                               this good practice.
                               Paragraph (c)
                               On an on-going basis, DIV does not actively promote public awareness of the
                               deposit insurance system, as well as how the system works, including its benefits
                               and limitations, whether directly or through DIV member banks.
                               Paragraph (d)
                               According to DIV, at least, there is a reasonably high level of public awareness of
                               the financial instruments and institutions covered by deposit insurance and the
                               coverage and limits of deposit insurance, if not the reimbursement process.
                               Paragraph (e)
                               DIV has yet to work closely with all member banks in order to ensure consistency
                               in the information provided to consumers and to maximize public awareness on an
                               ongoing basis.
                               Paragraph (f)
                               Also, DIV has yet to receive or to conduct any regular evaluations of the
                               effectiveness of DIV-related public awareness programs or activities.
Recommendation                 SBV in cooperation with DIV should give careful consideration to:
                                     promoting public awareness of the deposit insurance system;
                                     educating the public on the financial instruments and institutions covered by
                                      deposit insurance, the coverage and limits of deposit insurance and the
                                      reimbursement process;
                                     requiring members banks to advertise the fact of deposit insurance and how
                                      it applies in a manner which is consistent among all banks; and
                                     receiving or conducting regular evaluations of the effectiveness of public
                                      awareness programs or activities regarding deposit insurance.




   163
         Law no. 06 of 2012, on Deposit Insurance.
                                                                                                                  57
                                                                                         I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Good Practice F.2              Insolvency
                                  a. Depositors should enjoy higher priority than other unsecured
                                      creditors in the liquidation process of a bank.
                                  b. The law dealing with the insolvency of banks should provide for
                                      expeditious, cost effective and equitable provisions to enable the
                                      maximum timely refund of deposits to depositors.
Description                    Paragraph (a)
                               In the liquidation process of a bank, retail depositors are entitled to payments from
                               Deposit Insurance of Vietnam of up to VND 50 million per depositor within 60 days
                               from the date that SBV issues an official document:
                                         terminating the special control regime of the relevant bank; or
                                         indicating the non-application of recovery measures or the termination of
                                          unsuccessful recovery measures; or
                                         Stating, in relation to a branch of a foreign bank, that it has lost the ability
                                          pay deposits to depositors.
                               Any deposit exceeding the above threshold is considered unsecured debt which is
                               payable after payment of bankruptcy fees and unpaid wages, severance
                               allowances and social insurance and other rights pursuant to the signed collective
                               labor agreement and any other relevant labor contract. In the result, depositors
                               enjoy higher priority than other unsecured creditors in the liquidation process of a
                               bank.
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Furthermore, the law dealing with the insolvency of banks provides for expeditious,
                               cost effective and equitable provisions to enable the maximum timely refund of
                               deposits to depositors.164
Recommendation                 No recommendation

SECTION G                      CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice G.1              Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                                    a. A broadly based program of financial education and information
                                        should be developed to increase the financial capability of the
                                        population.
                                    b. A range of organizations, including those of the government, state
                                        agencies and non-government organizations, should be involved in
                                        developing and implementing the financial capability program.
                                    c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central
                                        bank or a financial regulator to lead and coordinate the development
                                        and implementation of the national financial capability program.
Description                    In Vietnam there is no broad based financial education program or financial
                               capability strategy. Instead, there are a number of isolated programs or
                               interventions, several of these supported by foreign commercial banks operating
                               in Vietnam. Examples include:
                                         The Practical Money Skills Program funded by Visa and delivered by the
                                          public relations firm Ogilvy;165
                                         The Global Financial Education Program funded by the Citi Foundation
                                          and delivered by the Dariu Foundation and Save the Children; 166
                                         The MoneyMinded Program run by ANZ;167




   164
         See CI Law, Chapter VIII and Decree no. 05 of 2010 on the application of the Law on Bankruptcy to credit institutions.
   165
       More information is available at www.practicalmoneyskills.com.vn (last visited on July 1, 2014).
   166
       More information is available at dariu.org/projects/financial-education (last visited on July 1, 2014).
   167
       More information is available at www.fpt.edu.vn/en/story/fpt-students-learn-how-control-money-anz (last visited on July 1,
   2014).
                                                                                                                                  58
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                                     The Junior Achievement More than Money program in elementary schools
                                      supported by HSBC;168
                            Each of these programs is reaching thousands of people each year using a variety
                            of online, social media and in-person training activities. However, in a population
                            of approximately 90 million, these efforts are not reaching scale, at least not yet,
                            for significant impact at the country level.
                            These initial efforts in Vietnam reflect a reliance on partnerships – especially
                            between the private sector, NGOs and civil society and academia / schools. Up to
                            this point the government has been relatively absent while others pilot a variety of
                            small scale interventions and programs.
                            To scale up financial education and capability efforts in Vietnam it will be necessary
                            for financial sector regulators, and especially SBV, to take a more active role in
                            coordination and developing a strategy for awareness raising and engagement with
                            consumers.
Recommendation              A Government agency such as MoF, with the active support of SBV and other key
                            regulators, should be appointed to a leadership role in financial capability and
                            financial education. This role would involve using its convening power to assemble
                            key stakeholders such as the ones listed above, identifying critical financial sector
                            issues where consumer awareness or skills can contribute to effective financial
                            inclusion efforts and to a more sustainable and efficient financial sector, developing
                            data on financial capability levels, sharing best practices and, in some instances,
                            supporting the delivery of financial capability efforts.
                            In many cases, however, it may be both cost effective and more impactful for others
                            to lead implementation efforts. One example is the potential for integrating financial
                            capability into the new curriculum reform efforts for K-12 education. This potential
                            opportunity should be seized if at all possible as it would present a unique chance
                            to develop a coordinated and sustainable approach to financial education for
                            children and support good financial habit formation.
                            In the mid-term horizon a national strategy for financial capability should be
                            developed. This would give the financial sector regulators time to develop a more
                            complete view of what options exist for financial capability in Vietnam, to evaluate
                            the strengths and weaknesses of different stakeholders and to conduct a national
                            financial capability survey to help determine critical knowledge and behavior gaps
                            and areas of relative strength.
Good Practice G.2           Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media
                             a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken by the relevant ministry or
                                  institution to improve people's financial capability regarding banking
                                  products and services.
                             b. The mass media should be encouraged by the relevant ministry or
                                  institution to provide financial education, information and guidance to
                                  the public regarding banking products and services.
                             c. The government should provide appropriate incentives and encourage
                                  collaboration between governmental agencies, banking regulators, the
                                  banking industry and consumer associations in the provision of
                                  financial education, information and guidance regarding banking
                                  products and services.
Description                 As described above, there are currently only a few relatively small-scale financial
                            capability activities in Vietnam. While most of the existing initiatives focus on a
                            classroom teaching model, there are also some important variations in terms of the
                            population served (children, university students, microfinance clients, etc.) and the
                            tools used (beyond classroom instruction there are fairs, role-plays, social media,
                            competitions, etc.).
                            Up to this point mass media has not been engaged in financial capability outreach.
                            The mission met with media representatives from Vietnam Television channel 1

   168
      More information is available at juniorachievementvietnambulletin.wordpress.com/about/ja-more-than-money/ (last visited on
   July 1, 2014).
                                                                                                                            59
                                                                    I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                    (VTV1) who indicated interest in developing possible media tools and programs
                    addressing financial capability and consumer protection issues.
                    The various roles of government including as a convener, coordinator, data and
                    knowledge generator and implementer are described above.
Recommendation      SBV, and other relevant regulators, should do a stocktaking of existing financial
                    capability activities and analyze the strengths and weaknesses of various
                    approaches. The insights developed from both international good practice, rigorous
                    impact evaluations in other countries and qualitative research from financial
                    capability activities in Vietnam should all contribute to the selection and scaling up
                    of future initiatives. Opportunities to work with mass media, including VTV1, should
                    be pursued given the penetration levels and the resulting cost-effectiveness per
                    person reached.
Good Practice G.3   Unbiased Information for Consumers
                       a. Regulators and consumer associations should provide, via the
                           internet and printed publications, independent information on the key
                           features, benefits and risks –and where practicable the costs– of the
                           main types of banking products and services.
                       b. The relevant authority or institution should encourage efforts to
                           enable consumers to better understand the products and services
                           being offered to consumers by banking institutions, such as
                           providing comparative price information and undertaking
                           educational campaigns.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    Currently there is no single source of information that would facilitate access to
                    information relevant to consumers. Further, the mission did not identify any
                    unbiased or third party comparison of financial products, in either the public or
                    private / non-profit sectors.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    While regulations provide some guidance on the way in which key product features,
                    such as interest rates on loans must be calculated and presented, these still seem
                    to leave ample room for each provider to customize products and terms so that
                    comparison shopping is difficult. Educational campaigns offered by financial
                    institutions focus on issues such as promoting savings and learning to budget
                    money and invest - issues which are aligned with the interests of the providers.
Recommendation      In cooperation with other supervisory agencies and relevant stakeholders, SBV
                    should consider establishing a website or creating a section within its current
                    website as a single source of information for consumers, where all relevant
                    information regarding consumer rights and consumer protection would be found.
                    The following information might be included on the website:
                           roles of SBV regarding consumer protection;
                           roles of other state authorities, including local government bodies;
                           contact information to SBV and other state authorities involved in
                            consumer protection;
                           contact information to consumer associations and advocacy groups;
                           summary of rights and obligations of consumers on financial markets;
                           guidelines and recommendations regarding financial products and
                            services;
                           warnings regarding unfair practices, operation of unlicensed entities or
                            fraudulent schemes.
                    In the long-term, SBV should publish on its website a list of contact information
                    (regularly reported by licensed entities) where consumers may file a dispute
                    against the respective financial service provider. Also, considerations should be
                    given on whether to establish a price comparison website that would display costs
                    of credit as reported by all licensed/registered credit institutions. It may also be
                    possible to develop some other technology-enabled tools which facilitate
                    comparison shopping by consumers, provided either by public or non-profit entities.

                                                                                                        60
                                                                                       I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


                             The financial capability strategy developed in Vietnam should include skills needed
                             for comparison shopping, negotiation and seeking redress among the key
                             objectives.
Good Practice G.4            Consulting Consumers and the Financial Services Industry
                                a. The relevant authority or institution should consult consumers,
                                    banking associations and banking institutions to help them develop
                                    financial capability programs that meet banking consumers' needs
                                    and expectations.
                                b. The relevant authority or institution should also undertake consumer
                                    testing with a view to ensuring that proposed initiatives have their
                                    intended outcomes.
Description                  Paragraphs (a) and (b)
                             There is currently no government authority or public institution responsible for
                             coordinating financial capability efforts, but this is a recommendation of this
                             mission. Up to this point, none of the small scale financial capability initiatives in
                             Vietnam have been rigorously studied for impact.
Recommendation               Going forward well-designed impact evaluations should be undertaken as is
                             possible given resource and time constraints. This goes beyond consumer testing
                             to include carefully designed evaluations with randomization and control groups
                             where feasible.
Good Practice G.5            Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                                a. The financial capability of consumers should be measured, amongst
                                    other things, by broadly-based household surveys and mystery
                                    shopping trips that are repeated from time to time.
                                b. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be
                                    evaluated by the relevant authorities or institutions from time to time.
Description                  Paragraph (a)
                             No comprehensive survey of financial capability has been implemented in Vietnam.
                             There have been only small scale efforts to measure financial knowledge and skills,
                             such as the five question survey implemented by Visa in 2012 in Vietnam and 27
                             other countries worldwide.169In that survey Vietnam was ranked low, in only 25th
                             place in terms of financial knowledge and behaviors. DIV is interested in performing
                             a national survey of financial capability, which would include information of specific
                             relevance for deposit insurance such as consumer awareness of this protection.
                             SBV is also interested in conducting a national survey of financial capability in the
                             future to establish a national baseline on this topic and to help identify specific gaps
                             in terms of issues, understanding and more vulnerable population groups.
                             Paragraph (a)
                             No government authorities are currently involved in any kind of oversight or
                             evaluation of existing financial capability initiatives.




   169
       Financial Literacy Barometer (Visa, 2012), available at practicalmoneyskills.com/resources/pdfs/FL_Barometer_Final.pdf (last
   visited on July 1, 2014).
                                                                                                                                 61
                                                                                        I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendation               The Government of Vietnam should perform a national survey of financial capability
                             as one of the early steps in the development of a national strategy or approach to
                             this issue. SBV should lead this effort in collaboration with other interested financial
                             regulators and agencies. The survey should reflect international good practices.
                             The World Bank surveys for financial capability provide a good starting place for
                             development of a national survey in Vietnam and would facilitate comparisons with
                             other countries.170 Further, a public outreach campaign should be developed.
                             Ideally this would be based on data from the national survey. However, a number
                             of well-targeted focus groups and interviews across different population segments
                             (urban consumers of different income levels, rural consumers, young vs. old,
                             women vs. men, etc.) should also be adequate to develop a targeted outreach
                             effort on various financial capability-related issues. This could involve for instance
                             improved education efforts at the time a loan is requested / received through
                             materials to be provided by financial institutions as well as other outreach efforts in
                             mass media, social media, etc. Another example of a critical moment for educating
                             consumers might be the requirement of adverse action notification described
                             above171, as this is the moment when they are likely to have the greatest motivation
                             to learn about their credit report, correct any errors which may exist and change
                             their behavior to strengthen their credit report.
                             The use of innovative delivery mechanisms, such as entertainment education,
                             short message service (SMS) reminders, engaging people on social media, etc.
                             should also be part of any outreach and education campaign. These tools are
                             highly effective and may be especially useful among the less educated, less literate
                             segment of the population which is also at more risk for financial frauds and abusive
                             financial practices.
SECTION H                    COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION
Good Practice H.1            Regulatory Policy and Competition Policy
                             Regulators and competition authorities should be required to consult one
                             another for the purpose of ensuring the establishment, application and
                             enforcement of consistent policies regarding the regulation of financial
                             services.
Description                  Although SBV and VCA apparently do consult with each other periodically on an
                             informal basis, there is no formalized mechanism established by them to do so for
                             the purpose of ensuring the establishment, application and enforcement of
                             consistent policies regarding the regulation of banking or any other financial
                             services.
                             While competition in any sector must abide by the principles of honesty and non-
                             infringement of the lawful rights and interests of consumers,172 the Competition Law
                             contains no specific obligations of banks in their dealings with their retail customers.
                             That said, it is a prerequisite of credit institutions seeking to be licensed by SBV
                             that they have a feasible establishment project or business plan that, in the process
                             of being implemented, will not create a monopoly, any constraint to competition or
                             any unfair competition in Vietnam’s system of credit institutions. 173
                             Furthermore, the CI Law expressly prohibits any constraints on competition or acts
                             of unfair competition that damage or are likely to damage the safety of the banking
                             system or the rights and lawful interests of any organizations (including credit
                             institutions) and individuals.174 However, although the Government is to issue a
                             Decree that provides details of actions constituting unfair competition in banking
                             and the remedies for any such actions, 175 this Decree is still awaited.


   170
       More information is available at http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/surveys/users-of-financial-services (last visited on
   July 30, 2014).
   171
       Banking Good Practice D.4(e)(iii).
   172
       Competition Law, Article 4, Clause 2.
   173
       Id., Article 20, Clause 1, Item e).
   174
       Id., Article 9, Clause 2.
   175
       Id., Clause 3.
                                                                                                                                       62
                                                                                   I. Good Practices: Banking Sector


Recommendation              SBV and VCA should coordinate in establishing, applying and enforcing consistent
                            policies to ensure a consistently high level of competition in the delivery of all
                            banking services in Vietnam. And, in this respect, consideration should be given to
                            formulating a Memorandum of Understanding between SBV and VCA to encourage
                            consultations between them in these respects.
                            In addition, pursuant to the CI Law, the Government should formulate and issue its
                            Decree providing details of actions constituting unfair competition in banking and
                            the remedies for any such actions.
Good Practice H.2           Review of Competition
                            Given the significance of retail banking to the economy as a whole and to the
                            welfare of consumers, competition authorities should:
                                (i)  monitor competition in retail banking;
                                (ii) conduct, and publish for general consumption, periodic
                                     assessments of competition in retail banking (such as the range of
                                     interest rates across banks for specific products); and
                               (iii) make recommendations publicly available on enhancing
                                     competition in retail banking.
Description                 VCA does not engage in the activities described in this Good Practice.
Recommendation              VCA should be staffed, equipped and funded so as to permit it to:
                                  carry out effective monitoring of competition in retail banking; and
                                  provide well-researched assessments of competition in retail banking
                                   (such as the range of interest rates, fees and charges across banks for
                                   specific products) on a periodic basis, with the results being made widely
                                   available to the general public and closely discussed with SBV.176
Good Practice H.3           Impact of Competition Policy on Consumer Protection
                            The competition authority and the regulator should evaluate the impact of
                            competition policies on consumer welfare, especially regarding any
                            limitations on customer choice and collusion regarding interest and other
                            charges and fees.
Description                 To date, no evaluations of any kind have been made by VCA on its own (or in
                            conjunction with SBV) of the impact of Vietnam’s competition policies on the
                            welfare of consumers of banking services.
Recommendation              In the medium to long-term, VCA and SBV should adopt and carry out this Good
                            Practice.




   176
      The Banking Enquiry of the Competition Commission of South Africa provides an example of the way in which such
   assessments have been conducted, as well as of the sorts of recommendations that have been made as a result. See,
   http://www.compcom.co.za/enquiry-in-to-banking.
                                                                                                                       63
      Vietnam is an MSCI frontier market.177 The market infrastructure comprises of two exchanges
      – the Ho Chi Minh City Stock Exchange (HOSE) and the Hanoi Stock Exchange (HNX) – and the
      central securities depository and securities settlement system for equities and debt known as the
      Vietnam Securities Depository (VSD). As of December 31, 2013, 308 stocks were listed in the
      HOSE with total market capitalization of approximately VND 842,105 billion or 23.5 percent of
      GDP178. As of December 31, 2013, 377 companies were listed in the HNX with total market
      capitalization of approximately VND 87,512 billion.179 The total market capitalization of both HOSE
      and HNX in 2013 stood at approximately VND 949 trillion, equivalent to 26.5 percent of GDP.180
      HOSE is the leading stock market in Vietnam, currently accounting for 85 percent of total
      market capitalization. HOSE has attracted the most large-scale companies that represent the
      national economy. The average turnover ratio was 42.05 percent during the first half of 2013. At
      present, there are 94 securities companies as members of HOSE, providing services for over 1.3
      million trading accounts in which domestic individual investors account for 1,282,071 accounts or
      close to 80 percent of the total number of trading accounts with securities companies. The
      majority of listed firms are former SOEs that have undergone partial privatization (“equitization”).
      A new trading floor for unlisted public companies (UPCOM) was launched at the Hanoi
      Securities Center in June 2009. At the end of 2011, 132 companies were listed on UPCOM. In
      September 2009, a separate trading floor for government bonds was established. Brokers can
      grant access to electronic platforms to certain customers through broker order routing systems
      and internet based systems. Trading also occurs over-the-counter by voice broking, negotiation
      or otherwise and the exchange data reflect a substantial number of negotiated “put -throughs” or
      reports to the market’s price reporting system of upstairs block trades; approximately 20 percent
      in the case of equities on HSX, and the majority in the case of bonds at HNX.
      Vietnam’s formal market is a highly retail market.181 As at the end of 2012, the number of
      investors’ accounts in VSD system was 1,264,030 of which domestic investors made up more
      than 98 percent.182 Additionally, more than 90 percent of transactions by volume were by retail
      investors.
      Vietnam stock markets are highly concentrated, and relatively illiquid. The top 40
      companies by market capitalization account for three fourth of the entire market. Both market
      capitalization and turnover are between 30 percent to 40 percent of GDP. Retail investors access
      a narrow range of products in the securities markets, including listed shares and corporate bonds
      and open-end collective investment funds. Efforts are underway to introduce new products on the
      exchange such as ETF, REITs and derivatives.




177
    MSCI Frontier Markets Indexes available at www.msci.com/products/indexes/country_and_regional/fm/ (last visited on July 29,
2014).
178
    HOSE’s Annual Report 201342 (HOSE, 2013), available at http://www.hsx.vn/hsx_en/Modules/annual/annual_files/BCTN-ANNUAL
percent20REPORT percent202013.pdf (last visited on August 13, 2014).
179
    HNX’s Annual Report 2013, available at http://hnx.vn/documents/18/133563/BCTN+HNX+2013+ percent28English percent29.pdf?
version=1.0 (last visited on August 13, 2014).
180
    SSC’s Annual Report 2013.
181
    As an example, 94 securities companies which are members of HOSE provide services for over 1,282,071 individual trading accounts
or close to 80 percent of their total number of trading accounts.
182
    VSD Annual Report 2012, 20 (VSD, 2012), available at vsd.vn/Systems/2013/07/16/2vsd-ar12_0407-15h-full.pdf (last visited on
August 13, 2014).

                                                                                                                                64
                                                                            II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


As at end of December 31, 2013, there were 104 licensed securities companies and 381
licenses to securities practitioners. These comprised 289 brokerage licenses and 92 analyst
licenses. For the asset management industry, SSC has issued 147 professional fund
management licenses and 1,099 fund management professional certificates.183 Industry assets
under management (AUM) are roughly 100 trillion VND (about US$4.8 billion). They offer a
limited product mix of public mutual funds and privately offered “member” funds.
Due to the industry’s small size and the high degree of competition, few asset managers
have achieved significant scale in terms of AUM. Industry penetration is extremely low, with
less than five percent of the population owning any investments aside from real estate, gold,
and cash. A limited product mix of public mutual funds and privately offered “member funds” is
available to retail customers. Although there is no data available on mutual fund sales channels,
anecdotal feedback from industry participants suggest that banks and securities companies
share a percentage of the commission/fee with the fund manager should they refer their clients
to the fund manager.


 SECTION A.                         INVESTOR PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

 Good Practice A.1                  Consumer Protection Regime
                                    The law should provide for clear rules on investor protection in the area
                                    of securities markets products and services, and there should be
                                    adequate institutional arrangements for implementation and
                                    enforcement of investor protection rules.
                                       a. There should be specific legal provisions in the law, which create
                                           an effective regime for the protection of investors in securities.
                                       b. There should be a governmental agency responsible for data
                                           collection and analysis (including complaints, disputes and
                                           inquiries) and for the oversight and enforcement of investor
                                           protection laws and regulations.
 Description                        Paragraph (a)
                                    The Securities Law of 2006 (SC Law) governs the securities markets and
                                    intermediaries/institutions as well as securities practitioners who are
                                    individuals working in securities intermediaries. The consumer/investor
                                    protection mandate of MoF and the State Securities Commission (SSC) is
                                    provided in the specific provisions in the SC Law and its subsidiary legislation
                                    relating to investor protection. For example, Article 4 of SC Law stipulates the
                                    principles of securities markets and activities to be underpinned by “ fairness,
                                    publicity and transparency” and “the protection of the lawful rights and interests
                                    of investors”.
                                    In this regard, MoF and SSC using their broad powers to protect the public
                                    interest and the interest of investors, have issued numerous decrees, circulars
                                    and decisions covering many aspects of consumer protection, including
                                    disclosure, business conduct and prudential rules. The provisions on
                                    consumer rights and obligations across these laws are at the level of principles
                                    and many are similar, but not the same. There also many regulations (Decrees,
                                    Decisions, Circulars) under the SC Law.
                                    Other laws impacting on consumer protection in the securities sector include:
                                           Civil Code;
                                           Enterprise Law;
                                           Penal Code;
                                           Commercial Law;


  183
        SSC’s Annual Report 2013.

                                                                                                                   65
                                                                          II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                                     Law on Protection of Consumers’ Rights; and
                                     Law on Advertising.
                            Paragraph (b)
                            The current regulatory framework places the State Securities Commission, a
                            State supervisory management agency, under the MoF. The MoF addresses
                            issues related to the development of primary (laws) and secondary legislation
                            (norms, circulars, decrees, decisions, ordinances) subject to input from SSC,
                            oversees the development of accounting standards, accredits auditors, and
                            has particular responsibilities related to the operation of the government and
                            private bond market and debt management.
                            SSC is responsible for the day-to-day monitoring and supervision of the
                            securities market and securities businesses including licensing of securities
                            businesses (e.g., funds management and securities companies) and their
                            representative offices and branches; approves public offers of securities and
                            public takeovers; and issues infringement notices for breaches of securities
                            regulations. SSC also oversees the operations of HOSE, HNX and VSD, which
                            have supervisory responsibilities vis-à-vis the operations of the market, listing
                            and continuous listing compliance.
                            SSC utilizes the prudential examiners and existing compliance and
                            enforcement resources to address consumer protection issues. The integration
                            of examination, compliance and enforcement resources for prudential and
                            consumer protection matters may result in economies of scale, but its
                            effectiveness in identifying and addressing consumer protection issues
                            adequately must be cautioned184.
                            Despite articulating the vision in the Capital Market Roadmap185 to enhance
                            protection of individual investors, SSC does not appear to have developed a
                            business plan that sets out specifically how it would set strategies, allocate
                            resources and plan supporting activities to achieve such objectives. While it
                            appears that the inspection department of SSC receives complaints from
                            investors and coordinates with other departments of the SSC, it is not
                            immediately clear if the Inspection Department has a clear written mandate for
                            financial consumer protection as discussed above that is well understood
                            within SSC and the market participants. According to the 2013 Annual Report
                            SSC had issued 108 decisions on sanctioning with administrative violations
                            with total fines of VND 8 billion. 186 SSC had also suspended one company’s
                            brokerage operations and one fund manager.
                            Further, the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI) is responsible for
                            administering the CP Law acting through the Vietnam Competition Authority.
                            Nonetheless, VCA is not proactive in identifying shortcomings in securities
                            intermediaries not complying with consumer protection requirements.




184
    The recent experience of UK, South Korea and US would indicate the risks of mixed mandates even though many other
countries with mixed mandates have worked well too.
185
    Vietnam Capital Market Roadmap: Challenges and Policy Options (ADB, 2014).
186
    Annual Report 2003, 89 (SSC, 2003).

                                                                                                                        66
                                                                             II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Recommendation                  The overlap of general laws and the SC Law in regard to consumer protection
                                raises a certain level of ambiguity and legal uncertainty. With the CP Law, the
                                Advertisement Law and the Competition Law each appearing to apply to the
                                financial services sector including the securities sector, there is some
                                ambiguity on how these general laws operate along with the Securities Law
                                and the subsidiary legislation. Hence, establishing effective coordination
                                mechanisms between MoF, SSC and other relevant authorities and defining
                                joint priorities and clarifying roles and responsibilities would help provide some
                                legal certainty to the market participants and consumers.
                                Consideration should be given to the rationalization of the legal and regulatory
                                framework for consumer protection in securities (or in financial services) in
                                order to make understanding of the requirements easier and clarifying the roles
                                of different government agencies. One possible approach could be to carve
                                out consumer protection provisions in respect of financial services from the
                                general laws and place those relevant to securities in the SC Law and make
                                SSC responsible for the oversight and ensuring compliance as well as
                                arbitrating on customer disputes.
                                The role of SSC in financial consumer protection should be strengthened in
                                order to ensure improved monitoring and compliance with legal requirements
                                and enforcement in case of violations of market conduct regulations. To equip
                                the inspectors to supervise market conduct issues effectively, it would be
                                useful to provide targeted training to relevant staff on understanding consumer
                                protection laws and regulations; analysis of complaints and consumer
                                contracts and other disclosure documents; verification of calculations of fees
                                and rates; and the ability to design and carry out market testing.
                                It would be useful if SSC develops a 3 to 5 year business plan on its strategy
                                of enhancing consumer protection and the resources it would need to meet the
                                goals as set out in such a business plan as well as providing a clear written
                                delegation of powers to the relevant department to handle consumer protection
                                matters within SSC.
Good Practice A.2               Code of Conduct for Securities Intermediaries and Collective Investment
                                Undertakings.
                                   a. Securities Intermediaries and CIUs should have a voluntary code
                                       of conduct.
                                   b. Securities Intermediaries and CIUs should publicize the code of
                                       conduct to the general public through appropriate means.
                                   c. Securities Intermediaries and CIUs should comply with the code
                                       and an appropriate mechanism should be in place to provide
                                       incentives to comply with the code.
Description                     Paragraphs (a)
                                The Association of Stockbroking Companies and Asset Managers, which was
                                established in June 2003 as a voluntary organization representing 56
                                securities companies and 11 fund managers and 3 commercial banks, does
                                not assume any self-regulatory responsibilities at this stage nor has it adopted
                                a code of conduct for its members. A draft code of conduct was prepared in
                                2007,187 however, it was not adopted by the Association.
                                The interviewed securities companies and fund management companies have
                                all adopted internal codes of conduct, which are not necessarily consistent with
                                each other. Article 24 of Circular 212/2012 for fund managers also requires
                                fund management companies to comply with their codes of conduct and
                                ensure fairness, honesty and the best interests of their customers. However
                                these codes do not represent an industry code of conduct of the type
                                contemplated by this Good Practice.



187
      It appears the draft Code was prepared with assistance from the ADB.

                                                                                                               67
                                                         II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                 Paragraph (b)
                 Article 47 of Circular 210/2012 re quires securities companies to “promulgate
                 rules of practice in accordance with their operations” and it seems that at least
                 one securities company has published its code on the company’s website.
                 However, generally such codes of conduct are not known to consumers.
                 Paragraph (c)
                 None of the codes of conduct is well-known to investors, even to the members
                 of each association.
Recommendation   More needs to be done to encourage industry participants to be actively
                 involved in developing and promoting high conduct standards, which should
                 be clearly enforceable. Thus far, industry standards have been largely driven
                 by laws and regulations rather than initiatives of the industry.
                 Industry codes of conduct could be developed for this purpose for each
                 segment of the securities sector or one could be prepared for use across the
                 securities sector. The value of a code of conduct is its widespread distribution
                 so that consumers know that, in principle, securities intermediaries have
                 agreed to provide minimum levels of service and to respond to complaints and
                 disputes. Codes should be as similar as possible across segments, ideally
                 based on basic common rules for all segments and only specifics added for
                 each individual segment, to make sure conditions are equal for financial
                 products that have similar features but are legally different (such as mutual
                 funds and structured and leveraged products).
                 Any code of conduct adopted by securities companies and fund managers
                 should be disseminated broadly and be provided to consumers as part of the
                 application process. In addition, these codes of conduct should be placed in
                 securities intermediaries’ retail offices and on their websites particularly in
                 regard to business conduct with customers of the securities intermediary.
                 Consumers should be advised upfront that if an intermediary fails to comply
                 with the code of conduct, a complaint can be submitted to the institution, the
                 professional association and SSC.
                 There should be a strong mechanism to investigate breaches of the codes of
                 conduct, including the possibility that these breaches be publicized and that
                 SSC use these breaches as warning signals for supervisory action.
                 In the longer term, the application of a policy of “comply or explain” could be
                 useful to strengthen the enforcement of codes of conduct. Non-compliance and
                 non-explanation would be considered a misleading business practice and be
                 subject to sanctions as such. The same policy could be applied to standard
                 contract provisions, where the need to deviate from a standard contract
                 provision would have to be explained.




                                                                                               68
                                                                                    II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


  Good Practice A.3           Other Institutional Arrangements
                                 a. The judicial system should provide an efficient and trusted venue
                                     for the enforcement of laws and regulations on investor
                                     protection.
                                 b. The media should play an active role in promoting investor
                                     protection.
                                 c. The private sector, including voluntary investor protection
                                     organizations, industry associations and, where permitted, self-
                                     regulatory organizations should play an active role in promoting
                                     investor protection.
  Description                 Paragraph (a)
                              The hierarchy of Vietnamese courts include: (1) Supreme Court; (2) Provincial
                              Courts; and (3) District Courts. The courts operate in five divisions: criminal,
                              civil, administrative, economic, and labor. Parallel to the court system is the
                              People’s Procuracy, which is responsible for supervising the operation of
                              judicial authorities. The People’s Procuracy can protest a judgment or ask for
                              a review of a case. In addition, Vietnam has a system of independent
                              arbitration centers, established under the Commercial Arbitration Ordinance
                              (2003), which can grant enforceable arbitral awards. Foreign and domestic
                              arbitral awards are legally enforceable in Vietnam, although in practice it can
                              be hard to ensure enforcement.188
                              Paragraph (b)
                              See Banking Sector Good Practice A.4, Paragraph (b).
                              Paragraph (c)
                              The Vietnam legal framework does not expressly include a self-regulatory
                              organization category but Vietnamese stock exchanges and VSD have
                              supervisory responsibilities vis-à-vis the operations of the market, listing and
                              continuous listing compliance and SSC considers them to be the front line
                              overseers of the markets and market systems that they operate. Recently,
                              Circular 689/2012/QD/IBCK states clearly the oversight responsibilities of the
                              exchanges such as in respect of disclosure, corporate governance, market
                              abuses, accounting and auditing and market practitioners.
                              See Banking Sector Good Practice A.4, Paragraph (c).
  Recommendation              See Banking Sector Good Practice A.4.
  Good Practice A.4           Licensing
                                 a. All legal entities or physical persons that, for the purpose of
                                     investment or speculation, solicit funds from the public should
                                     be obliged to obtain a license from the supervisory agency.
                                 b. The securities supervisory agency should have broad powers to
                                     investigate fraudulent schemes.
  Description                 Paragraph (a)
                              There are clear, minimum entry standards for all market intermediaries under
                              the SC Law and Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 for securities companies
                              and fund management companies respectively. The eligibility criteria also
                              include fitness and competency standards for securities practitioners
                              (individuals working for securities intermediaries) and a specified number of
                              personnel must hold a securities practitioner certificate for each operation
                              performed by the licensed securities intermediary. In addition, the fit and proper
                              criteria also apply to holders of more than 10 percent interests and include a
                              review for any record of prior criminal activity.
                              The fit and proper standards are also applicable to fund management
                              companies. Despite authority under the SC Law since 2006 for open ended
                              and other types of funds, the only collective investments (CIS) that are

188
  2012 Investment Climate Statement – Vietnam (U.S. Department of State), available at: www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/
2012/191263.htm.
                                                                                                                           69
                                                                         II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                             operating are public listed closed end funds offered on HOSE and member
                             funds sold to no more than 30 professional investors (defined in the law as
                             commercial banks, insurance companies, securities companies, financial
                             companies and financial leasing companies). All CIS are now subject to the
                             constitution, investment operations and treatment of customers’ funds as
                             provided under Circular 224.
                             According to SSC there are no free standing financial analysts or other
                             evaluators. Advisory services are not typically part of brokerage operations.
                             SSC evaluates existing consultancy services under the provisions related to
                             securities companies where internal control requirements are intended to
                             insulate the process of providing advice from internal conflicts.
                             Paragraph (b)
                             SSC has extensive powers of supervision and investigations through its
                             inspectorate that permits it to engage in routine and ad hoc examinations,
                             reviews, inspections and investigations directly. Where the conduct in
                             question is of an unlicensed entity or of a third party (that is, a non-regulated
                             entity), while it is also a criminal offense, the investigation team may have to
                             cooperate with the police.
                             SSC operates a routine periodic inspection program, approved annually by
                             MoF, through its own Inspectorate. On its own recognizance, it also conducts
                             numerous inquiries, examinations and thematic reviews based on department-
                             specific off-site reviews and other activities such as the review of issuers’
                             disclosure, accounting oversight, fund oversight and follow up of ad hoc on-
                             site or off-site activities originated in response to rumors or “denunciations.”
                             Periodic inspections are typically announced approximately 10 days in
                             advance, but ad hoc reviews, for which the 24-hour notice may be given, can
                             be performed on a surprise basis and SSC has in fact performed surprise
                             audits.
                             When inspected, securities companies must cooperate and provide full and
                             accurate information to SSC on request. 189 Failure to respond can be
                             sanctioned by SSC.
                             SSC’s Surveillance Department also conducts surveillance of trading activity
                             and cooperates with SSC’s Inspectorate in further investigating serious
                             matters exposed by abnormal price or suspicious activity reports received from
                             the exchanges. A stock exchange must provide all securities trading records
                             to SSC upon request as must VSD pursuant to Article 30 of Decree 36/2007
                             ND-CP and Circular 38/2007 TT-BTC. Under Article 130 of SC Law, the stock
                             exchange and VSD may be sanctioned if they fail to comply.
                             Articles 119 to 130 of SC Law list multiple types of breaches (including
                             manipulation and insider trading) that constitute violations of the SC Law and
                             also establish that both the Chief of the Securities Inspectorate and the
                             Chairman of SSC have the authority to issue warnings and apply pecuniary
                             penalties. These breaches include both misconduct and the failure to follow
                             specific affirmative legal requirements, including: fraud, insider trading,
                             manipulation, misuse of customer funds or securities, violation of listing
                             requirements and public offering requirements, abuse of customer orders,
                             failure to undertake an inquiry into the financial capacity and “risk” appetite of
                             a customer, guaranteeing profits to customers, failure to report, audit
                             violations, violations related to the registration, deposit, clearing and payment
                             requirements, providing false information, impersonating another and violation
                             of the responsibilities of supervising banks and so forth.
                             The abovementioned authorities are also permitted to suspend operations,
                             revoke licenses and practitioner certificates, to suspend or cancel a public


189
      Article 114(2) of the SC Law.
                                                                                                                  70
                                            II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


offering, force delisting, and confiscate profits earned from illegal acts and/or
the securities used to commit such acts.
The SC Law also gives SSC the power to enjoin specific activities, and the
power to compel: (i) correction of recorded information; and (ii) restitution of a
customer’s deposits. These powers are then more specifically set forth by
subsidiary legislation. For example, Government Decree 85/2010 ND CP on
Sanctioning of Administrative Violations in the Field of Securities and the
Securities Markets applies to domestic and foreign individuals and institutions
that intentionally or unintentionally commit violations of the law on securities
and the securities markets, which are not serious enough for penal sanctions.
Depending on the nature and seriousness of the breach and extenuating and
aggravating circumstance, a wide array of fines of various levels, ranging from
VND 5,000,000 to VND 500,000,000, are specified for multiple types of
breaches. These penalties may be applied both against licensed public interest
entities, such as securities companies and practitioners, and against third
parties.
SSC also has the capacity to impose administrative fines on a stock exchange
for failure to strictly comply with member obligations under Clauses 2 and 4 of
Article 39 of the SC Law or for failing to submit new types of trading or systems
to SSC or to promptly handle violations. In addition to being subject to the main
penalty and additional penalties as stipulated, an offender may also be subject
to one or more of the following types of measures in order to remedy
consequences of the breach:
         compulsory compliance with law;
         compulsory rescission or correction of incorrect or false information;
          and
         pecuniary sanctions, such as for example one to five times the
          amount illegally earned where someone offers securities without
          obtaining a Certificate of Public Offering.
While SSC has access to all documents that are maintained by a securities
intermediary, third parties cannot be compelled to provide any evidence
without assistance of the police. Hence, SSC does not have direct access to
records outside the scope of its regulatory ambit and beneficial ownership
records related to third parties. However, SSC can refer offenses to the
criminal investigatory authorities, that is, the police, for investigation
(inspection/control), which then can be referred to the prosecutor. The
Ministries of Justice, Finance and Public Security (police) cooperate with SSC
pursuant to an inter-ministerial decree that defines borders between criminal
actions that must proceed in the criminal counts and administrative powers to
sanction violations that can be used by SSC, based on the amount of damages
or profit and the nature of the case.
The enforcement of the law is not perceived by market participants as
sufficiently consistent and rigorous to be an effective deterrent and penalties
are not sufficiently dissuasive. To the extent SSC must seek assistance from
the police, timing may be outside the control of SSC and the process is heavily
dependent on ongoing cooperation. More work is being done in this area, but
the lines of authority remain ambiguous.




                                                                                     71
                                                                II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Recommendation      The authorities responsible for supervision and enforcement of law against
                    entities operating on the capital market, led by SSC, should be commended
                    for devising mutual cooperation arrangements.
                    Nonetheless, the enforcement powers of SSC need to be enhanced. In
                    particular, the inability to follow the money to bank accounts and to follow the
                    transfer of securities due to the remnants of the bearer share regime may
                    hamper the ability of SSC to conduct full and complete investigations,
                    especially of the transfer of ownership of public companies outside the registry.
                    Hence:
                           In the long term, considerations should be given to require the
                            mandatory immobilization of all listed shares to eliminate the problems
                            relating to bearer shares.
                           Further, more needs to be done to clarify the lines of authority and
                            responsibilities between the different authorities in the investigation of
                            criminal offences particularly in relation to what SSC can do in the
                            course of investigation of criminal offences.
                           SSC should seek to apply sufficiently stringent and consistent
                            penalties to achieve an enforcement program that is perceived as
                            dissuasive, proportionate and effective. This can be done by
                            developing clear and transparent criteria for enforcement actions
                            particularly in relation to administrative actions. An effective
                            enforcement program would necessitate the development of clear,
                            transparent and accountable processes in relation to decision-making.
                            In this regard, SSC should be given independent powers without
                            having its decisions being reviewed or revised by MoF.

SECTION B           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   General Practices
                    There should be disclosure principles that cover an investor’s
                    relationship with a person buying or selling securities, or offering to do
                    so, in all three stages of such relationship: pre-sale, point of sale, and
                    post-sale.
                        a. The information available and provided to an investor should
                           inform the investor of:
                               (i)   the choice of accounts, products and services;
                               (ii)  the characteristics of each type of account, product or
                                     service; and
                               (iii) the risks and consequences of purchasing each type of
                                     account, product or service.
                        b. A securities intermediary or CIU should be legally responsible for
                           all statements made in marketing and sales materials related to
                           its products.
                        c. A natural person acting as the representative of a securities
                           intermediary or CIU should disclose to an investor whether he is
                           licensed to act as such a representative and by whom he is
                           licensed.
                        d. If a securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU delegates
                           or outsources any of its functions or activities to another legal
                           entity or physical person, such delegation or outsourcing should
                           be fully disclosed to the investor, including whether the person
                           to whom such function or activity is delegated is licensed to act
                           in such capacity and who licenses the person.




                                                                                                         72
                                                          II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Description   Paragraph (a)
              There are various provisions in the SC Law and related subsidiary legislation
              that provide for the responsibilities of securities intermediaries in relation to
              their customers but these provisions do not clearly identify their responsibilities
              in each stage of the relationship.
              Under the SC Law and relevant decrees and circulars including Circulars
              210/2012 and 212/2012, there are broad disclosure principles that cover an
              investor’s relationship with a person buying or selling securities, or offering to
              do so, in all three stages of such relationship. For example, Article 71(3) of the
              SC Law requires a securities company to sign a written contract with a client
              and to provide “complete and truthful information” to the client.
              Article 48(2) of SC Law provides that a securities company is obliged to explain
              to its customers the terms for opening securities trading accounts and related
              procedures when implementing securities transactions for customers. Article
              71(5) of the Law requires a securities company to collate and understand
              information relating to the financial status, investment objectives and risk
              profile of its clients. Article 36(4) of Circular 212/2012 provides that advisory
              staff of a fund management company shall be responsible for explaining to
              customers that their guidance on customers’ investments are only for
              reference and investment decisions made by customers are at their own risk.
              Article 73(1) and 73(3) of the SC Law provide that a securities intermediary
              must not misleadingly inform customers that their investment is guaranteed or
              that they may not suffer losses.
              Article 31(3) of Circular 212/2012 requires fund management companies to
              “draw out” the investment principles and policies consistent with requirements
              of customers based on information it has collected from the customer pursuant
              to Article 31(1) of Circular 212/2012. Investment policies shall be clear, detailed
              and reflect all basic information on levels and types of risks, structures of
              sample portfolios, management expenses, rights and responsibilities of parties
              and other related important information. Investment policies shall form a part
              of investment management contracts. Article 36(1) of Circular 212/2012 also
              provides that investment advisory services of a fund management company
              shall be provided to a customer in a voluntary, equitable and truthful manner
              and information shall be provided on a full, timely and accurate basis so that
              customers may make their own investment decisions.
              Nonetheless, there is no provision in the law requiring description of the
              choices available to a securities intermediary’s customers. Neither is there any
              provision requiring a description of all services that are offered.
              Paragraph (b)
              There are various provisions in Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 that impose
              liability of a securities intermediary in relation to “the mistakes and violations”
              of such a securities intermediary against its customers. These provisions are,
              however, broadly phrased and are not specific in terms of holding the securities
              intermediary being legally responsible for all statements made in its marketing
              materials and information that is provided to its customers. Nonetheless, the
              SC Law also establishes civil liability of securities intermediaries for any
              breaches of the Law and subsidiary legislation.
              Article 57 of the SC Law provides that where a securities company provides
              investment advisory services to its customers, it is prohibited from any
              “advertising that claims that the content, performance, or its security analysis
              methods are of higher value of other securities companies ”. The securities
              company is also prohibited from providing false information to “lure or entice
              customers to purchase and sell a certain type of securities ” or providing false,
              fraudulent or misleading information for customers.



                                                                                                    73
                                                                              II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                                 All securities practitioners represent the relevant securities company when
                                 executing transactions with customers and a securities company is responsible
                                 for all the activities of its securities practitioners.190
                                 Article 30 of Circular 212/2012 provides that a fund management company
                                 must not through the contracts it enters with its customers contain clauses that
                                 enable the fund management company to “evade legal obligations to
                                 compensate customers resulting from its own mistakes or willful violations” of
                                 laws and regulations. Further, the contract which a fund management
                                 company enters into with its customers must not restrict the scope of
                                 compensation and financial responsibilities to customers, without justifiable
                                 reasons, or transfers risks to customers in cases of mistakes and willful
                                 violations.
                                 Article 31(4) of Circular 212/2012 provides that where fund management
                                 companies fail to observe investment policies as prescribed in investment
                                 management contracts, they shall adjust portfolios as soon as possible and
                                 bear all expenses incurred in connection with such transactions and may not
                                 charge management fees for portfolios inconsistent with investment policies.
                                 Further, Article 31(5) of the same circular provides that for all damages or
                                 profits resulting from investments which are inconsistent with investment
                                 policies and objectives, or from portfolios which are inconsistent with
                                 investment policies, portfolio structures specified with customers or resulting
                                 from other mistakes of fund management companies, fund management
                                 companies shall be responsible for compensating investors in accordance with
                                 written agreements between the two parties or recognizing all arising profits as
                                 those of portfolios of customers right after completing the adjustment of
                                 portfolios.
                                 Article 36 of Circular 212/2012 requires that, in relation to investment advisory
                                 operations of a fund management company, such services shall be provided
                                 to its customers in a voluntary, equitable and truthful manner and information
                                 shall be provided on a full, timely and accurate basis so that customers may
                                 make investment decisions by themselves. Further, the fund management
                                 company must ensure that economic information, data and forecasts are
                                 provided to customers on the basis of actual events and accompanied by
                                 reliable references, which are published by professional financial and
                                 economic organizations and have been publicly announced.
                                 In addition, fund management companies and advisory staff are both required
                                 to disclose their interests in relation to an asset in a situation of a potential or
                                 real conflict such as when the fund management company has a position in
                                 these securities.
                                 Paragraph (c)
                                 Article 38(3) of the SC Law stipulates that securities practitioners are the ones
                                 representing the securities company to execute transactions with customers
                                 and the securities company is responsible for all activities of the securities
                                 practitioners when carrying out the business of the securities company. The
                                 securities practitioners are not entitled to use money or securities in the
                                 customer's account when they are not authorized to do so under the trust of
                                 customers to a securities company in writing.
                                 There is no particular provision in the regulatory framework that requires a
                                 securities practitioner to disclose to a customer that he/she is licensed by SSC.
                                 Paragraph (d)
                                 Such outsourcing arrangements do not exist for the securities industry as the
                                 SC Law only allows licensed securities intermediaries and practitioners to
                                 conduct securities activities entirely through their own operations.



190
      Article 38(3) of Circular 210/2012.
                                                                                                                        74
                                                                   II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Recommendation      It would certainly help to further clarify the regulatory framework on principles
                    relating to an investor’s relationship with a person buying or selling securities,
                    or offering to do so, in all three stages of such relationship: (i) pre-sale; (ii) point
                    of sale; and (iii) post-sale. While there are a number of provisions in the SC
                    Law and related regulations on the obligations of the securities intermediaries
                    in explaining their services to the customers, the current provisions are
                    scattered and do not quite clarify at which part of the sale product cycle the
                    principles on fair dealing and disclosure relate to.
                    It would be useful to further clarify that one of the legal responsibilities of a
                    security intermediary in the regulatory framework is to be responsible for all
                    information and marketing materials that are made to its customers which can
                    be a basis of claim by the customer for compensation under the relevant SC
                    Law provision.
                    The regulatory framework should in any event be amended to require more
                    extensive disclosure to investors regarding the choice of services offered and
                    entities that the broker will use in conducting the investors business, including
                    disclosure by a securities practitioner that he/she is licensed under the SC Law
                    and for which securities intermediary is the practitioner working. The securities
                    company should provide these disclosures regardless of whether the
                    customer/investor requests them.
Good Practice B.2   Terms and Conditions
                    Before commencing a relationship with an investor, a securities
                    intermediary or CIU should provide the investor with a copy of its general
                    terms and conditions, and any terms and conditions that apply to the
                    particular account.
                    Insofar as possible, the terms and conditions should always be in a font
                    size and spacing that facilitates easy reading.
                    The terms and conditions should disclose:
                        a. Details of the general charges;
                        b. The complaints procedure;
                        c. Information about any compensation scheme that the securities
                            intermediary or CIU is a member of, and an outline of the action
                            and remedies which the investor may take in the event of default
                            by the securities intermediary or CIU;
                        d. The methods of computing interest rates paid or charged;
                        e. Any relevant non-interest charges or fees related to the product;
                        f. Any service charges;
                        g. The details of the terms of any leverage or margin being offered
                            to the client and how the leverage functions;
                        h. Any restrictions on account transfers; and
                        i. The procedures for closing an account.
Description         The SC Law and related subsidiary legislation requires a securities
                    intermediary to adopt an agreement at the time of opening of an account with
                    its customer. Article 26(3) of Circular 212/2012 provides for terms and
                    conditions of contracts between a fund management company and its
                    customers. Appendices 6 and 21 of the Circular requires the content of an
                    investment contract to include:
                            investment targets and risk tolerance of investors;
                            principles, policies of investment and asset types;
                            rights and obligations of a customer;
                            reports by fund management company of changes on invesetment
                             policies, report and disclosure obligations;
                            disclosures to a customer on fees and charges and payment method;
                             procedures for client protection such as cash and custody
                             management, procedures of cash and asset contribution or
                             withdrawal; contract termination conditions and structure and
                             procedures to liquidate contract.


                                                                                                               75
                                                                              II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                                Article 48 of Circular 210/2012 also requires that all securities companies
                                provide minimum content for agreements entered into with their customers
                                which deals with the following subjects:
                                         protocol for taking orders from customers;
                                         fees and charges;
                                         obligations of the securities company and customers;
                                         confidentiality;
                                         representations and Warranty;
                                         indemnities;
                                         amendment and termination of the agreement; and
                                         governing laws;
                                         dispute resolution.
                                Article 48 of Circular 210/2012 also imposes responsibility on a securities
                                company to explain its agreement and the implications of the terms and
                                conditions to its customers. It prohibits the securities company from including
                                in an agreement provisions which would allow it to avoid its legal obligations,
                                limit the scope of compensation or transfer its own risks to its customers and
                                cause an unfair disadvantage to the customers.
                                Article 49(4) of SC Law provides that securities companies must disclose the
                                securities transaction fee before the customers make transactions.
                                Regulations Guiding Securities Margin Trading issued with Decision 637-QD-
                                UBCK provide, among other things, minimum terms in a margin financing
                                agreement between a securities company and its customer. Article 9 of the
                                Regulations requires that margin agreements (contracts opening a margin
                                trading account) must have as a minimum the following terms and conditions:
                                         information about the client, namely full name, date of birth, people's
                                          identity card number, contact address, email and fax number (if any)
                                          and a contact telephone number;
                                         objective, namely to purchase securities by way of margin trading;
                                         initial margin ratio;
                                         maintenance margin ratio;
                                         time-limit and method for making payment pursuant to a call to
                                          supplement mortgaged assets (securities);
                                         limit on financing/loans;
                                         interest rate on loans;
                                         term and effective date of the contract, and time for commencing to
                                          calculate interest on financing/loans;
                                         method of realizing mortgaged assets in the margin trading account if
                                          the client fails to correctly perform the contract, and priority order for
                                          using proceeds from sale of mortgaged securities of the client;
                                         provision on protection of interests of contracting parties;
                                         method of dispute resolution;
                                         method of contract liquidation; and
                                         undertaking from the client that the broker has adequately explained
                                          risks arising from conduct of transactions on a margin trading account.
                                The terms and conditions in standard contracts must be written in a font size
                                not less than 12. Otherwise, a fine of merely from 10,000,000 VND to
                                20,000,000 VND (i.e. about $475 to $950) may be imposed on any bank or
                                other organization.191
                                On the websites of some brokers, the special terms and conditions are
                                provided in English and Vietnamese. However there is no rule prescribing the
                                font type and size for special terms and conditions to facilitate ease of reading
                                by customers/prospective customers of a securities intermediary.



191
      See Government Decree no. 19 of 2012, Article 10, Clause 1, item a).
                                                                                                                       76
                                                                II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Recommendation      While there are multiple provisions in the regulatory framework on the
                    responsibilities of a securities intermediary in relation to terms and conditions
                    of customer contracts it would appear that the customers may not fully
                    understand the implications of such contracts. In fact, in spite of contracts that
                    appear to be easy to understand, a common complaint received is that
                    consumers did not eventually understand the terms and conditions of the
                    service contracts they signed. Therefore, SSC should make sure through
                    effective investor education/awareness programs that the public clearly
                    understands the disclosed standard terms and conditions and knows how to
                    use it to make informed decisions.
                    Further, there should be a regulatory requirement that the terms and conditions
                    of contracts entered into between a securities intermediary and its customers
                    should be in minimum font size and spacing to facilitate customers’ reading of
                    such terms and conditions.
                    SSC/MoF should also require securities intermediaries who distribute
                    investment products and mutual funds to provide its customers with a Key Fact
                    Statement. The Key Fact Statement would provide disclosures in simple
                    language of the costs, returns and risks relating to the type of investment
                    product that is marketed to the customer.
                    Consumer testing of standard terms and conditions and proposed Key Facts
                    Statements would be helpful.
Good Practice B.3   Professional Competence
                    Regulators should establish and administer minimum competency
                    requirements for the sales staff of securities intermediaries and CIUs,
                    and collaborate with industry associations where appropriate.
Description         The SC Law and subsidiary legislation requires securities practitioners who
                    deal with clients to meet minimum competency requirements including passing
                    an examination that is administered by the Securities Training Institute. Article
                    38(4) of SC Law requires all securities practitioners to participate in mandatory
                    training courses on legal documents, transactional systems, new types of
                    securities held by SSC and the stock exchange.
                    Article 79(1) of the SC Law provides that an individual may be licensed by SSC
                    as securities practitioner if he/she (i) has legal capacity and is not subject to
                    any ban from professional practice by a court or criminal penalty; (ii) has a
                    university degree and professional expertise in securities; and (iii) has passed
                    an examination held by SSC (through the Securities Training Institute). The
                    securities practitioner may only work for one securities intermediary and such
                    intermediary is fully liable for the acts of the securities practitioner.
                    SSC also requires that securities practitioners undergo continuous
                    professional education (CPE) but to-date the Securities Training Institute has
                    not organized any CPE for the industry. This could be due to the lack of
                    resources at the Securities Training Institute. However, it would appear that
                    securities companies normally arrange training for their staff depending on
                    their internal training requirements on an ongoing basis.
Recommendation      The Securities Training Institute should be actively encouraged by SSC to
                    develop CPE program standards for the industry in collaboration with relevant
                    professional bodies (such as CFA and accounting bodies etc.) and service
                    providers currently providing “in-house” training programs for securities
                    intermediaries. Otherwise SSC should mandate such training requirements.
Good Practice B.4   Know Your Customer (KYC)
                    Before providing a product or service to an investor, a securities
                    intermediary or CIU should obtain, record and retain sufficient
                    information to enable it to form a professional view of the investor’s
                    background, financial condition, investment experience and attitude
                    toward risk in order to enable it to provide a recommendation, product or
                    service appropriate to that investor.


                                                                                                         77
                                                                            II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


  Description                    The SC Law requires securities companies to ensure that advice and
                                 recommendations given to clients are suitable and appropriate for their
                                 clients.192 In addition, under the SC Law and subsidiary legislation, all
                                 securities intermediaries are required to assess their clients’ age, financial
                                 situation, and investment objective and investment experience when making
                                 any recommendation for buying or selling any security to their clients. For
                                 example, Article 71(8) of SC Law requires a securities company to retain
                                 complete source documents and accounts reflecting in detail and accurately
                                 all transactions of clients and of the company.
                                 In respect of investment advisory services provided by a securities company,
                                 pursuant to Article 56(2) of Circular 210/2012, the securities company is
                                 obliged to collect information about the client’s financial status, investment
                                 targets, and ability to take risks and experience and knowledge of investments.
                                 The securities company must also ensure that the customer is fully informed
                                 of the risks of products/services before making an investment
                                 Article 31 of Circular 212/2012 provides that fund management companies
                                 shall be responsible for summarizing information on customer identification,
                                 including information on beneficiaries (if any), financial capacity, investment
                                 experience, investment period, investment objectives, risk tolerance,
                                 investment restrictions and sample portfolios and other requirements (if any)
                                 on customers.
                                 Article 31(2) of Circular 212/2012 also requires fund management companies
                                 to update information on identification of entrusting customers on a quarterly
                                 basis. When there is a change in such information, entrusting customers shall
                                 be obliged to provide related information to fund management companies in a
                                 full and timely manner. Fund management companies shall be entitled to
                                 refuse to provide portfolio management services to customers in case the
                                 customer fails to provide required information in a full and timely manner.
                                 Pursuant to the Circular 148/2010 relating to AML that established various KYC
                                 and CDD guidelines, securities intermediaries are required to obtain and
                                 document information on the purpose and intended nature of the account to be
                                 opened/ maintained with them and to develop a profile of the client based on
                                 the results of client identification and the risk assessment. Information
                                 regarding the intended investment plan of the client must also be obtained to
                                 the extent possible and must be documented.
  Recommendation                 No recommendation
  Good Practice B.5              Suitability
                                 A securities intermediary or CIU should ensure that, taking into account
                                 the facts disclosed by the investor and other relevant facts about that
                                 investor of which it is aware, any recommendation, product or service
                                 offered to the investor is suitable to that investor.
  Description                    Article 71(5) of the SC Law provides that a securities company is obliged to
                                 collect and understand the information relating to the financial status,
                                 investment objectives and risk profile of its clients and to make
                                 recommendations and give advice that is appropriate to the risk profile of the
                                 clients. Article 49(1) of Circular 210/2012 provides that when a securities
                                 company advises its customers in respect of trading, such securities company
                                 must gather sufficient information on customers and not guarantee securities
                                 values which it recommend the investment. Similarly, pursuant to Article 36(2)
                                 of the Circular advisory contents shall be based on results of informed analysis
                                 which are conducted in a prudent and reasonable manner. Reports on analysis
                                 of securities and the securities market, trading recommendations shall specify
                                 reference sources, persons responsible for the contents of such reports.

                                 Article 31(3) of Circular 212/2012 requires fund management companies to
                                 “draw out” the investment principles and policies consistent with requirements


192
      Article 71(5) of the SC Law.
                                                                                                                    78
                                                              II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                 of customers based on information summarized it has collected from the
                 customer pursuant to Article 31(1) of Circular 212/2012. Investment policies
                 shall be clear, detailed and reflect all basic information on levels and types of
                 risks, structures of sample portfolios, management expenses, rights and
                 responsibilities of parties and other related important information. Investment
                 policies shall form a part of investment management contracts.
                 Article 31(4) of Circular 212/2012 provides that where fund management
                 companies fail to observe investment policies as prescribed in investment
                 management contracts, they shall adjust portfolios as soon as possible and
                 bear all expenses incurred in connection with such transactions and may not
                 charge management fees for portfolios inconsistent with investment policies.
                 Further, Article 31(5) of the same circular provides that for all damages or
                 profits resulting from investments which are inconsistent with investment
                 policies and objectives, or from portfolios which are inconsistent with
                 investment policies, portfolio structures specified with customers or resulting
                 from other mistakes of fund management companies, fund management
                 companies shall be responsible for compensating investors in accordance with
                 written agreements between the two parties or recognizing all arising profits as
                 those of portfolios of customers right after completing the adjustment of
                 portfolios.
                 It would appear that securities companies and fund management companies
                 do conduct training for their staff in respect of new products and their
                 responsibilities in dealing with clients. However, the training would appear to
                 be skewed towards “product pushing”.
Recommendation   Special training should be required for the securities practitioners who deal
                 with retail customers as to their responsibilities to ensure suitability. Different
                 investors, due to factors such as age, health, investment goals and risk
                 appetites, will have different suitability for different type of financial
                 instruments. Determining which investments are appropriate for the investor
                 requires full and clear disclosure of the characteristics of the investment and
                 expert advice as to the benefits and risks with each investment. In this regard,
                 more practical training programs for securities practitioners who deal with
                 customers would be useful.
                 When providing information to customers, a firm should pay regard to its target
                 market, including its likely level of financial capability; should take account of
                 what information the customer needs to understand the product or service, its
                 purpose and the risks, and communicate information in a way that is clear, fair
                 and not misleading; and should have in place systems and controls to manage
                 effectively the risks posed by providing information to customers.
                 In the area of post-sale responsibility, a firm should be required: (i) in supplying
                 information to the customer, to ensure that the information is communicated in
                 a way which is clear, fair and not misleading; (ii) periodically review products
                 whose performance varies materially to check whether the product is
                 continuing to meet the general needs of the target audience that it was
                 designed for, or whether the product's performance is or is likely to be
                 significantly different from what the provider originally expected and
                 communicated to the distributor or customer; and (iii) act fairly and promptly
                 when handling claims or when paying out on a product that has been
                 surrendered or reached maturity. In doing this, the provider should meet any
                 reasonable customer expectations that it may have created with regard to the
                 outcomes or how the process would be handled.
                 Ideally there would also be an industry code of conduct to make clear the
                 requirement that a broker or CIS or investment advisor advise a client as to the
                 suitability of an investment for the client.




                                                                                                        79
                                                                 II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Good Practice B.6   Sales Practices
                    Legislation and regulations should contain clear rules on improper sales
                    practices in the solicitation, sale and purchase of securities. Thus,
                    securities intermediaries, CIUs and their sales representatives should:
                        a. Not use high-pressure sales tactics;
                        b. Not engage in misrepresentations and half-truths as to products
                           being sold;
                        c. Fully disclose the risks of investing in a financial product being
                           sold;
                        d. Not discount or disparage warnings or cautionary statements in
                           written sales literature;
                        e. Not exclude or restrict, or seek to exclude or restrict, any legal
                           liability or duty of care to an investor, except where permitted by
                           applicable legislation.
                    Legislation and regulations should provide sanctions for improper sales
                    practices.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    There are provisions in the SC Law and related circulars that provide that a
                    securities intermediary is not to provide information that misleads or distorts
                    the risks involved in respect of investments by the investor.
                    For example, Article 47 of the SC Law provides that a securities company must
                    not “make the judgment or assure customers of the level of income or profit
                    earned on their investments or assure customers of not being lost, except for
                    investments in securities with fixed income”.
                    Further, a securities company must not do anything that can mislead the
                    customers and investors about stock prices. Article 45 of the Law lays down
                    the principle that where a securities company makes any recommendations in
                    relation to a specific class of securities on the media, it must specify the basis
                    of such an analysis and cite information sources. Article 47(4) of the Law
                    provides that a securities company is prohibited from “giving an opinion on the
                    increase or decrease in the securities price without foundation to entice
                    customers to participate in the transaction or making agreement or offer
                    specific interest rate or share profits or losses with customers to entice
                    customers to participate in the transaction”.
                    Similarly, Article 36(5) of Circular 212/2012 provides that in respect of the
                    securities investment advisory operations of a fund management company, its
                    staff must ensure that they do not advise customers to invest in assets without
                    providing customers with sufficient information on such assets and issuers. In
                    addition, they must not to provide to customers unverified information, rumors,
                    misleading information, false information, make forecasts or do anything with
                    a view of soliciting, luring, inciting customers to trade in a certain type of assets
                    which is not consistent with investment objectives, experience, risk awareness
                    and tolerance and financial capacity of the customer.
                    The staff of a fund management company is also prohibited from providing
                    information, which misleads customers about potential profits and risks
                    involving investments assets. Neither can a fund management company
                    present gifts nor use any other means to solicit or lure customers to trade in
                    any type of assets. The fund management company is also prohibited from
                    making any forecast of the prices of assets in the future, guarantee investment
                    results (except for investments in fixed-income products or capital-preserving
                    investment products) or agree with customers on profit or loss division.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    See the Good Practice B.4 and B.5.

                    Paragraph (c)

                                                                                                            80
                                                             II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                 See the Good Practice B.4 and B.5.
                 Paragraph (d)
                 While there are broad principles regulating the conduct of securities
                 intermediaries in relation to their interaction with customers to ensure that
                 customers are treated fairly and be provided full information in a full, timely and
                 accurate manner (see descriptions in Paragraph (a)) above, there are no
                 specific provisions in the regulatory framework that prohibits the security
                 intermediary from discounting or disparaging warnings or cautionary
                 statements in written sales literature.
                 Paragraph (e)
                 Article 48(3) of the SC Law requires that a contract which is entered into
                 between a securities company and its customer must not contain any terms
                 that:
                        avoid legal obligation of the securities company without plausible
                         reasons;
                        limit the scope of compensation of the securities company without
                         plausible reason or transfer a risk from the securities company to the
                         customer;
                        compel the customer to execute unfair compensation obligation; and
                        cause an unfair disadvantage to the customer.
                 Article 30(2) of Circular 212/2012 provides that investment management
                 contracts between a fund management company and its customers must not:
                         contain clauses which enable the fund management companies to
                          evade legal obligations to compensate the customer resulting from
                          their mistakes or willful violations;
                      restrict the scope of their compensation, financial responsibilities to
                          customers without justifiable reasons; or transfer risks to customers in
                          cases there are their mistakes or willful violations; or
                      contain clauses which facilitate unfair treatment towards customers.
Recommendation   There should be a provision in the regulatory framework that prohibits the
                 security intermediary (for both securities company and fund management
                 company) from discounting or disparaging warnings or cautionary statements
                 in written sales literature that are distributed to their customers.
                 There is anecdotal evidence that there is some commission sharing
                 arrangements between banks and a securities intermediary for any referrals of
                 the banks’ customers made to the securities intermediary. Even though the
                 market for such wealth management products is not significant in Vietnam to-
                 date, given the potential for rapid growth of this segment of the market, SSC
                 may wish to work out appropriate arrangements with SBV and MoF to ensure
                 that sales practices in such referrals are subject to similar standards of investor
                 protection as are imposed on securities intermediaries including disclosure to
                 investors of accurate information on charges and fees in such arrangements.




                                                                                                       81
                                                                           II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


  Good Practice B.7            Advertising and Sales Materials
                                  a. All marketing and sales materials should be in plain language and
                                      understandable by the average investor.
                                  b. Securities intermediaries, CIUs and their sales representatives
                                      should ensure their advertising and sales materials and
                                      procedures do not mislead the customers.
                                  c. Securities intermediaries and CIUs should disclose in all
                                      advertising, including print, television and radio, the fact that they
                                      are regulated and by whom.
  Description                  See Banking Sector Good Practice B.9.
                               Paragraph (a)
                               Under the general Advertising Law the contents of any advertisement must be
                               truthful, accurate and clear and not cause damage to any “advertisement
                               receiver” (i.e. any consumer).193 It is prohibited for any business organization
                               (in this case, any securities intermediary and fund management company or
                               their practitioners) to provide consumers with any inaccurate, misleading or
                               inexact information or to hide information about:
                                     any good or service provided by that business organization;
                                     the reputation, goodwill, business capacity, capacity to supply goods,
                                         services and any other characteristic of that business organization; or
                                     the nature or any characteristic of a transaction between a consumer
                                         and that business organization.194
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Securities intermediaries, among others, are legally responsible for all
                               statements made in their advertising and sales materials (i.e. are subject to
                               penalties under the law for making any false or misleading statement).
                               Furthermore, all advertisers must ensure that the quality of their products and
                               services is consistent with their advertisements.195 Moreover, there is an
                               obligation on third parties (such as media organizations through their
                               advertising services) that provide consumers with information about products
                               and services of any business organization to ensure that the information
                               supplied is complete and accurate. The third party will be jointly liable with the
                               business organization in question for any inaccurate information where that
                               third party has failed to take adequate steps to ensure the accuracy of the
                               information.196
                               Paragraph (c)
                               No regulatory status disclosure requirements have been prescribed.
  Recommendation               All securities intermediaries should be responsible for the offers they make in
                               their advertising, whether by means of newspaper, radio, television or
                               otherwise. They should also bear responsibility for their agents’ actions when
                               advising or offering a product or service to consumers. All securities
                               intermediaries should be legally responsible for any statements made in their
                               advertisements.
                               Supervision of advertising in the securities market should also be strengthened
                               by SSC. However, responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of
                               advertising and marketing rules for the securities market should be supervised
                               not just by SSC but also by the professional bodies such as the Association of
                               Stockbroking Companies and Fund in the longer term.
                               For all provisions in the Advertising Law regarding consumer disclosure, SSC
                               in particular should, through effective investor awareness/education programs,
                               make sure that the public clearly understands the disclosed information and
                               knows how to use it to make informed decisions. While supervisory staff is

193
    Id., Article 19, Section 1 of the Advertisements Law.
194
    See CP Law, Article 10, Section 1.
195
    Id., Article 12, Section 2, item b).
196
    Id., Article 13, Section 1.
                                                                                                                    82
                                                              II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                    limited within the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and SSC,
                    advertisements made by securities intermediaries should be reviewed from
                    time to time. The content of these advertisements should be monitored either
                    by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism or SSC.
                    At the same time, consideration may be given to requiring that all securities
                    intermediaries state in their advertisements that they are licensed and
                    regulated by SSC.
                    More specific guidance could also usefully be provided by SSC/MoF in the
                    form of policy explanatory notes to the industry on what may constitute
                    legitimate advertising by securities intermediaries and what is meant by the
                    “unreliable and misleading” advertisement rule under the securities laws. At
                    present there are no detailed regulations on permissible advertising practices
                    in the securities sector other than the general requirement not to make
                    misleading statements. The result of the lack of specific guidance is that
                    compliance with the abovementioned rules would inevitably be dependent on
                    individual securities company’s or fund management company’s compliance
                    capacity.

SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Segregation of Funds
                    Funds of investors should be segregated from the funds of all other
                    market participants.
Description         There are multiple provisions in the SC Law and subsidiary legislation that
                    mandate the segregation of funds of investors from the funds of the securities
                    intermediaries. For example, Article 46 of the SC Law requires VSD to manage
                    separately the assets of customers. Article 71 of the SC Law spells out the
                    obligations of a securities company to include, among other things, the duty to
                    manage the securities of each investor, and separately manage the assets of
                    a customer from the monies and securities of the securities company.
                    In addition, Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 specifically require a securities
                    company and a fund management company to segregate the funds of
                    investors from the assets and monies of such securities company or fund
                    manager and from its other customers.
                    Further, the SC Law and Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 all provide that a
                    custodian bank must separate the cash and assets of an investor from its own
                    assets and other assets it manages and must not use investors’ asset to make
                    loans or to provide guarantees or to pay the debts of other investors.
Recommendation      No recommendation.




                                                                                                      83
                                                                II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Good Practice C.2   Contract Note
                    Investors should receive a detailed contract note from a securities
                    intermediary or CIU confirming and containing the characteristics of
                    each trade executed with them, or on their behalf. The contract note
                    should disclose the commission received by the securities intermediary,
                    CIU and their sales representatives (expressed as total expenses as a
                    percentage of total assets purchased).
Description         Article 52(7) of Circular 210/2012 provides that a securities company must
                    provide confirmation of a trade order to a customer. However, it is not clear if
                    a prescribed format for such confirmation is used. It would appear that it is the
                    practice of all securities companies to send a text message and email to their
                    customers (as nearly all their customers have online access to their trading
                    account) notifying them of the matched orders and the price at which they were
                    matched.
                    The commission received by the securities company and the fund
                    management company are disclosed upfront at the time of signing the contract
                    by the customer as specified in Circular 210/2012.
Recommendation      A useful step would be for the stock exchanges together with the securities
                    company industry group to develop standardized contracts —or at least
                    standard provisions of contracts. The standardized contract should include all
                    the key terms and conditions of the financial product or service. The contract
                    note needs to include whether the securities company acted as a dealer on the
                    trade and, if the price is based on a mark-up, there should be no brokerage
                    fee.
Good Practice C.3   Statements
                    An investor should receive periodic, streamlined statements for each
                    account with a securities intermediary or CIU, providing the complete
                    details of account activity in an easy-to-read format.
                       a. Timely delivery of periodic securities and CIU statements
                           pertaining to the accounts should be made.
                       b. Investors should have a means to dispute the accuracy of the
                           transactions recorded in the statement within a stipulated period.
                       c. When an investor signs up for paperless statements, such
                           statements should also be in an easy-to-read and readily
                           understandable format.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    There is an obligation of a securities company of a fund management company
                    to provide information to its customers in relation to their trades/portfolio under
                    the SC Law and subsidiary legislation. For a fund management company,
                    pursuant to Circular 212/2012 Appendix 8, a prescribed format of a portfolio
                    must be given to the customers. Article 38(3)(d) requires a fund management
                    company to supply to its customers account statements of portfolios,
                    transaction statements certified by custodian banks, and information on
                    investment management activities, answer all questions raised by customers
                    at any time. For trades on the stock exchanges, the securities company would
                    send the confirmation by both text and email to customers once their orders
                    are matched.
                    However, there appears no regulatory requirement on the regularity for such
                    statements to be sent to customers.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Further, there are provisions to allow customers to contest the accuracy of the
                    securities balances even though there is the assumption that since customers
                    access their accounts online they could check it anytime.



                    Paragraph (c)

                                                                                                          84
                                                                             II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                                 Securities companies interviewed advised that their customers are generally
                                 internet savvy and use online trading. They have online access to their
                                 securities account and the balance anytime. However, at the request of
                                 customers who want printable statements, these securities companies would
                                 provide them printed versions at no cost.
  Recommendation                 Provisions should be introduced relating to paperless statements in
                                 compliance with this Good Practice.
                                 It would also be helpful to introduce more specific regulations as to the
                                 procedure for contesting the accuracy of statements.

  Good Practice C.4              Prompt Payment and Transfer of Funds
                                 When an investor requests the payment of funds in his or her account,
                                 or the transfer of funds and assets to another securities intermediary or
                                 CIU, the payment or transfer should be made promptly.
  Description                    Prior to 2012, it was a commonplace for securities companies to use clients'
                                 monies that were supposed to be kept in trust account. However, under current
                                 regulatory requirements all necessary payments to customers of the securities
                                 companies must be done by custodial banks so that the former do not handle
                                 the money side of the transaction.197
  Recommendation                 No recommendation
  Good Practice C.5              Investor Records
                                 A securities intermediary or CIU should maintain up-to-date investor
                                 records containing at least the following:
                                         a.   A copy of all documents required for investor identification and
                                              profile;
                                         b.   The investor’s contact details;
                                         c.   All contract notices and periodic statements provided to the
                                              investor;
                                         d.   Details of advice, products and services provided to the investor;
                                         e.   Details of all information provided to the investor in relation to
                                              the advice, products and services provided to the investor;
                                         f.   All correspondence with the investor;
                                         g.   All documents or applications completed or signed by the
                                              investor;
                                         h.   Copies of all original documents submitted by the investor in
                                              support of an application for the provision of advice, products or
                                              services;
                                         i.   All other information concerning the investor which the
                                              securities intermediary or CIU is required to keep by law; and
                                         j.   All other information which the securities intermediary or CIU
                                              obtains regarding the investor.
                                 Details of individual transactions should be retained for a reasonable
                                 number of years after the date of the transaction. All other records
                                 required under a. to j. above should be retained for a reasonable number
                                 of years from the date the relationship with the investor ends. Investor
                                 records should be complete and readily accessible.
  Description                    Article 69 of Circular 210/2012 requires a securities company to keep all
                                 documents relating to customers’ transactions and its operations for a period
                                 of 10 years. Article 40 of Circular 212/2012 requires a fund management
                                 company to “keep, on a full, accurate, timely and systematic basis, all
                                 documents, records and update information, data related to their operations. A
                                 backup copy of information on the company’s operations shall be kept at a
                                 location outside the headquarters of the company”. Further, Article 52(3) of the
                                 Circular provides that where a securities company receives an order online,
                                 via phone, fax and other transmission lines, it must:



197
      Article 50 of Circular 202/2012.
                                                                                                                    85
                                                           II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                       comply with the law on electronic transactions , and guiding
                        documents;
                       ensure full recording of information at the time of receiving an order
                        and keeping proof of executing the customers’ order;
                       ensure principles of confirmation with customers prior to entry of order
                        to the trading system;
                       take measures to ensure the safety, security of transmission lines and
                        appropriate remedies upon failure of entry of customers ’ order into
                        transaction system due to company's fault.
                 Article 40(2) of Circular 212/2012 provides that all fund management
                 companies, supervisory banks, custodian banks, distribution agents shall
                 maintain, in a full, systematic, accurate and consistent manner, documents
                 related to:
                       the offering and distribution of fund certificates;
                       the confirmation of the ownership of investors of securities investment
                        funds/companies;
                       financial statements, accounting books; systems of accounts,
                        invoices, transaction documents to ensure that they reflect, on a
                        detailed, accurate and timely basis, all daily transactions of such fund
                        management companies including information on the sequence of
                        orders placed, transactions made;
                       documents, electronic information used to determine the net asset
                        value;
                       original copies of legal documents on ownership registration and
                        original copies of legal documents certifying the ownership related to
                        assets; asset transactions and related documents, if any, which shall
                        be maintained by fund management companies and supervisory and
                        custodian banks during the operation process of securities investment
                        funds;
                       reports on valuation, investment analysis, investment decision,
                        investment management, capital withdrawal and related documents;
                       final reports on asset management operations, portfolios, figures,
                        transaction documents; and
                       accounting books, accounting accounts, documents, electronic
                        information related to assets, transactions in assets of securities
                        investment funds/companies.
                 Securities companies and fund management companies and other market
                 intermediaries are required to maintain duplicates of confirmation issued to
                 customers and maintain books of accounts and other documents for a period
                 of not less than 10 years.
Recommendation   No recommendation




                                                                                                   86
                                                                                  II. Good Practices: Securities Sector



  SECTION D                     PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

  Good Practice D.1             Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                                Investors of a securities intermediary or CIU have a right to expect that
                                their financial activities will have privacy from unwarranted private and
                                governmental scrutiny. The law should require that securities
                                intermediaries and CIUs take sufficient steps to protect the
                                confidentiality and security of a customer’s information against any
                                anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such
                                information, and against unauthorized access to, or use of, customer
                                information.
  Description                   The SC Law and subsidiary legislation provide for the protection of
                                confidentiality of customers and information relating to their activities. For
                                example, Article 57 of the SC Law provides that VSD and its members (all
                                securities companies) must protect confidentiality of information of clients
                                including the ownership of securities unless consent is provided by the clients
                                or if it is in accordance with law (such as when information is required by a
                                State body). Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 also provide for obligations on
                                the part of the securities companies and fund management companies to
                                protect confidentiality of information relating to their clients.
                                Vietnam has no consolidated data protection law. Rather, in addition to the
                                provision in the SC Law referred above, the CP Law, the Civil Code, the E-
                                Transactions Law, the Law on Information Technology and the Criminal
                                Code198, as well as certain subsidiary legislation,199 all have provisions dealing
                                explicitly with - or having relevance to - privacy and data protection. See
                                Banking Sector Good Practice D.1.
  Recommendation                See the Banking Sector Good Practice D.1.
  Good Practice D.2             Sharing Customer’s Information
                                Securities intermediaries and CIUs should:
                                     a.Inform an investor of third-party dealings in which they should
                                       share information regarding the investor’s account, such as legal
                                       enquiries by a credit bureau, unless the law provides otherwise;
                                   b. Explain how they use and share an investor’s personal
                                       information;
                                   c. Allow an investor to stop or "opt out" of certain information
                                       sharing, such as selling or sharing account or personal
                                       information to outside companies that are not affiliated with
                                       them, for the purpose of telemarketing or direct mail marketing,
                                       and inform the investor of this option.
  Description                   Paragraph (a) and (b)
                                The SC Law allows various agencies such as SSC and other authorized
                                agencies which can solicit client information to aid in carrying out of their
                                functions. Pursuant to various contractual documents, investors are informed
                                that information relating to their accounts can be shared with the authorized
                                federal agencies/institutions as provided in the law.
                                Paragraph (c)
                                Contractually, an investor has the right to insist on privacy of information of his
                                account and bar the intermediaries from sharing information with third parties
                                except in relation to the provision of information to the agencies/institutions that
                                are authorized to receive such information for official use. Nonetheless, it
                                would appear that not many investors are aware of their right to stop or "opt
                                out" of certain information sharing, such as selling or sharing account or

198
      See, Article 226 of the Criminal Code regarding the crime of illegally using information in computer networks and computers.
199
      See, e.g., SBV Decision 1087 of 2007 on State Secrets in Banking, SBV Circular no. 1 of 2011 on Ensuring Safety and Keeping
Secrets within Information Technology Systems in Banking Operations; and SBV Circular no. 29 of 2011 on the Safety and
Confidentiality in the Provision of Banking Services over the Internet.
                                                                                                                              87
                                                                             II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                                 personal information to outside companies that are not affiliated with them, for
                                 the purpose of telemarketing or direct mail marketing.
  Recommendation                 The rules on information sharing in the SC Law should be redrafted to: (i)
                                 provide a clear set of rights for investors regarding the sharing of information
                                 and their right to opt out of any sharing agreements; and (ii) to clearly set out
                                 the obligation of the securities intermediary/asset manager to provide investors
                                 with information on sharing of information and any “opt-out” provisions.
  Good Practice D.3              Permitted Disclosures
                                    a. The law should state specific procedures and exceptions
                                        concerning the release of customer financial records to
                                        government authorities.
                                    b. The law should provide for penalties for breach of investor
                                        confidentiality.
  Description                    Paragraph (a) and (b)
                                 Article 45(6) of Circular 210/2012 provides that a securities company must not
                                 disclose information about customers except if the customer gives consent or
                                 if it is at the request of the competent State management.
                                 Article 57 of the SC Law provides that VSD and its members must protect the
                                 confidentiality of information of clients (including as to ownership of securities)
                                 unless consent is provided by the clients or if it is in accordance with law (such
                                 as when information is required by a State body).
                                 Further see the Banking Sector Good Practice D.3.
  Recommendation                 In the long term, the authorities should consider providing guidance to financial
                                 intermediaries including securities companies and fund management
                                 companies and other market institutions on what are the parameters for
                                 relevant agencies to solicit and obtain information relating to cus tomers’
                                 accounts.

  SECTION E                      DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

  Good Practice E.1              Internal Dispute Settlement
                                    a. An internal avenue for claim and dispute resolution practices
                                        within a securities intermediary or CIU should be required by the
                                        securities supervisory agency.
                                    b. Securities intermediaries and CIUs should provide designated
                                        employees available to investors for inquiries and complaints.
                                    c. Securities intermediaries and CIUs should inform their investors
                                        of the internal procedures on dispute resolution.
                                    d. The securities supervisory agency should provide oversight on
                                        whether securities intermediaries and CIUs comply with their
                                        internal procedures on investor protection rules.
  Description                    Paragraph (a) and (b)
                                 Article 133(1) of the SC Law clearly provides that an individual has the right to
                                 complain or institute legal proceedings in accordance with law. Further, Article
                                 132 (1) of the SC Law empowers any person who has suffered loss or
                                 damages to claim compensation from the defaulting person (including a
                                 securities intermediary). Article 131(1) goes on to provide that, in the event of
                                 a dispute between an individual and a securities intermediary, such a dispute
                                 can be resolved either by negotiation, arbitration or through the courts.
                                 Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 require all securities intermediaries to have
                                 internal complaints handling procedures for their clients. A securities company
                                 must set up a dedicated department to handle all communications with
                                 customers and to address all complaints from such customers.200 Various
                                 procedures in regard to the time required to resolve disputes are stipulated in
                                 Article 131 of SC Law but it is not clear whether the time-bound procedures

200
      Article 49(6) of Circular 210/2012.
                                                                                                                       88
                                                           II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                 are equally applicable to securities intermediaries as they are to SSC (which
                 is the designated agency to receive complaints from consumers under the SC
                 Law). There is concern over the quality of internal complaints handling systems
                 and the resources that are allocated to them by securities intermediaries
                 (particularly those that are smaller).
                 The stock exchanges (HNX and HOSE) are also required to provide a dispute
                 resolution forum for resolving errors, cancellations and other matters. Annual
                 reports of the exchanges, however, do not contain statistics on this activity.
                 Paragraph (c)
                 While the stock exchanges have information on their websites regarding how
                 to complain against member companies of such exchanges, there appear to
                 be no explicit requirements in the exchanges’ member rules that require their
                 members to have minimum requirements on internal complaints handling
                 procedures.
                 Paragraph (d)
                 SSC’s on-site inspection examines the effectiveness of the complaints
                 handling procedures of the securities intermediary. SSC may also examine the
                 complaints on an ad-hoc basis should it determine necessary where there are
                 complaints against the securities intermediary outside the onsite inspection
                 cycle.
Recommendation   In the short-term, the MoF/SSC should require all securities intermediaries to:
                       publicize a common, consistent process for their handling of any
                        compliant of a retail customer;
                       establish a unit in charge of receiving and handling all such complaints
                        and disclose the name, telephone number and street and email
                        address of this unit;
                       provide in all agreements between a seucrities intermediary and its
                        retail customers a description of the procedures to be followed by the
                        securities intermediary and its retail customers with a view to resolving
                        any dispute; and
                       deliver regularly to SSC all data compiled regarding all complaints in a
                        standardized format prescribed by SSC.
                 SSC should assess the quality of the internal complaints handling procedures
                 and processes for all securities intermediaries and develop structured
                 processes within its operations to be able to assess the effectiveness of
                 internal complaints handling operations of the securities intermediaries. For
                 example, SSC should specifically require that securities intermediaries provide
                 on their website, in client communications and on request, information on how
                 to seek a remedy, including redress, for problems arising out of interactions
                 with the securities intermediaries. Intermediaries should also be required to
                 prepare an annual report of compliance with their dispute-resolution policy to
                 SSC.
                 Relevant industry bodies (such as the exchanges and the Association of
                 Stockbroking Companies and the Fund Managers Association) should also
                 review their rules/codes of conduct to ensure that minimum standards and
                 processes on internal complaints handling are required of their members and
                 develop mechanisms to monitor their effectiveness.




                                                                                                    89
                                                              II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                    There should be an independent dispute resolution system for resolving
                    disputes that investors have with their securities intermediaries and
                    CIUs.
                         a. A system should be in place to allow investors to seek third-party
                             recourse, such as an ombudsman or arbitration court, in the
                             event the complaint with their securities intermediary or CIU is
                             not resolved to their satisfaction in accordance with internal
                             procedure, and it should be made known to the public.
                         b. The independent dispute resolution system should be impartial
                             and independent from the appointing authority and the industry.
                         c. The decisions of the independent dispute resolution system
                             should be binding upon the securities intermediaries and CIUs.
                             The mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of these decisions
                             should be established and publicized.
Description         Article 131(3) of the SC Law vests SSC with an explicit mandate to resolve
                    complaints made by individuals in accordance with law. However there is no
                    dedicated centralized unit that monitors and analyzes these complaints to
                    ensure effectiveness.
                    While the SC Law and Circulars 210/2012 and 212/2012 require securities
                    companies and fund managers to establish complaints handling policies and
                    process within these institutions, SSC does not receive data relating to the
                    number and types of complaints that are channeled to these institutions. Thus,
                    SSC does not have a consolidated database of complaints that can help in
                    identifying the vulnerabilities such as the breakdown of complaints by types of
                    institutions (securities companies/fund managers) and the issues complained
                    about.
                    Under Article 131(1) of the SC Law, disputes between securities intermediaries
                    and their customers may also be resolved through negotiation, mediation,
                    arbitration or the court. However, these avenues are not likely to be cost-
                    effective or efficient for retail investors.
Recommendation      It is considered that SSC could further strengthen its own transparency and
                    accountability regarding treatment of consumer complaints. This is because
                    both disputes and inquiries provide valuable early warning signals to both the
                    intermediaries’ management and the supervisor regarding possible future
                    problems.
                    Over the medium term it might be useful for SSC to establish a centralized unit
                    within SSC that would monitor and analyze data such as the total number of
                    complaints, types of complaints and time for them to be resolved as a basis of
                    analyzing the key risks and trends that can inform supervision and policy
                    formulation. Ideally complaints would be able to be received through a variety
                    of mechanisms, including a hotline, in writing and via email. Considering the
                    broad range of supervisory responsibilities of SSC and the capacity
                    constraints, in the immediate term, a designated team within the Securities
                    Supervision Department responsible for financial consumer protection would
                    be helpful as an intermediate step.
                    A consolidated database of complaints could help the regulators in identifying
                    vulnerabilities as follows:
                          the medium of complaints;
                          the institution that received the complaint;
                          breakdown of complaints by types of institutions (securities
                           companies/fund managers etc.), industry and province;
                          the time taken to resolve the complaints;
                          the issues complained about;
                          the time taken to resolve;
                           number of complaints that were not resolved;
                           policy changes based on complaints; and
                                                                                                      90
                                                                II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                           literacy efforts directly related to analysis of complaints.
                    SSC should also require all securities intermediaries and market institutions
                    (exchanges) to report on complaints received on a periodical basis.
                    SSC should also be required to: (i) publicize widely, at least once every year,
                    the total number of consumer complaints, the most common concerns of
                    consumers, and the percentage of cases that have been acknowledged in
                    writing by the consumer as having been resolved satisfactorily; (ii) publicize
                    appropriate corrective measures; and (iii) of those complaints that went into
                    dispute resolution - the number resolved in favor of the investors and the
                    number in favor of the securities intermediary.
                    A low-cost Ombudsman for resolution of disputes for retail customers could be
                    considered for the securities sector in the longer term. The arbitration system
                    should still be maintained when it relates to larger size disputes.
                    See also Banking Sector Good Practice E.2.

SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Investor Protection
                        a. There should be clear provisions in the law to ensure that the
                            regulatory authority can take prompt corrective action on a timely
                            basis in the event of distress at a securities intermediary or CIU.
                        b. The law on the investors guarantee fund, if there is one, should
                            be clear on the funds and financial instruments that are covered
                            under the law.
                        c. There should be an effective mechanism in place for the pay-out
                            of funds and transfer of financial instruments by the guarantee
                            fund or insolvency trustee in a timely manner.
                        d. The legal provisions on the insolvency of securities
                            intermediaries and CIUs should provide for expeditious, cost-
                            effective and equitable provisions to enable the timely payment
                            of funds and transfer of financial instruments to investors by the
                            insolvency trustee of a securities intermediary or CIU.
Description         The regulatory framework today does not provide for an investor compensation
                    scheme as contemplated by this Good Practice. However, there is a current
                    project within SSC to consider developing such a regime.
                    Currently, however, individual securities companies/fund management
                    companies and individual brokers are required to have professional liability
                    insurance (although the amounts are not clear) and a compensation
                    arrangement to protect against errors and losses caused by brokerage staff.
                    Vietnam insolvency law further protects transfers to customers and transfers
                    for clearing and settlement purposes made within the 90 days prior to opening
                    of a bankruptcy proceeding. The law also permits the auction or sale of a
                    securities company to another company and for the transfer of customer
                    accounts. However, there remain ambiguities as to the treatment of customers,
                    as opposed to general creditors, once a bankruptcy is declared if a sale or
                    recapitalization is not possible.
                    The following paragraphs describe in more detail the limited provisions which
                    currently exist in relation to insolvency and related situations in the securities
                    markets.
                    SSC possesses powers to issue directions and orders to securities
                    intermediaries to take prompt corrective action in the event of distress of such
                    securities intermediaries. For example, Article 74 of the SC Law states that a
                    warning shall be given to a firm whose amount of capital does not exceed 120
                    percent of capital as required by MoF. A firm has only 30 days to return to a
                    non-warning level. Further, Article 70 of the SC Law and Circulars 210/2012
                    and 212/2012 permits suspension by SSC of a securities company or fund

                                                                                                         91
                                                                                II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                             management company that fails to rectify the required status and suffers a
                             cumulative loss of 50 percent of its charter capital or fails to meet its ongoing
                             operating requirements.
                             Under the SC Law, SSC can also transfer the accounts of a financially troubled
                             securities intermediary to a solvent securities intermediary. MoF also has direct
                             powers to suspend trading subject to input from SSC and SSC appears to have
                             the power to move positions. However, SSC does not have power to appoint
                             an administrator or liquidator as all insolvencies in Vietnam are court
                             supervised.
                             If members default on posting cash in time, under VSD rules, the financial
                             guarantee fund provides an automatic loan if the shortfall is within the limit
                             prescribed by VSD. If the amount still is not sufficient to fund delivery of
                             securities, this could lead to removal of transactions from settlement,
                             engendering settlement risk and the reversal or cancellation of trades. Further,
                             if the customer and/or the broker cannot repay the above mentioned loan,
                             Decision 87-2007QD-BTC explains that VSD member is accountable for
                             settlement on behalf of customers and in the event of the failure of the cash or
                             securities leg, that either the settlement fund or a loan from a paying bank may
                             be used or in the case of a security, the security may be borrowed. Securities
                             companies have been unable in certain cases to complete transactions on the
                             settlement system, where customer credit was extended, but the customer
                             failed to settle the cash leg. This has resulted in charges first to the settlement
                             fund at the exchange, and in the case of insufficiency of funds in the settlement
                             fund, borrowings from the settlement.
                             VSD and SSC have discouraged such failures to settle, and after three
                             warnings, can suspend, and have suspended, access to the settlement
                             system. Such discouragement is not considered sufficient by market
                             participants, who believe other measures, including a central counterparty
                             (“CCP”), harsher consequences (prompt corrective action), and more
                             coordination with the markets, should be explored.
  Recommendation             The insolvency regime for the securities industry should be reviewed to align
                             treatment of customers of insurers and securities intermediaries with
                             international standards (i.e. IOSCO Principles of Securities Regulation).
                             In particular, full and effective powers should be developed for the entity
                             overseeing the insolvency of a securities intermediary in order to allow it to fully
                             protect investor assets, promptly return the assets to investors and resolve
                             creditor claims.
                             Any consideration of an investor protection scheme should be carefully
                             considered to ensure it is appropriate to the stage of development of securities
                             market development in Vietnam. Typically, the existence of an investor
                             protection fund will secure the assets of investors in the event of a broker’s
                             insolvency and fraudulent conduct201. In the event of an unauthorized trade,
                             which a broker cannot cover in the open market due to insolvency, the
                             protection fund would be available to restore the investor’s assets. The use of
                             a guarantee fund is a powerful way of building investors’ confidence that their
                             assets are safe if a securities intermediary misappropriates their assets or
                             becomes bankrupt. It is mandatory in the EU and exists for equity transactions
                             in the US.
                             However, it should be pointed out that countries with smaller capital markets
                             frequently do not have such a fund, since the securities intermediaries do not
                             want to incur the costs. In that instance, the government may want to consider
                             initiating such a fund that is partially funded from government resources or from
                             other resources such as a securities transactions tax. The government would



201
  Such a compensation fund is required in the European Union and exists in various forms in the United States, Turkey, Malaysia,
Hong Kong and South Korea, among many other countries.

                                                                                                                            92
                                                               II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


                    need to weigh the cost/benefits of such a fund in creating increased investor
                    confidence in the market.

SECTION G           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice G.1   Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                    A broadly based program of financial education and information should
                    be developed to increase the financial capability of the population.
                         a. A range of organizations –including the government, state
                              agencies and non-governmental organizations– should be
                              involved in developing and implementing the financial capability
                              program.
                         b. The government should appoint a ministry (e.g. the Ministry of
                              Finance), the central bank or a financial regulator to lead and
                              coordinate the development and implementation of the national
                              financial capability program.
Description         Financial education efforts related to securities and investments are currently
                    provided by the major stock exchanges in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. These
                    activities, however, seem to be directed at relatively knowledgeable investors,
                    such as brokerage employees or active traders, not at retail investors who are
                    novices at trading. The mission did not learn of financial capability efforts at
                    SSC.
Recommendation      As Vietnam develops a financial capability strategy, knowledge of securities
                    and investments should be included among the related objectives, as these
                    products are important for long-term savings and resource mobilization. The
                    securities regulator should participate with SBV in the development of the
                    financial capability strategy. Outreach specific to securities and investments,
                    such as training provided by the stock exchanges, brokerages or securities
                    regulator, should place greater emphasis on awareness raising and basic skills
                    and knowledge (especially of the opportunity to invest and the risks involved in
                    different products and strategies).
Good Practice G.2   Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media
                       a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken to improve people's
                           financial capability.
                       b. This should include encouraging the mass media to provide
                           financial education, information and guidance.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    Currently the stock exchanges are taking the lead on providing investment
                    training to consumers, mainly through workshops and seminars featuring
                    expert speakers from Vietnam and abroad. These events are taught in person,
                    sometimes at the exchange, and reach as many as several hundred
                    participants at one time. The stock exchange in Ho Chi Minh City has also
                    developed a website for investors, which is a source of information on
                    investment opportunities but the extent to which it offers online training is not
                    clear.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    See Banking Sector Good Practice G.2.
Recommendation      Financial capability interventions for securities and investments would benefit
                    from a broader range of interventions, including use of technology enabled
                    tools, games and the use of mass media to raise awareness and provide skills,
                    including entertainment education.

                    More of the attention on securities and investment training should involve basic
                    concepts and issues such as portfolio diversification, the tradeoff between risk
                    and return, risks / costs from excessive trading volatility, etc.




                                                                                                        93
                                                         II. Good Practices: Securities Sector


Good Practice G.3   Unbiased Information for Investors
                       a. Financial regulators should provide, via the internet and printed
                           publications, independent information on the key features,
                           benefits and risks –and where practicable the costs- of the main
                           types of financial products and services.
                       b. Non-governmental organizations should be encouraged to
                           provide investor awareness programs to the public regarding
                           financial products and services.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice G.3.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.3.
Good Practice G.4   Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                       a. The financial capability of consumers should be measured
                           through a broad-based survey that is repeated from time to time.
                       b. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be
                           evaluated.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice G.5.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.5.




                                                                                           94
The insurance industry is still nascent but growing fast along with the growth in the
economy. While gross premiums written and industry assets have more than doubled over the
last 5 years, the insurance penetration ratio (gross premiums as a share of GDP) has increased
only marginally to approximately 1.85 percent. Non-life insurance business grew 10.3 percent
in 2012 reaching VND 22.8 trillion, while in the same time the life insurance grew 14.8 percent
reaching VND 18.4 trillion.202 Agents203 are the main distribution channel for personal lines non-
life products and life products, but insurers are beginning to use banks, telemarketing, on-line
platforms and post offices as alternative channels.204
Both the non-life and life insurance sectors have numerous insurers but most of the
business is concentrated in a few insurers. The non-life insurance market has 29 insurers
with a limited number of foreign stakeholders and is reasonably concentrated with the top 5
insurers writing approximately 70 percent of the premiums.205 The main personal lines products
are motor vehicle, health and personal accident, and property with claims ratios (claims as a
percent of premiums) for these classes being respectively 53, 22 and 37, so profitability is good.
The life insurance market has 15 insurers with a high degree of foreign ownership or investment
and is quite concentrated with the top 3 insurers receiving approximately 75 percent of the
premiums. The major products are endowment savings, term life and investment insurance,
with very few whole of life or annuities sold, and life insurers can also provide health insurance
as part of a life insurance package. There are over 200,000 agents, but many are part-time and
there is very a high turnover, as well as agents shifting between insurers.206
Insurance is highly regulated, including detailed regulation of non-life mandatory
insurance products and all life and health insurance products. Some types of non-life
insurance are compulsory (e.g. civil liability for motor vehicle owners) and for these the Ministry
of Finance sets the policy clauses, premium scales and minimum sums insured and an insurer
licensed for these classes cannot refuse to underwrite. Insurance policy clauses and premium
scales for health insurance and life insurance products must be ratified by MoF. Life agent
training, certification and management are also heavily regulated. MoF also sets caps on
commissions’ payable for all insurance products, which vary by product type.




202
    Overview of Vietnam Insurance Market in 2012 (AVI, 2012).
203
    Until the end of 2012, total number of agents in the market was 225,963 agents, up 11.3 percent. See, Overview of Vietnam
Insurance market in 2012, 12 (Insurance Association of Vietnam, 2012).
204
    Overview of Vietnam Insurance market in 2012, 12 (Insurance Association of Vietnam, 2012) and data available at AVI’s website:
http://avi.org.vn.
205
    Id.
206
      Id.

                                                                                                                              95
                                                                                   III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector




  SECTION A                    CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

  Good Practice A.1            Consumer Protection Regime
                               The law should provide for clear rules on consumer protection in all
                               matters of insurance and there should be adequate institutional
                               arrangements for implementation and enforcement of consumer
                               protection rules.
                                  a. There should be specific provisions in the law, which create an
                                      effective regime for the protection of retail consumers of
                                      insurance.
                                  b. The rules should prioritize a role for the private sector, including
                                      voluntary    consumer     organizations      and    self-regulatory
                                      organizations.
  Description                  Paragraph (a) and (b)
                               The Law on Insurance Business 2010 (IB Law) governs the organization and
                               operation of insurance business and defines the rights and obligations of
                               organizations as well as individuals participating in insurance. The IB Law does
                               not apply to social, health and other insurances of a non-commercial nature
                               provided by the State. IB Law Chapter II covers the content and operation of
                               insurance contracts, and the rights and obligations of insurance enterprises and
                               insurance buyers.
                               Other laws impacting on consumer protection in insurance include:
                                        Civil Code;
                                        Commercial Law;
                                        Law on Protection of Consumers’ Rights; and
                                        Law on Advertising.
                               The provisions on consumer rights and obligations across these laws are at the
                               level of principles and many are similar, but not the same. There is also a
                               substantial body of subsidiary legislation (Decrees, Decisions, Circulars) under
                               the IB Law. This plethora of laws and regulations is likely to make it difficult for
                               insurance consumers and advisers to understand their obligations and rights
                               under all of this legislation.
                               The MoF is responsible for administering the IB Law and the Insurance
                               Supervisory Authority (ISA, which is part of the MoF) is responsible for
                               supervision of the insurance industry. Insurance is heavily regulated, including
                               detailed regulation of non-life insurance mandatory products and all life and
                               health insurance products207. Some types of non-life insurance are compulsory
                               (e.g. civil liability for motor vehicle owners) and for these the MoF sets the policy
                               clauses, premium scales and minimum sums insured and an insurer licensed
                               for these classes cannot refuse to underwrite. Insurance policy clauses and
                               premium scales for health insurance and life insurance products must be ratified
                               by the MoF. Insurance agent training, certification and management are also
                               heavily regulated. The MoF also sets caps on commissions payable for all
                               insurance products, which vary by product type.
                               There is no evidence that VCA responsible for consumer protection (See
                               Banking Sector Good Practice A.1) is proactive in trying to identify shortcomings
                               in insurers’ complying with consumer protection requirements, and there
                               appears to be minimal complaints to the VCA, or evidence that VCA investigates
                               complaints against insurers to achieve rectification and improved industry
                               practice.



207
   See, IB LAW Article 39 – Responsibilities of Ministry of Finance for State administration of insurance business. In particular
Clauses 3, 9 and 10.


                                                                                                                               96
                                                                             III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

                                 The Association of Vietnamese Insurers (AVI) represents all licensed insurers
                                 and its main roles are dealing with MoF on insurance policy and legislation
                                 issues, publishing insurance business statistics, arranging forums on insurance
                                 regulatory matters, and assisting insurers manage agents through its database
                                 of all agents in the industry. At this stage it has developed one specific self-
                                 regulatory arrangement for the life insurance industry208 and it has developed
                                 an industry-wide agent database which has some regulatory backing.
  Recommendation                 Consideration should be given to the rationalization of the legal and regulatory
                                 framework for consumer protection in insurance in order to make understanding
                                 of the requirements easier, clarify the roles of government agencies, and focus
                                 the key agencies to achieve effective consumer protection. One way to achieve
                                 this may be to carve out consumer protection provisions in respect of financial
                                 services from the general laws and place them in a specific financial services
                                 consumer protection law. Improved consumer outcomes from such a change
                                 would also likely require a specialist agency to effectively monitor financial
                                 service provider practices, apply sanctions and possibly handle and arbitrate on
                                 customer disputes. Another option is to carve out relevant consumer protection
                                 provisions from the general laws and place them in the Law on Insurance
                                 Business and make the Insurance Supervisory Authority responsible for
                                 effectively monitoring compliance, applying sanctions and arbitrating on
                                 customer disputes. This may be the most practicable option in the short term.
  Good Practice A.2              Contracts
                                 There should be a specialized insurance contracts section in the general
                                 insurance or contracts law, or ideally a separate Insurance Contracts Act.
                                 This should specify the information exchange and disclosure
                                 requirements specific to the insurance sector, the basic rights and
                                 obligations of the insurer and the retail policyholder and allow for any
                                 asymmetries of negotiating power or access to information.
  Description                    The general regulatory framework for insurance contracts is set by Section 11
                                 of the Civil Code (Articles 567 to 580). Insurance contracts are categorized by
                                 the Code into the following three categories: (i) contracts for “human insurance”
                                 (e.g. life insurance); (ii) contracts for property insurance; and (iii) contracts for
                                 civil liability insurance.209 All insurance contracts must be in writing.210 Section
                                 11 of the Civil Code further briefly summarizes rights and obligation of the
                                 parties to insurance contracts, including the obligation to pay premiums, provide
                                 information prevent damage or pay compensation for claims.
                                 Chapter II of the IB Law contains numerous requirements in relation to insurance
                                 contracts, including provisions relating to:
                                          the form and contents of insurance contracts;
                                          insurable interests;
                                          when liability arises and the basis for indemnity;
                                          the rights and obligations of insurers;
                                          the rights and obligations of insurance buyers;
                                          voidance and termination;
                                          amendment and assignment; and
                                          time-limits for premium payments, claims settlement and lawsuits.
                                 The IB Law also requires insurers to fully supply contract information at sale,
                                 explain the insurance terms and conditions, and keep insurance buyer
                                 information confidential.
                                 The ISA211:
                                     sets the policy terms, premium scales and minimum sums insured for
                                        compulsory non-life insurance products;
                                     ratifies insurer’s policy terms, premium scales and sales brochures for
                                        life and health insurance products;

208
      AVI “Customer Service Commitments of Life Insurers”.
209
      Article 568 of the Civil Code.
210
      Article 570 of the Civil Code.
211
      See, Circular 124 of 2012 – Section 4. Selling Insurance.


                                                                                                                 97
                                                                                 III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

                                        requires life savings product benefit illustrations to be approved by the
                                         insurer’s actuaries; and
                                        sets maximum caps on commissions payable for all insurance products.
                                The CP Law also contains general provisions regarding accurate information,
                                clear contracts and the form of contracts.
                                Although life insurers provide good summaries of the key benefits of their
                                products there is no regulatory requirement for insurers to provide Key Facts
                                Statements on common retail insurance products to allow customers to easily
                                compare insurers’ products. As the market matures and consumer’s needs and
                                financial understanding develops, the ability to make product comparisons will
                                become more important.
  Recommendation                Insurers should be required to provide Key Facts Statements about their
                                common retail products to assist consumers to better understand and compare
                                insurance products.
  Good Practice A.3             Codes of Conduct for Insurers
                                   a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for insurers
                                       that is devised in consultation with the insurance industry and with
                                       relevant consumer associations, and that is monitored and
                                       enforced by a statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory
                                       agency.
                                   b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, insurers should
                                       publicize and disseminate it to the general public through
                                       appropriate means.
                                   c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary
                                       codes for insurers on such matters specific to insurance products
                                       or channels.
                                   d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                                       disseminated.
  Description                   Paragraphs (a) to (d)
                                There are no legally enforceable codes of conduct for how insurers deal directly
                                with customers, either generally or in relation to specific activities (e.g. customer
                                disputes handling).
                                As the mission team was advised, AVI has issued the “Customer Service
                                Commitments of Life Insurers” which covers:
                                        professionalism;
                                        transparency;
                                        customer privacy protection;
                                        selling ”right products” to “right customers”;
                                        quality of insurance products;
                                        information update during contract period;
                                        fairness in claims settlement; and
                                        public interests.
                                The selling of insurance, in particular through agents, is highly regulated through
                                detailed requirements covering:
                                        principles for selling insurance, including prohibited acts during
                                         selling212; and
                                        agent training, including agent examination and certification 213.
                                Major insurers have internal procedures for customer interactions, other than at
                                the time of sale (i.e. mostly for customer complaints handling), but industry
                                codes do not exist. During its on-site inspections of insurers ISA examines
                                insurer practices in dealing with customers.



212
      See Circular 124 of 2012 – Section 4. Selling Insurance.
213
      See Chapter III of Decree 45/2007/ND-CP – Guidelines for Implementation of a number of Articles of Law on Insurance
Business.


                                                                                                                            98
                                                                                 III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

  Recommendation              Consideration should be given to establishing a (legally enforceable) code of
                              conduct for insurer practices as contemplated by this Good Practice.
  Good Practice A.4           Other Institutional Arrangements
                                   a. Prudential supervision and consumer protection can be placed in
                                        separate agencies or lodged in a single institution, but allocation
                                        of resources between prudential supervision and consumer
                                        protection should be adequate to enable the effective
                                        implementation of consumer protection rules.
                                   b. The judicial system should provide credibility to the enforcement
                                        of the rules on financial consumer protection.
                                   c. The media and consumer associations should play an active role
                                        in promoting consumer protection in the area of insurance.
  Description                 ISA’s regulation and supervision (including inspections) of insurer practices
                              covers both prudential and consumer protection issues. In respect of consumer
                              protection issues it is heavier and more intensive than in many other
                              jurisdictions. It covers insurance contract terms and conditions, materials
                              provided to consumers, insurer procedures and insurer actual practices. ISA is
                              also responsible for ensuring that insurers fulfil their undertakings to insurance
                              purchasers214.
                              The lack of consumer awareness, cultural approach, time and cost involved in
                              using the judicial system means it does not provide credible enforcement of
                              financial consumer protection rules, even though the Civil Procedure Code
                              clearly provides for the courts to be used to resolve disputes215.
                              There is no evidence that the media plays any role in promoting insurance
                              consumer protection and the consumer associations simply react to the small
                              volume of complaints rather than take an active promotional role.
  Recommendation              See Banking Good Practice A.4 regarding support for consumer associations.
  Good Practice A.5           Bundling and Tying Clauses
                              Whenever an insurer contracts with a merchant or credit grantor
                              (including banks and leasing companies) as a distribution channel for its
                              contracts, no bundling (including enforcing adhesion to what is legally a
                              single contract), tying or other exclusionary dealings should take place
                              without the consumer being advised and able to opt out
  Description                 Some life insurers partner with banks to enable bank staff to sell the insurer’s
                              products on an individual basis to bank customers. This is mostly in respect of
                              credit life products and some unemployment insurance. It appears that in
                              practice lenders generally do not require borrowers to take out insurance such
                              as credit life or unemployment insurance.
                              While lenders providing secured finance for major assets (e.g. housing and
                              motor vehicles) will often require the borrower to have the assets insured there
                              is no specific evidence that they are requiring borrowers to take out the
                              insurance with specific insurers, with whom they have tied or exclusionary
                              arrangements.
                              There are broad requirements under IB Law regulations216 that prohibit insurers
                              from coercing customers to purchase insurance.
  Recommendation              Even though specific evidence of tying or bundling is not apparent, the
                              requirements related to non-coercion in the purchase of insurance should be
                              reviewed so that the practice of bundling or tying is prohibited with very limited
                              exceptions, thus enabling consumers to choose their own insurance
                              arrangements, even where the borrower requires insurance.
                              See also Banking Good Practice B.4.




214
    See Article 39, Clause 4 of Decree 45/2007/ND-CP – Guidelines for Implementation of a number of Articles of Law on Insurance
Business.
215
    See Article 29 of the Civil Procedure Code 2004.
216
    See IB Law Article 10.2(b), Article 17.3 of Decree 45 of 2007 and Article 38.2 of Circular 124 of 2012 (these may be able to
be interpreted to prohibit bundling or tying).


                                                                                                                            99
                                                              III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector


SECTION B           DISCLOSURE & SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   Sales Practices
                       a. Insurers should be held responsible for product-related
                           information provided to consumers by their agents (i.e. those
                           intermediaries acting for the insurer).
                       b. Consumers should be informed whether the intermediary selling
                           them an insurance contract (known as a policy) is acting for them
                           or for the insurer (i.e. in the latter case the intermediary has an
                           agency agreement with the insurer).
                       c. If the intermediary is a broker (i.e. acting on behalf of the
                           consumer) then the consumer should be advised at the time of
                           initial contact with the intermediary if a commission will be paid to
                           the intermediary by the underwriting insurer. The consumer
                           should have the right to require disclosure of the commission and
                           other costs paid to an intermediary for long-term savings
                           contracts. The consumer should always be advised of the amount
                           of any commission and other expenses paid on any single
                           premium investment contract.
                       d. An intermediary should be prohibited from identically filling
                           brokering and agency roles for a given general class of insurance
                           (i.e. life and disability, health, general insurance, credit insurance).
                       e. When a bank is the intermediary, the sales process should ensure
                           that the consumer understands at all times that he or she is not
                           purchasing a bank product or a product guaranteed by the bank.
                       f. Sanctions, including meaningful fines and, in the case of
                           intermediaries, loss of license, should apply for breach of any of
                           the above provisions.
Description         Paragraphs (a) to (f)
                    The commercial agency provisions of the Commercial Law mean principals bear
                    joint responsibility for their agent’s acts and the IB Law and regulations make
                    insurers responsible for their product-related information, and liable for loss or
                    damage caused by agent activities.
                    There are no specific regulations requiring insurance intermediaries to disclose
                    to consumers their status in respect of who they are acting for, or if they have
                    any conflicts of interest. As the market develops insurance
                    advisers/intermediaries are likely to diversify and increase in number. Then
                    consumers will need to know more about the status and competence of
                    intermediaries.
                    Brokers are not required to disclose if they will receive payment from the
                    underwriting insurer and, for long term savings products, consumers do not have
                    the right to request from the broker details of any commission, or other payment,
                    from the insurer to the broker. There are only 12 brokers in the market and they
                    operate essentially for commercial clients seeking advice on non-life products.
                    There are no specific requirements which require that consumers are informed
                    that when they purchase an insurance product through a bank, that they are not
                    purchasing a bank product or a product guaranteed by the bank.
                    The detailed regulation of agents and insurer management of agents, and ISA
                    supervision of insurer management of agents, means that agent breaches
                    would result in fines and/or banning of agents.
Recommendation      Insurance intermediaries should disclose their status to consumers, and brokers
                    should be required to disclose any commissions to be received, especially as
                    the market develops.
                    Requirements should be developed for banks to disclose the insurance products
                    they sell are not their products and not guaranteed by them.




                                                                                                100
                                                                                    III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

  Good Practice B.2              Advertising and Sales Materials
                                    a. Insurers should ensure their advertising and sales materials and
                                        procedures do not mislead customers. Regulatory limits should be
                                        placed on investment returns used in life insurance value
                                        projections.
                                    b. Insurers should be legally responsible for all statements made in
                                        marketing and sales materials they produce related to their
                                        products.
                                    c. All marketing and sales materials should be easily readable and
                                        understandable by the general public.
  Description                    Paragraph (a)
                                 The IB Law and regulations217 require that:
                                           insurers fully supply consumers with information on insurance
                                            contracts;
                                           insurers explain insurance terms and conditions to buyers;
                                           insurer’s advertising and sales materials are truthful and not
                                            misleading;
                                           insurer’s advertising and sales materials are clear and comprehensible;
                                            and
                                           insurers are responsible for statements made in their marketing and
                                            sales materials.
                                 Also, under the CP Law consumers are entitled to compensation if services
                                 provided are not in accordance with what was advertised or pledged. Moreover,
                                 life and health insurance product materials are ratified by ISA.
                                 Benefit illustrations used in life and health insurance product sales materials
                                 must be clear and accurate, and the bases for the calculation of the illustrations
                                 must be approved b y the insurer’s actuaries. For policies with refundable values,
                                 the conditions for refund must be provided in documents along with the
                                 illustrated amounts.
                                 Paragraph (b)
                                 See Banking Sector Good Practice B.9.
                                 Paragraph (c)
                                 There is no requirement implementing this Good Practice.
  Recommendation                 Existing rules should be amended in order to provide for the requirement that all
                                 marketing and sales materials should be easily readable and understandable by
                                 the general public.
  Good Practice B.3              Understanding Customers’ Needs
                                 The sales intermediary or officer should be required to obtain sufficient
                                 information about the consumer to ensure an appropriate product is
                                 offered. Formal ―fact finds should be specified for long-term savings and
                                 investment products and they should be retained and be available for
                                 inspection for a reasonable number of years.
  Description                    Under IB Law regulations218 insurers have a general obligation to analyze
                                 customer needs in order to recommend appropriate products, and for life
                                 insurance products the analysis and recommendation must be in writing. For
                                 unit-linked insurance contracts there are more detailed requirements219 on the
                                 insurer to analyze the client’s demand for such a contract and the suitability of
                                 the contract for the client. There are also specific requirements in relation to
                                 universal life insurance products 220 about client needs analysis and client
                                 certification of their understanding of the product.



217
      Especially Circular 124 of 2012, Section 4. Selling Insurance.
218
      See Article 37.1(g) of Circular 124 of 2012 – Section 4. Selling Insurance.
219
      See Article 12 of Circular 135 of 2012 – Guiding the Provision of Unit-Linked Insurance Products.
220
      See Article 18 of Decision 96 of 2007 – Promulgating the Regulation on Provision of the Universal Life Insurance Product.


                                                                                                                             101
                                                                                  III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

                              Even though agent training would cover these obligations it is not clear that such
                              needs analysis actually occurs when non-life products are sold.
                              For life insurance (apart from unit-linked and universal life products, which are
                              a small volume of business sold) it appears that the needs analysis is basic,
                              covering only the customers employment situation and income level, and that
                              the life insurers’ record keeping is varied and unlikely to be accessible after a
                              number of years when needed if a dispute arises.
  Recommendation              Needs analysis requirements should be reviewed and updated to ensure they
                              result in appropriately detailed analyses being undertaken, and that records are
                              retained for lengthy periods to enable the facts of the analysis to be available to
                              identify mis-selling and for dispute handling.
  Good Practice B.4           Cooling-off Period
                              There should be a reasonable cooling-off period associated with any
                              traditional investment or long-term life savings contract, after the policy
                              information is delivered, to deal with possible high pressure selling and
                              mis-selling.
  Description                 Cooling-off or free-look periods of between 15 to 21 days are routinely provided
                              for in life insurance products.
                              There is a specific requirement221 for a cooling-off period of 21 days for unit-
                              linked insurance products.
                              It also appears that AVI has promulgated sample provisions for insurance
                              contracts which include cooling-off periods.
                              ISA process of ratifying life insurance policy terms222 would also consider if a
                              cooling-off period is included as it specifically recommends insurers use AVI
                              sample provisions.
  Recommendation              It is desirable that there are clear regulations requiring reasonable cooling-off
                              periods for life insurance savings and investment type products.
      Good Practice B.5       Key Facts Statement
                              A Key Facts Statement should be attached to all sales and contractual
                              documents, disclosing the key factors of the insurance product or service
                              in large print.
  Description                 The IB Law and regulations223 require insurers to explain insurance terms and
                              conditions in a clear, understandable and not misleading way and supply
                              introductory documents which satisfy these requirements. The heavy regulation
                              of insurance products has led to retail insurance products being relatively
                              simple. However, insurers are not required to provide Key Facts Statements to
                              consumers.
                              At this early stage of development of the market, the insurance needs of most
                              consumers are basic and consumers are more likely to rely on what the agent
                              tells them, rather than examine the product material themselves when making
                              their purchase decision. As the market matures and consumer’s needs and
                              financial understanding develops product comparing will become more
                              important.
                              It does appear from insurer websites that for the common life and health
                              insurance products many insurers do in fact provide good information on the key
                              components of these products.
  Recommendation              It should be considered at what stage in the development of the insurance
                              market insurers should be required to provide Key Facts Statements about their
                              products to assist consumers to better understand and compare insurance
                              products, and what the specific content of the key features statements should
                              be.




221
    See Article 14.1 (b) of Circular 135 of 2012 – Guiding the Provision of Unit-Linked Insurance Products.
222
    See Article 39 of Circular 124 of 2012.
223
    See IB Law Article 19.1 and Article 37 of Circular 124 of 2012.


                                                                                                                  102
                                                                             III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

  Good Practice B.6               Professional Competence
                                     a. Sales personnel and intermediaries selling and advising on
                                         insurance contracts should have sufficient qualifications,
                                         depending on the complexities of the products they sell.
                                     b. Educational requirements for intermediaries selling long-term
                                         savings and investment insurance products should be specified,
                                         or at least approved, by the regulator or supervisor.
  Description                     Paragraphs (a) and (b)
                                  There are general requirements that employees of insurers must be
                                  professionally competent and ethical, and that agent intermediaries must
                                  possess agent certificates or certificates about insurance services being
                                  provided224.
                                  There are legislated requirements related to insurance agent training 225.
                                  Insurers are responsible for training their agents and certifying their agent
                                  competency. Any agent training facility must meet minimum conditions covering:
                                           the content of the training program;
                                           the professional competency of the trainers;
                                           the material facilities for training; and
                                           it must be approved by ISA.
                                  The content of the training program must cover:
                                           general knowledge on insurance;
                                           agent responsibilities and ethics;
                                           insurance law;
                                           insurance product contents;
                                           insurance selling skills;
                                           rights and obligations of insurers and agents; and
                                           professional practices of an agent.
                                  ISA inspects agent training activities and can require suspension of training if
                                  requirements are not met. Agent training facilities must report annually to ISA
                                  on the number of training courses conducted, the number of agents trained and
                                  agent certificates issued.
                                  AVI maintains a database of agents across the industry and it is a legislated
                                  requirement that insurers notify AVI (as well as ISA) of any agent whose contract
                                  has been terminated due to legal or professional breaches.
  Recommendation                  No recommendation
  Good Practice B.7               Regulatory Status Disclosure
                                     a. In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio or
                                         otherwise, an insurer should disclose: (i) that it is regulated, and
                                         (ii) the name and address of the regulator.
                                     b. All insurance intermediaries should be licensed and proof of
                                         licensing should be readily available to the general public,
                                         including through the internet.
  Description                     Paragraph (a)
                                  The general Law on Advertising and the requirements in relation to insurance
                                  selling and insurance agents require honesty and no misleading information.
                                  However, there appear to be no requirements that an insurer disclose in its
                                  advertising that it is regulated and the contact details of the regulator.
                                  Paragraph (b)
                                  While insurance agents must be certified and insurance brokers licensed, it
                                  appears that there are no requirements that an insurance intermediary must



224
      See Article 37.1 (b) of Circular 124 of 2012.
225
      See Chapter III Decree 45 of 2007.


                                                                                                             103
                                                                                   III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector

                                 disclose proof of their status or licensing to a customer, or that such details
                                 should be readily available to the public through some means.
  Recommendation                 It is desirable that insurers be required to disclose in their advertising that they
                                 are regulated by ISA.
                                 Given the existence of AVI database of insurance agents, consideration should
                                 be given to making agent’s basic details from the database available to the
                                 public (e.g. through the internet).
  Good Practice B.8              Disclosure of Financial Situation
                                    a. The regulator or supervisor should publish annual public reports
                                        on the development, health, strength and penetration of the
                                        insurance sector either as a special report or as part of the
                                        disclosure and accountability requirements under the law
                                        governing it.
                                    b. Insurers should be required to disclose their financial information
                                        to enable the general public to form an opinion with regards to the
                                        financial viability of the institution.
                                    c. If credible claims paying ability ratings are not available, the
                                        regulator or supervisor should periodically publish sufficient
                                        information on each insurer for an informed commentator or
                                        intermediary to form a view of the insurer’s relative financial
                                        strength.
  Description                    Paragraph (a)
                                 Currently ISA does not publish annual material on the development, health,
                                 strength and penetration of the insurance sector.
                                 AVI produces annually an “Overview of the Vietnam Insurance Market” which
                                 covers market developments and market growth, but it does not contain much,
                                 if any, information about the financial strength of the insurance sector or
                                 individual insurers.
                                 Paragraph (b)
                                 The IB Law requires that an insurer annually publicize its financial reports 226. An
                                 insurer is required227 to publicize:
                                       On its website its entire audited financial statements along with audit
                                           opinion; and
                                       In newspapers its annual report, summary financial statement and
                                           audit opinion.
                                 Paragraph (c)
                                 While some Vietnamese insurers have obtained credible claims paying rating
                                 most have not. ISA does not publish periodically individual insurer information
                                 which is sufficient to allow an informed commentator or intermediary to form a
                                 view of an individual insurer’s relative financial strength.
  Recommendation                 ISA should develop a high level summary balance sheet and solvency
                                 information format (from the data collected in Forms No. 7 & 8 – PNT) and
                                 publish the data for each insurer annually, to enable informed persons to assess
                                 individual insurer financial strength.




226
      See Article 104 of Law on Insurance Business 2010.
227
      See Article 36 of Circular 125 of 2012 – On Guiding Financial Regime Applicable to Insurers, Reinsurance Businesses,
Insurance Brokers and Branches of Foreign Non-life Insurers.


                                                                                                                             104
                                                                             III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector



  SECTION C                       CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

  Good Practice C.1               Customer Account Handling
                                     a. Customers should receive periodic statements of the value of their
                                         policy in the case of insurance savings and investment contracts.
                                         For traditional savings contracts, this should be provided at least
                                         yearly, however more frequent statements should be produced for
                                         investment-linked contracts.
                                     b. Customers should have a means to dispute the accuracy of the
                                         transactions recorded in the statement within a stipulated period.
                                     c. Insurers should be required to disclose the cash value of a
                                         traditional savings or investment contract upon demand and
                                         within a reasonable time. In addition, a table showing projected
                                         cash values should be provided at the time of delivery of the initial
                                         contract and at the time of any subsequent adjustments.
                                     d. Customers should be provided with renewal notices a reasonable
                                         number of days before the renewal date for non-life policies. If an
                                         insurer does not wish to renew a contract it should also provide a
                                         reasonable notice period.
                                     e. Claims should not be deniable or adjustable if non-disclosure is
                                         discovered at the time of the claim but is immaterial to the
                                         proximate cause of the claim. In such cases, the claim may be
                                         adjusted for any premium shortfall or inability to recover
                                         reinsurance.
                                     f. Insurers should have the right to cancel a policy at any time (other
                                         than after a claim has occurred – see above) if material non-
                                         disclosure can be established.
  Description                     Paragraph (a)
                                  Life insurance policyholders must be notified of their contract status every
                                  year228, but no details are specified as to what contract status means. In practice
                                  contract status information includes cash values for savings or investment
                                  contracts. There are more specific details required to be provided in respect of
                                  unit-linked contracts229 but the contract information does not need to be provided
                                  more frequently than annually, although insurers must provide unit prices every
                                  week on its website and in the newspaper. In practice some insurers provide
                                  product statements twice each year, with the mid-year amount estimated and
                                  the final year amounts based on audited financials.
                                  Paragraph (b)
                                  Insurers are responsible for the information they provide to customers about
                                  their products and when an insurance contract is issued insurers must provide
                                  the customer with the address for settling complaints, enquiries and disputes.
                                  Paragraph (c)
                                  For life and health insurance products which have a refundable value the
                                  illustration documents provided at time of sale must contain the benefits and
                                  monetary values to be received by customers and the conditions for a refund to
                                  be paid.
                                  Paragraph (d)
                                  There do not appear to be specific legislative requirements detailing renewal
                                  processes or the timing and content of renewal notices. It appears that these
                                  are covered in the terms and conditions of the insurance contracts.



228
      See Article 37.1 (e) of Circular 124 of 2012.
229
      See Article 28 of Circular 135 of 2012.

                                                                                                               105
                                                                             III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector


                                  Paragraph (e)
                                  Apart from the customer’s general obligation to declare fully and honestly all
                                  details relating to the insurance contract, there do not appear to be any specific
                                  legislative requirements dealing with the consequences of immaterial non-
                                  disclosure by customers.

                                  Paragraph (f)
                                  Insurers can unilaterally suspend the performance of an insurance contract if an
                                  insurance buyer intentionally supplies untruthful information with a view to
                                  entering an insurance contract to receive claims money.230 Similarly, “[i]n cases
                                  where the insurance buyer intentionally provides false information in order to
                                  enter into the contract for enjoying the insurance indemnity, the insurer shall be
                                  entitled to unilaterally terminate the performance of such contract and collect the
                                  insurance premium up to the time of termination of the contract.”231
  Recommendation                  It should be considered if specific legislative requirements detailing renewal
                                  processes, timings and notice contents are needed, or if standard insurance
                                  contract terms regarding renewals are required by ISA, and are adequate to
                                  provide certainty and protection to customers.

  SECTION D                       PRIVACY & DATA PROTECTION

  Good Practice D.1               Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                                  Customers have a right to expect that their financial transactions are kept
                                  confidential. Insurers should protect the confidentiality and security of
                                  personal data, against any anticipated threats, or hazards to the security
                                  or integrity of such information, and against unauthorized access.
  Description                     Insurers are required to keep confidential the information supplied by insurance
                                  buyers232 and not doing so is specified as a violation 233 which may be
                                  administratively fined, examined for penal liability, or if causing damage result
                                  in compensation having to be made.234
                                  The mission team was informed that customer privacy protection is covered in
                                  AVI “Customer Service Commitments of Life Insurers”.
  Recommendation                  No recommendation




230
      See Articles 17.1 (c) and 19.2 of IB Law.
231
      Article 573(2) of the Civil Code.
232
      See Article 19.1 of IB Law.
233
      See Article 124.6 of IB Law.
234
      See Article 125.1 of IB Law.

                                                                                                               106
                                                              III. Good Practices: Insurance Sector



SECTON E            DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Dispute Settlement
                       a. Insurers should provide an internal avenue for claim and dispute
                           resolution to policyholders.
                       b. Insurers should designate employees to handle retail policyholder
                           complaints.
                       c. Insurers should inform their customers of the internal procedures
                           on dispute resolution.
                       d. The regulator or supervisor should investigate whether insurers
                           comply with their internal procedures regarding consumer
                           protection.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    There do not appear to be any legislative requirements on insurers to have
                    internal dispute settlement mechanisms. However, insurers have developed
                    their own specific means for dealing with customer enquiries and complaints.
                    Generally this involves the customer making contact with the insurer for instance
                    through the insurers contact or call center.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Insurer practices regarding which insurer staff handle customer complaints
                    seems to vary with some insurers having specific staff separate to underwriting,
                    policy administration, accounts or claims staff, while other insurers have their
                    underwriting, policy administration, accounts or claims staff (i.e. whichever is
                    relevant to the specific complaint) handle the complaint, but with oversight from
                    senior management.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Insurers are required when issuing the insurance contract to inform customers
                    of the address to use if they want to make an enquiry or complaint. But there is
                    no requirement for insurers to inform customers of the internal procedures that
                    insurers utilize to deal with complaints.
                    Fairness in claims settlement is covered in AVI “Customer Service
                    Commitments of Life Insurers”.
                    Paragraph (d)
                    ISA on-site inspections of insurer operations cover many insurer practices and
                    do specifically cover insurer procedures for handling customer complaints. It
                    appears that ISA inspection staff actually look at some individual customer
                    complaints to see how they were resolved, if this was in accordance with the
                    insurer’s own procedures and to check there were no legislative breaches in
                    handling the complaints.
Recommendation      It is highly desirable that there be a legislative requirement that insurers have
                    internal mechanisms for handling customer disputes and that insurers are
                    required to inform customers about these procedures. It is also desirable that
                    insurers be required to provide ISA complaints data such as the volume of
                    complaints, type of complaint and how long complaints take to resolve, or if they
                    remain unresolved.




                                                                                               107
  Good Practice E.2            Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                                  a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek
                                      affordable and efficient third-party recourse, which could be an
                                      ombudsman or tribunal, in the event the complaint with the insurer
                                      cannot be resolved to the consumer’s satisfaction in accordance
                                      with internal procedures.
                                  b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution vis-à-vis
                                      consumer disputes should be made known to the public.
                                  c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial and
                                      act independently from the appointing authority and the industry.
                                  d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution should
                                      be binding upon the insurers. The mechanisms to ensure the
                                      enforcement of these decisions should be established and
                                      publicized.
  Description                  Paragraphs (a) to (d)
                               There is no external dispute handling arrangements such as an ombudsman or
                               tribunal for customers to use to achieve affordable and efficient resolution if they
                               cannot achieve satisfactory resolution directly through the insurer.
                               ISA would only become involved in specific customer disputes with insurers if it
                               was asserted that the insurer was breaching legislative requirements.
  Recommendation               Considerations should be given on whether to establish an external dispute
                               handling mechanism, such as an ombudsman or tribunal, especially given the
                               access to and use of the courts to resolve insurance disputes is very limited.
                               However, at this stage of development of the insurance market it may be
                               preferable to focus on improving insurer’s internal dispute handling procedures
                               and obtaining complaints data to improve understanding to assess if an external
                               dispute handling mechanism is warranted (see the Good Practice E.1 above).

  SECTION F                    GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

  Good Practice F.1            Guarantee Schemes and Insolvency
                                  a. With the exception of schemes covering mandatory insurance
                                      (and possibly long-term insurance), insolvency guarantee
                                      schemes are not to be encouraged for insurance because of the
                                      opaque nature of the industry and the scope for moral hazard.
                                      Strong governance and prudential supervision are better
                                      alternatives.
                                  b. Nominal defendant arrangements should be in place for
                                      mandatory insurances such as motor third party liability insurance
                                      to cover situations where there is no insured guilty party.
                                  c. Assets covering life insurance mathematical reserves and
                                      investment contract policy liabilities should be segregated or at
                                      the very least earmarked, and long-term policyholders should
                                      have preferential access to such assets in the event of a winding-
                                      up.
  Description                  Paragraph (a)
                               A guarantee fund called the Fund for Protection of the Insured 235 exists to
                               support payments due to policyholders of bankrupt insurers. Payments into the
                               fund come from levies on all insurance contracts. AVI administers the fund under
                               guidance and management from MoF. The fund has its own bank account and
                               makes its own investments into government or government guaranteed bonds
                               and deposits at commercial banks.




235
      See Section 4 of Decree 123 of 2011 – No. 123/2011ND-CP.

                                                                                                               108
                               Paragraph (b)
                               There are no specific nominal defendant arrangements to cover situations
                               where there is no identified insured guilty party.
                               Paragraph (c)
                               Life insurers must separately account for enterprise owners’ capital fund (e.g.
                               equity injections) and policyholder funds. The policyholder funds comprise
                               premiums paid in, investment income on policyholder assets, less expenses and
                               claims paid out. The policyholder funds are further segregated into those in
                               respect of policyholders with contracts that participate in sharing investment
                               returns and those that do not. The policyholder funds have to be managed so
                               that the assets of the funds exceed the actuarial or mathematical reserves to
                               cover the liabilities in respect of the fund’s life insurance contracts. Any shortfall
                               must be made up from the enterprise owners’ capital fund.
                               Any insurance bankruptcy would be administered 236 in accordance with the
                               Bankruptcy Law237, which itself does not appear to contain provisions which
                               would provide life policyholders preferential access to their policyholder funds.
                               It appears that the order of distribution in an insurer bankruptcy would follow
                               Article 37 of the Bankruptcy Law, namely:
                                      bankruptcy charge;
                                      employee entitlements;
                                      unsecured creditors (which includes policyholders).
  Recommendation               It is desirable that life policyholders have preferential access to their policyholder
                               funds in the event of the bankruptcy of their insurer. While the Fund for
                               Protection of the insured could be accessed to cover any shortfall to
                               policyholders this effectively means that all the life policyholders in the industry
                               would fund a shortfall that might otherwise be funded by unsecured creditors,
                               but not policyholders of the insurer.

  SECTION G                    CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

  Good Practice G.1            Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                                  a. A broadly based program of financial education and information
                                      should be developed to increase the financial capability of the
                                      population.
                                  b. A range of organizations–including government, state agencies
                                      and non-governmental organizations–should be involved in
                                      developing and implementing the financial capability program.
                                  c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central
                                      bank or a financial regulator to lead and coordinate the
                                      development and implementation of the national financial
                                      capability program.
  Description                  Paragraph (a)
                               There is no broadly based program of financial education aimed at improving
                               the public’s financial capability. However, ISA is responsible for financial
                               education efforts according to the relevant regulations that encourage insurers
                               to provide financial education materials to their clients but do not prescribe for
                               supervision of such efforts. Without oversight it is not possible to know whether
                               the materials are more oriented to product marketing or to unbiased financial
                               education.




236
      See Article 83 of IB Law.
237
      See Bankruptcy Law – No. 21/2004/QH11 of June 15, 2004 and Article 8 of Decree 114 of 2008, Detailing the Implementation
of a number of articles of the Bankruptcy Law applicable to Enterprises engaged in Insurance, Securities and Other Financial
Business Activities.

                                                                                                                         109
                    Financial capability outreach by insurers consists mainly of printed materials and
                    information available on websites. The activities of ANZ, which focus on
                    students, are one exception, as they include classroom training.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    There are no government and non-government organizations systematically
                    involved in developing any financial capability programs.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Almost nothing is done to educate consumers about insurance. Major life
                    insurers run customer seminars on insurance needs and products, which are
                    really aimed at warming up customers for a sale, but they do coincidentally
                    provide some insurance education. Apart from individual insurance product
                    materials there is no industry material or promotions about the basics of
                    insurance.
Recommendation      Consideration should be given to the development of a broad based financial
                    education program to increase the financial capability of the population. This
                    would need to be led by a single central agency (such Ministry of Education and
                    Training, MoF or SBV) to drive it forward.

                    Particularly with regard to the insurance sector, ISA should develop an approach
                    to supervising the financial capability outreach provided by insurers. This
                    approach should include activities during both on and off site supervision. The
                    insurance supervisor should also begin to develop their own approach to the
                    topic and to their role on improving financial skills and knowledge related to
                    insurance. The regulator should also take on a role as convener and coordinator
                    for financial capability efforts among the private sector and civil society
                    communities. Finally, data on knowledge and use of insurance products should
                    be part of a national financial capability survey.
Good Practice G.2   Unbiased Information for Consumers
                       a. Consumers, especially the most vulnerable, should have access
                           to sufficient resources to enable them to understand financial
                           products and services available to them.
                       b. Financial regulators should provide, via the internet and printed
                           publications, independent information on the key features,
                           benefits and risks—and where practicable the costs–of the main
                           types of financial products and services.
                       c. Non-governmental organizations should be encouraged to provide
                           consumer awareness programs to the public regarding financial
                           products and services.
Description         Paragraphs (a) to (c)
                    The only insurance information available to any consumer is that which is
                    provided by insurers about their specific insurance products. This is really
                    marketing type material which coincidentally may provide some basic insurance
                    information.
Recommendation      As the market develops consideration could be given to establishing
                    mechanisms to provide unbiased consumer information about the features and
                    costs of common retail insurance products such as comparison websites. The
                    possible use of various technology enabled tools for product comparisons
                    should be reviewed by the regulator. Attention to regulations to increase
                    uniformity on how product information is presented to consumers is a critical
                    element of increasing transparency in this market.
                    If requirements for key features statements for insurance products are
                    introduced this will provide a base of information which a government or non-
                    government organization could use to develop some detailed unbiased
                    information that consumers could use to assess and compare insurance
                    products.


                                                                                                  110
  Good Practice G.3           Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                                 a. Policymakers, industry and advocates should understand the
                                     financial capability of various market segments, particularly those
                                     most vulnerable to abuse.
                                 b. The financial capability of consumers should be measured
                                     through a broad-based household survey that is repeated from
                                     time to time.
                                 c. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be
                                     evaluated.
  Description                 See Banking Sector Good Practice G.5
  Recommendation              See Banking Sector Good Practice G.5




The non-bank credit institutions (NBCI) sector is diverse, with some parts remaining out
of the SBV’s jurisdiction. The different categories of NBCIs include: (i) formal and legally fully
recognized CIs operating in accordance with the Law on Credit Institutions; and (ii) semi-formal
entities operating as private businesses in accordance with general laws (e.g. the Civil Code,
the Commercial Law and the Law on Enterprises), and (iii) informal lenders. The first category,
as defined by the CI Law, comprises: (i) non-banking credit institutions, (ii) micro-finance
institutions (MFIs) (“a form of credit institution which mainly conducts a number of banking
activities aimed at satisfying requirements of low-income individuals and households and of
super-small enterprises”), and (ii) Peoples’ Credit Funds (PCFs) (defined, in summary, as
cooperative formed to carry out banking activities in accordance with the CI law and the Law on
Cooperatives with the mutual assistance to develop “production and business activities and
living standards”238). The category of non-banking credit institutions is defined to mean “a form
of credit institution which is permitted to conduct one of a number of banking activities in
accordance with this Law, except for receipt of deposits from individuals and provision of
payment services via accounts of clients” and is specifically stated to include: (i) finance
companies (e.g. Home Credit), (ii) finance leasing companies (e.g. Vietnam International
Leasing Company), and (iii) other non-banking credit institutions.239
NBCIs not licensed under the CI Law include different types of entities. Namely, different
donor-driven non-governmental organizations (NGOs) providing microcredit (e.g. CEP, Binh
Minh MFI), and the remaining categories of informal NBCIs ranging from rotating savings and
credit associations (ROSCAs), to different types of money-lenders (such as pawn shops). The
system of NBCIs is further complemented by the Vietnam Bank for Social Policies (VBSP),
which is a state-owned institution providing micro–credit services to poor and near–poor
households.240 VBSP is state-subsidized and is excluded from prudential regulation and
supervision exercised by SBV.241




238
    Article 4(1) of the Law on Credit Institutions.
239
    Article 4(4) of the Law on Credit Institutions.
240
    VBSP was established by Decision No.131/2002/QD-TTg on establishment of Vietnam Bank for Social Policies.
241
    The Government guarantees solvency of VBSP and VBSP is exempted from deposit insurance, tax and other obligations to the
state budget. Supervision of VBSP’s operations is ensured by its specific governance model: members of the governing board that
consists of the Board of Directors (BOD) at central level and BOD representatives in provincial and district level are appointed by
state agencies and mass organizations. The Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam is the BOD Chairperson. See Development
Strategy up to 2020, 2 (VBSP, 2012).

                                                                                                                             111
                                                               IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


Given the fact that a number of NBCIs are not subject to licensing and supervision by
SBV, it is difficult to be precise about the number of NBCIs operating in Vietnam. The data
provided to the mission team suggests that there are currently (i) two licensed MFIs (M7-MFI
and TYM), (ii) one policy bank providing microcredit (VBSP), (iii) a cooperative bank (the
Cooperative Bank of Vietnam) which provides capital and other support services to member
people’s credit funds (PCF), (iv) 1,146 PCFs, (v) 18 finance companies (such as Home Credit),
(vi) 12 leasing companies, (vii) around 50 semi-formal MFIs, and (vii) an unspecified number of
informal credit providers. Indeed, the total size of the NBCI sector, including informal providers
who primarily extend consumption credit, is difficult to measure. However, as indicated by the
World Bank Global Findex data, there is an important difference between the total number of
borrowers and people who have actually borrowed money from a formal financial institution.

The NBCI industry reflects various country-specific features. In particular, microfinance
lending (including facilities offered by MFIs and VBSP) is partially intertwined with the system
of local government through the involvement of the Peoples’ Committees and mass
organizations such as Women’s Union and the Farmers’ Union. Those institutions help to
identify and approve potential borrowers in need and assist with supervising repayments.
Moreover, the Women’s Union owns 100 percent of a licensed microfinance institution – TYM.
A specific role is played by VBSP which manages a portfolio of outstanding loans of 113,921
billion VND242 as compared to 99 billion VND243 and 608 billion VND244 in the case of M7-MFI
and TYM respectively. Asset-wise the three pillars of the NBCI sector (VBSP, PSFs and MFIs)
are depicted in Graph 1 below and compared to the largest financial institution in the country –
Agribank (also known as VBARD).

                           Graph 1: Concentration in the Microfinance (2012)

                                                 Microfinance Industry (2012)
                                                              2%


                                                     19%                                           VBSP
                                                                                                   Agribank

                                                                         56%                       PCFs
                                                  23%
                                                                                                   MFIs




                           Source: The Sustainability of Microfinance Institutions in Vietnam:
                           Circumstances and Implications (Nguyen Kim Anh, Le Thanh Tam,
                           2013)

Lending is recovering after the sudden increase in NPLs in 2010. The NPL ratio increased
due to a combination of both internal factors (e.g. poorly designed credit models)245, and
external factors (the difficult economic environment). In 2013, lending growth was estimated at
17.6 percent as compared to 16.4 percent in 2012.246 Yet, with the still-significant level of NPLs
(estimated around 4.6 percent in 2013), the mission team was told that responsible and sound

242
      Data refers to December 2012. See VBSP Annual Report 2012.
243
      Data refers to December 2013. See M7-MFI Progress Report 2014.
244
      Data refers to December 2013. See TYM Annual Report 2013.
245
      Vietnam Banking Survey 2013, 20 (KPMG, 2013).
246
      Industry Report: Financial Services in Vietnam, 3 (The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2013).

                                                                                                                 112
                                            IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


lending remains a significant concern for the industry, although in specific segments NPLs have
decreased dramatically as mentioned further in this report.

     Graph 2 – NPL Ratio (IMF Vietnam’s Financial Sector Presentation, 2012)




SECTION A              CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1      Consumer Protection Regime
                       The law should provide clear consumer protection rules in the area of
                       non-bank credit institutions, and there should be adequate institutional
                       arrangements to ensure the thorough, objective, timely and fair
                       implementation and enforcement of all such rules, as well as of
                       sanctions that effectively deter violations of these rules.
                          a. There should be specific statutory provisions, which create an
                             effective regime for the protection of consumers of non-bank
                             credit institutions.
                          b. There should be a government authority responsible for
                             implementing, overseeing and enforcing consumer protection
                             in the area of non-bank credit institutions.
                          c. The supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions
                             should have a register which lists the names of non-bank credit
                             institutions.
                          d. There should be coordination and cooperation among the
                             various institutions mandated to implement, oversee and
                             enforce consumer protection and financial sector regulation
                             and supervision.
                          e. The law should provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the
                             private sector, including voluntary consumer associations and
                             self-regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer
                             protection in the area of non-bank credit institutions.




                                                                                               113
                                                               IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


 Description                      Paragraph (a)
                                  See Banking Sector Good Practice A.1 for a discussion of the ambiguity in
                                  relation to the application of the CP Law to credit institutions (including
                                  NBCIs) and of the limited nature of the consumer protection provisions in the
                                  CI Law.
                                  A further important issue that negatively affects the establishment of an
                                  effective regime for the protection of consumers of NBCIs is that there
                                  appears to be large numbers of semi-formal and informal NBCIs which are
                                  not licensed under the CI Law. This group includes unlicensed MFIs,
                                  ROSCAs, pawn shops and various forms of informal money-lenders.
                                  Unlicensed semi-formal and formal NBCIs are currently unsupervised by
                                  SBV. However arguably they are within the scope of the CI Law, and should
                                  be licensed, given the abovementioned broad scope of application of the CI
                                  Law. Further support for this view is that Article 4(2) of the Commercial Law
                                  states that “[p]articular commercial activities provided for in other laws shall
                                  comply with the provisions of such laws.” That is, the quoted provision may
                                  well mean that each person engaging in activities regulated by a specific law
                                  must comply with such a law (regardless of whether the person acts with or
                                  without a license). The uncertainty on this issue is particularly problematic
                                  with regard to semi-formal NBCIs such as unlicensed MFIs, which provide
                                  services comparable to the services provided by formal NBCIs, including
                                  deposit-taking. Pending any clarification of the issue, there appear to be two
                                  different supervisory regimes for NBCIs: (i) credit institutions which are
                                  licensed and supervised by SBV under the CI Law and most likely the CP
                                  Law as well; and (ii) other NBCIs which may be registered as traders under
                                  the Commercial Law or as enterprises under the Law on Enterprises, and
                                  who are more clearly subject to the CP Law but are not supervised by SBV.
                                  The result is an uneven playing field with potential for regulatory arbitrage to
                                  the detriment of consumers.
                                  Paragraph (b)
                                  The mission team was told that neither VCA nor People’s Committees – the
                                  institutions primarily responsible for supervision and enforcement of the
                                  general consumer protection rules as provided for in the CP Law and in
                                  theory the only supervisory bodies overseeing semi-formal NBCIs – actively
                                  and continuously supervise either formal NBCIs or semi-formal and informal
                                  NBCIs (money lenders, pawn shops, ROSCAs) in respect of market conduct
                                  supervision. In particular, it appears that the primary focus of SBV’s
                                  inspections is on prudential rules.
                                  Other ministries, ministerial-equivalent bodies and People’s Committees are
                                  responsible for “state administration of credit institutions ”247 within their
                                  competence. In other words, the regulatory and supervisory power of the
                                  SBV is not exclusive and appears to overlap with the powers of other
                                  authorities such as VCA, although the mission team was told that this does
                                  not cause difficulties in practice.
                                  See also Banking Sector Good Practice A.1. and A.3.
                                  Paragraph (c)
                                  All commercial enterprises (including semi-formal NBCIs) must be registered
                                  with a commercial register248 that is publicly available in local offices.
                                  Moreover, enterprises are required to publish information about their
                                  registration “in the business website of the business registration office or in



247
      Article 158(3) and 158(4) of the CI Law.
248
      Article 7 of the Commercial Law and Article 27 of the Law on Enterprises.

                                                                                                                 114
                                                           IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                                   three consecutive issues of a newspaper or electronic newspaper”249. SBV
                                   does not however publish a list of licensed and registered NBCIs.
                                   Paragraph (d)
                                   See Banking Sector Good Practice A.1, paragraph (f).
                                   Paragraph (e)
                                   See Banking Sector Good Practice A.1, paragraph (f).
                                   Currently there are two relevant industry organizations: (i) the Working Group
                                   for Microfinance operating under the Vietnam Association of Small and
                                   Medium Enterprises (MFWG); and (ii) the Association of People’s Credit
                                   Funds. The Working Group for Microfinance, which associates both formal
                                   and semi-formal MFIs, intends to issue a code of conduct as discussed
                                   below (see Good Practice A.2 below). The Association of People’s Credit
                                   Funds acts as a lender of lenders, a training center and a representative of
                                   PCFs. The Association also has some limited self-regulatory functions,
                                   however, these powers are not used in order to deepen or strengthen
                                   consumer protection beyond what is already provided for by general laws
                                   such as the CP Law or CI Law.
 Recommendation                    The financial consumer protection legal regime covering NBCIs requires
                                   clarification so that there is a level playing field established in the sense that
                                   the same consumer protection provisions apply to NBCIs carrying out similar
                                   functions. Ideally, all NBCIs (including currently unlicensed MFIs) would be
                                   either licensed or registered, and supervised, by SBV from the consumer
                                   protection perspective, whilst bearing in mind the need to focus on the areas
                                   of highest risk (which could be particular types of products, services,
                                   providers or market segments) and on developing a proportionate, scalable
                                   approach to supervision. Registered and licensed NBCIs should be listed in
                                   a register maintained by SBV and made publicly available on SBV’s website
                                   and at its branches.
                                   See also the recommendations in Banking Sector A.1 and A.3 concerning,
                                   in particular, the application of the CP law to credit institutions and the role
                                   of VCA, enhancement of SBV’s approach to a single financial sector specific
                                   consumer protection regime.
 Good Practice A.2                 Code of Conduct for Non-Bank Credit Institutions
                                      a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for non-
                                          bank credit institutions that is devised in consultation with the
                                          non-bank credit industry and with relevant consumer
                                          associations, and that is monitored by a statutory agency or an
                                          effective self-regulatory agency.
                                      b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be
                                          publicized and disseminated to the general public.
                                      c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary
                                          codes on matters specific to the industry (credit unions, credit
                                          cooperatives, other non-bank credit institutions).
                                      d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                                          disseminated.
 Description                       Paragraph (a)
                                   At the time of the mission, the MFWG had recently drafted a Code of
                                   Conduct, which had been approved by the MFWG’s BOD and the members,
                                   but was not yet in force. The Code covers both prudential and market
                                   conduct issues such as: (i) demand-driven planning and management; (ii)
                                   client protection and education; (iii) accountability and professional conduct;
                                   (iv) asset quality; (v) efficiency and cost-coverage; (vi) financial
                                   management; (vii) accounting practices; (viii) sustainability; and (ix)

249
      Article 28 of the Law on Enterprises.

                                                                                                                   115
                                                           IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                               transparent reporting. The Code also expressly incorporates principles of the
                               SMART Campaign250 (the core principles relate to appropriate product
                               design and delivery, prevention of over-indebtedness, transparency,
                               responsible pricing, fair treatment of clients, privacy of client data, and
                               complaint resolution mechanisms). Once in force, the Code will be binding
                               on the members and will be enforced by the MFWG leadership: the Code
                               gives the MFWG rights of admission to applicant members and the power to
                               exclude a member. The MFWG’s Code has potential to promote a level
                               playing field among the licensed and unlicensed MFIs that are MFWG’s
                               members, since it applies identical rules to all of them. However, the
                               MFWG’s Code will cover only its member institutions251, thus leaving other
                               credit providers out.
                               Besides the MFWG’s there is no other code of conduct compreh ensively
                               covering a specific sector of NBCIs, even though the mission team was
                               advised that the Association of People’s Credit Funds may decide to issue
                               product-related standards that may be voluntarily adhered to by APCF’s
                               members.
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Pursuant to the MFWG’s Code of Conduct “[t]he [MFWG] Board of Directors
                               (Steering Committee) will adopt and regularly review this Code of Conduct,
                               and will ensure wide publicity and dissemination of the Code to all
                               stakeholders”.
                               Paragraph (c) and (d)
                               Currently, there is no industry-specific code of conduct, besides the
                               proposed MFWG’s Code of Conduct.
 Recommendation                The MFWG’s Code of Conduct should be implemented as soon as possible,
                               with training provided to member MFIs and an appropriate public awareness
                               campaign.
                               The Association of People’s Credit Funds should be similarly encouraged to
                               develop a Code of Conduct for its members, building on the general
                               principles already included in the CP Law and CI Law. A starting point for
                               such a Code could be implementation of the Client Protection Principles
                               developed by the Smart Campaign (as has been done in the MFWG Code).
                               Prospectively, supervision and enforcement of the industry codes of conduct
                               could be undertaken by SBV.
 Good Practice A.3             Other Institutional Arrangements
                                    a. Whether non-bank credit institutions are supervised by a
                                       financial supervisory agency, the allocation of resources
                                       between financial supervision and consumer protection should
                                       be adequate to enable their effective implementation.
                                    b. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution
                                       of any dispute regarding a consumer protection matter with a
                                       non-bank credit institution is affordable, timely and
                                       professionally delivered.
                                    c. The supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions
                                       should encourage media and consumer associations to play an
                                       active role in promoting consumer protection regarding non-
                                       bank credit institutions.




  See www.smartcampaign.org (last visited on May 19, 2014).
250

  MFWG has currently 87 official members including 38 individuals and 49 organizations operating in the microfinance sector. See
251

www.microfinance.vn/category/members/current-members (last visited on August 29, 2014).

                                                                                                                          116
                                                             IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


 Description                         Paragraph (a)
                                     See Banking Sector Good Practice A.1.
                                     Paragraph (b)
                                     In theory, consumers may initiate civil lawsuits in order to protect their
                                     legitimate rights and interests. To facilitate consumers’ access to justice, the
                                     CP Law provides that when initiating a lawsuit consumers “are not obliged to
                                     pay in advance their court charges and court fees .”252 In practice, however,
                                     consumers only rarely go to courts to have their cases resolved, presumably
                                     for the concerns identified in Banking Sector Good Practice A.4.
                                     Paragraph (c)
                                     See Banking Sector Good Practice A.4, paragraph (b).
 Recommendation                      The capacity of BISA should be strengthened so that it can properly
                                     undertake all its responsibilities and effectively supervise and enforce
                                     consumer protection regulation during on-site and off-site inspections in
                                     respect of NBCIs, and bearing in mind the differences in NBCI products as
                                     compared to those in the commercial banking sector. Prospectively, a unit
                                     specialized in consumer protection should be established within BISA. At the
                                     same time, an institutional needs assessment should be conducted to clearly
                                     identify the resources needed to implement all functions assigned to SBV in
                                     the area of consumer protection supervision. This assessment should
                                     provide the needed inputs to prepare a long-term capacity building program
                                     within SBV.
                                     See the further recommendations in Banking Sector Good Practice A.3 and
                                     A.4.
 Good Practice A.4                   Registration of Non-Bank Credit Institutions
                                     All financial institutions that extend any type of credit to households
                                     should be registered with a financial supervisory authority.
 Description                         See Good Practice A.1 above concerning the fact that there are significant
                                     numbers of NBCIs which are not licensed, or supervised, under the CI Law
                                     notwithstanding its apparently broad scope of application.
 Recommendation                      See Good Practice A.1 above.

 SECTION B                           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

 Good Practice B.1                   Information on Customers
                                         a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a non-bank
                                            credit institution should gather, file and record sufficient
                                            information from the consumer to enable the institution to
                                            render an appropriate product or service to that consumer.
                                         b. The extent of information the non-bank credit institution
                                            gathers regarding a consumer should:
                                             (i)    be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the
                                                    product or service either being proposed to or sought by
                                                    the consumer; and
                                             (ii)   enable the institution to provide a professional service to
                                                    the consumer in accordance with that consumer’s
                                                    capacity.




252
      Article 43(2) of the CP Law.

                                                                                                                   117
                                                             IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


 Description                    Paragraph (a)
                                VBSP and MFIs have developed a specific model that ensures collection and
                                assessment of information on creditworthiness of customers and affordability
                                of loans. The system builds on the structure of mass organizations (primarily
                                the Women’s Union) and local communities. Borrowers and potential
                                borrowers are organized in small groups (sometimes called Savings and
                                Credit Groups) ranging from 5 to 20 members depending on the size of the
                                community. The group decides on the eligibility of its members for credit – a
                                list of eligible borrowers is voted upon based on financial situation and needs
                                of the members, who are usually assessed as households rather than as
                                individuals. Furthermore, a representative of the respective NBCI visits the
                                potential borrower in his/her home to examine the financial situation on-site.
                                In the case of VBSP and MFIs, as noted by SBV, according to the PM
                                Decision 03 VBSP and micro-finance institutions have become mandatory
                                members of NCIC. Thus, VBSP is participating in the credit registry, while
                                from the three licensed MFIs only one has been actively using NCIC
                                although, most likely, the other two will start in 2015. Further, advice has
                                been received from SBV since the mission that NCIC has provided
                                guidelines and developed an e-portal for information exchanges between
                                NCIC and credit institutions.
                                See also Banking Sector Good Practice B.1.
                                Paragraph (b)
                                See Banking Sector Good Practice B.1.
 Recommendation                 See Banking Sector Good Practice B.1.
 Good Practice B.2              Affordability
                                   a. When a non-bank credit institution makes a recommendation
                                       regarding a product or service to a consumer, the product or
                                       service it offers to that consumer should be in line with the need
                                       of the consumer.
                                   b. Sufficient information on the product or service should be
                                       provided to the consumer to enable him or her to select the
                                       most suitable and affordable product or service.
                                   c. When a non-bank credit institution offers a new credit product
                                       or service that significantly increases the amount of debt
                                       assumed by the consumer, the consumer’s credit worthiness
                                       should be properly assessed.
 Description                    Paragraph (a)
                                See Good Practice B.1 above and see Banking Sector Good Practice B.2.
                                Paragraph (b)
                                There are various disclosure requirements both at the general, as well as the
                                sector-specific level to provide information about the offered product or
                                service.253 A specific emphasis is put on disclosure of price (interest rates)
                                and information about the provider. However, the requirements are rather
                                general (for instance formal requirements on disclosures are missing), which
                                may cause difficulties in practical application. Moreover, current disclosure
                                requirements mostly prescribe for general publication of information, while
                                individualized (customer-tailored) pre-contractual disclosure requirements
                                are fragmented and incomplete.254
                                See Banking Sector Good Practice B.2.

253
    See, e.g. Article 8(2) of the CP Law, Article 14(1) of the Commercial Law, the articles 6 and 13(2) of the Law on Prices, the
articles 10(4), 10(5), 25, 39, and 91(1) of the CI Law, Article 14(2) of the Decree on Consumer Protection, Article 6(2) of the
Circular on ATMs, or Article 5(2) and (3) of the Circular on Debit Card Charges.
254
    Requirements regarding individualized pre-contractual disclosure are mainly set in the articles 8(2), 12(6), and 17(1) of the CP
Law.

                                                                                                                              118
                                                            IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                                Paragraph (c)
                                See Good Practice B.1 above and see Banking Sector Good Practice B.2.
 Recommendation                 See Banking Sector Good Practice B.2. The recommendations there should
                                apply to all NBCIs, not only those operating under the CI Law.
 Good Practice B.3              Cooling-off Period
                                   a. Unless explicitly waived by the consumer in writing, a non-bank
                                       credit institutions should provide the consumer a cooling-off
                                       period of a reasonable number of days immediately following
                                       the signing of an agreement between the institution and the
                                       consumer.
                                   b. On his or her written notice to the non-bank credit institution
                                       during the cooling-off period, the consumer should be
                                       permitted to cancel or treat the agreement as null and void
                                       without penalty to the consumer of any kind.
 Description                    Paragraphs (a) and (b)
                                No cooling-off period has been established by law. However, in the case of
                                distance contracts, when a trader fails to disclose information as required by
                                the Decree No. 99/2011/ND-CP, a consumer may unilaterally terminate the
                                contract within 10 days after its conclusion without any penalty or costs being
                                charged.255 Similarly, in the case of door-to-door contracts any contract may
                                be terminated by a consumer within 3 working days after its conclusion.256
                                See also Banking Sector Good Practice B.3.
 Recommendation                 See Banking Sector Good Practice B.3.
 Good Practice B.4              Bundling and Tying Clauses
                                   a. As much as possible, non-bank credit institutions should avoid
                                       the use of tying clauses in contracts that restrict the choice of
                                       consumers.
                                   b. In particular, whenever a borrower is required by a non-bank
                                       credit institution to purchase any product, including an
                                       insurance policy, as a pre-condition for receiving a loan, the
                                       borrower should be free to choose the provider of the product
                                       and this information should be made known to the borrower.
                                   c. Also, whenever a non-bank credit institution contracts with a
                                       merchant as a distribution channel for its credit contracts, no
                                       exclusionary dealings should be permitted.
 Description                    Paragraphs (a) and (b)
                                In the NBCI sector, tying and bundling does not seem to be a significant issue
                                yet, mostly due to the relatively underdeveloped market for ancillary
                                consumer financial products. Instead of mandatory insurance or other
                                ancillary products, MFIs may require and do require compulsory deposits.
                                Currently, there is no legal provision prohibiting tying and bundling practices;
                                however consumers are expressly granted the right to select goods and
                                services according to their actual needs and conditions.257
                                Paragraph (c)
                                Besides general anti-trust requirements258 there is currently no prohibition of
                                exclusionary dealings between credit institutions and merchants.
 Recommendation                 See Banking Sector Good Practice B.4.


255
    Article 17(3) of the Decree No. 99/2011/ND-CP, detailing and guiding a number of articles of the Law on Protection of Consumer
Rights.
256
    Article 19(3) of the Decree No. 99/2011/ND-CP, detailing and guiding a number of articles of the Law on Protection of Consumer
Rights.
257
    Article 8(2) of the CP Law.
258
    Law No. 27/2004/QH11 on Competition.

                                                                                                                            119
                                                                IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


  Good Practice B.5                Key Facts Statement
                                      a. Non-bank credit institutions should have a Key Facts Statement
                                          for each type of account, loan or other products or services.
                                      b. The Key Facts Statement should be written in plain language,
                                          summarizing in a page or two the key terms and conditions of
                                          the specific financial product or service, and allowing
                                          consumers the possibility of easily comparing products offered
                                          by different institutions.
  Description                      Paragraph (a) and (b)
                                   Currently there are no requirements to provide consumers with a Key Facts
                                   Statement. (For discussion on disclosures refer to Good Practice B.7)
  Recommendation                   SBV should require non-bank credit institutions to provide consumers with
                                   standardized Key Facts Statements that allow them to easily understand and
                                   compare offers by different financial service providers. The Key Facts
                                   Statements should be drafted in cooperation with the industry association,
                                   VINASTAS and its members, mass organizations and local authorities,
                                   taking into account the most important concepts for each type of basic retail
                                   financial product they offer and specific features characteristic to different
                                   types of credit providers. These formats should be tested using consumer
                                   research tools such as focus groups or interviews, and revised, approved
                                   and incorporated into SBV regulations.
                                   See also Banking Sector Good Practice B.8.
 Good Practice B.6                 Advertising and Sales Materials
                                      a. Non-bank credit institutions should ensure that their
                                          advertising and sales materials and procedures do not mislead
                                          customers.
                                      b. All advertising and sales materials should be easily readable
                                          and understandable by the general public.
                                      c. Non-bank credit institutions should be legally responsible for
                                          all statements made in advertising and sales materials (i.e. be
                                          subject to the penalties under the law for making any false or
                                          misleading statements).
 Description                       Paragraph (a)
                                   The primary source of rules on advertisements is the Law on Advertising. 259
                                   The Law includes a general prohibition of false, misleading or unfair (in the
                                   sense of anti-competitiveness) advertising.260 For more details refer to
                                   Banking Sector Good Practice B.9, paragraph (c).
                                   Paragraph (b)
                                   See Banking Sector Good Practice B.9, paragraph (b).
                                   Paragraph (c)
                                   Advertisers must ensure that the provided service is consistent with the
                                   advertisement.261 Advertisers, as well as advertising service providers and
                                   advertisement publishers, are also responsible for accuracy of information
                                   used in advertisements.
 Recommendation                    See Banking Sector Good Practice B.9.




259
      Law No. 16/2012/QH13 on Advertising.
260
      Article 8(9) and Article 19 of the Law on Advertising. The rules are repeated in Article 109 of the Commercial Law.
261
      Article 12(2)(b) of the Law on Advertising.

                                                                                                                            120
                                                         IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


 Good Practice B.7              General Practices
                                Specific rules on disclosure and sales practices should be included in
                                the non-bank credit institutions’ code of conduct and monitored by the
                                relevant supervisory authority.
 Description                    Multiple legal sources provide for disclosure requirements and sales
                                practices:
                                  i.    CI Law
                                           Public announcement of deposit interest rates, service fees,
                                             and customers’ rights and obligations [Article 10(4)];
                                           Public announcement of the office hours [Article 10(5)];
                                           Pre-operation disclosure [Article 25];
                                           Publication of changed deposit rates and fees [Article 91(1)];
                                 ii.    P Law
                                             Provision of (accurate and complete) information about the
                                              offered service and provider [Article 8(2)];
                                             Publication of prices at “places of business” [Article 12(2)];
                                             Disclosure of “form-based” contracts and general conditions for
                                              transaction [Article 12(6) and Article 17(1)];
                                             Public announcement of general trading conditions [Article
                                              18(1)];
                                iii.    Law on Prices262
                                           Publicity of prices [Article 6(2)];
                                iv.     Decree on Consumer Protection
                                          Publication of model (standard) contracts and general
                                             transaction conditions on websites [Article 14(2)];
                                 v.     Circular on ATMs
                                           Disclosure of fees and terms and conditions [Article 6(2)];
                                vi.     Circular on Debit Card Charges
                                           Publication of card-related charges [Article 5(2)];
                                           Publication of information regarding use of cards [Article 5(3)].
                                The MFWG’s Code of Conduct (as described above in more detail) provides
                                for transparency requirements in compliance with the SMART Campaign
                                Principles: member institutions must present to customers the total amount
                                payable, installments and terms and conditions in simple language. Further,
                                the Code sets rules covering sales practices such as the rules for appropriate
                                product design and delivery channels, responsible lending and responsible
                                pricing, or fair and respectful treatment of customers. The Code is not in
                                force, however, and it is not subject to SBV’s supervision.
 Recommendation                 SBV should require that all types of financial services contracts for
                                consumers are well explained and available for consumers to review before
                                signing (even outside the premises if needed). Specific requiremenst should
                                be adopted for individualized pre-contractual disclosure (See the discussion
                                regarding Key Facts Statements – Good Practice B.5 above).
                                In order to facilitate access to and understanding of the disclosure
                                requirements, the requirements should be consolidated.




262
      Law No. 11/2012/QH13 on Prices.

                                                                                                            121
                                                               IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


 Good Practice B.8                Disclosure of Financial Situation
                                       a. The relevant supervisory authority should publish annual
                                          public reports on the development, health, strength and
                                          penetration of the non-bank credit institutions, either as a
                                          special report or as part of the disclosure and accountability
                                          requirements under the law that governs these.
                                       b. Non-bank credit institutions should be required to disclose
                                          their financial information to enable the general public to form
                                          an opinion regarding the financial viability of the institution.

 Description                      Paragraph (a)
                                  SBV is required to disclose information about the monetary and banking
                                  developments,263 while the Governor must decide on contents of the
                                  information to be disclosed in the State Bank’s annual reports. 264 The most
                                  recent annual report (issued for the year of 2011) includes a chapter on
                                  activities of credit institutions. The chapter provides general information and
                                  aggregate data on governance and management activities, financial
                                  capacity, soundness indicators, and operational risks (including the NPL
                                  ratio). Further, SBV publishes on its website market-wide, aggregate
                                  information such as: the total amount of deposits, yearly growth in deposits,
                                  cash flow, outstanding credit to economy, growth in outstanding credit to
                                  economy, statistics for different types of supervised entities, including total
                                  assets, charter capital, own capital, ratio of credit vs. deposit mobilization,
                                  NPL ratio, the number of different types of cards, the number of deposit
                                  accounts and account balance.
                                  Paragraph (b)
                                  Credit institutions are required to make public their financial statements no
                                  later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year. Credit providers other
                                  than formal credit institutions shall publish their annual statements in
                                  accordance with the Law on Accounting.265
 Recommendation                   SBV should revise the content of its annual reports in order to provide the
                                  information described in Good Practice B.8. Also, SBV should issue its
                                  annual reports on a regular basis so that information about the previous year
                                  is readily available to the general public in a reasonable time after the end of
                                  the year.




263
      Article 37(2) of the Law No.: 46/2010/QH12 on the State Bank of Vietnam.
264
      Article 11(1) of the Circular No: 35/2011/TT-NHNN Providing for the Disclosure and Provision of Information of the State Bank.
265
      Law No. 03/2003/QH11, on Accounting.



                                                                                                                               122
                                                             IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector



  SECTION C                          CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE


  Good Practice C.1                  Statements
                                        a. Unless a non-bank credit institution receives a customer’s prior
                                            signed authorization to the contrary, the non-bank credit
                                            institution should issue, and provide the customer with, a
                                            monthly statement regarding every account the non-bank
                                            credit institution operates for the customer.
                                        b. Each such statement should: (i) set out all transactions
                                            concerning the account during the period covered by the
                                            statement; and (ii) provide details of the interest rate(s) applied
                                            to the account during the period covered by the statement.
                                        c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum
                                            payment required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if
                                            the cardholder makes only the required minimum payment.
                                        d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly
                                            indicate the amount paid during the period covered by the
                                            statement, the total outstanding amount still owing, the
                                            allocation of payment to the principal and interest and, if
                                            applicable, the up-to-date accrual of taxes paid.
                                        e. A non-bank credit institution should notify a customer of long
                                            periods of inactivity of any account of the customer and provide
                                            reasonable final notice in writing to the customer if the funds
                                            are to be transferred to the government.
                                        f. When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such
                                            statements should be in an easy-to-read and readily
                                            understandable format.
  Description                        Paragraph (a)
                                     Vietnamese law requires credit institutions to provide account holders with
                                     information on conducted transactions and account balances in accordance
                                     with the agreement concluded between the credit institution and the
                                     customer.266 In other words, it depends exclusively on the agreement
                                     between the credit institution and the customer whether and when an
                                     account statement is provided. Borrowers of MFIs are informed about their
                                     account balance and previous transactions with help of mass organizations
                                     and local groups. For instance, VBSP makes public up-to-date lists of
                                     borrowers, including the total principal amount and outstanding balance. The
                                     list is displayed at VBSP’s transaction centers.
                                     Paragraphs (b) to (f)
                                     No requirements have been prescribed.
  Recommendation                     The requirements set by Article 13(1) of the CI Law should be further
                                     amended in order to comply with the Good Practices listed above. In
                                     particular, there should be requirements to cover the minimum content of
                                     account statements and periodicity (at least monthly if not agreed otherwise).
                                     However, there should be enough flexibility in the requirements for NBCIs of
                                     different categories to implement the requirements in a proportionate
                                     manner. For example, there might not be a requirement to provide
                                     statements for a loan from an MFI for a short fixed term with a fixed interest
                                     rate.




266
      Article 13(1) of the CI Law.

                                                                                                                 123
                                            IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


Good Practice C.2   Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Non-Interest Charges
                        a. A customer of a non-bank credit institution should be notified
                           in writing by the non-bank credit institution of any change in:
                            (i)    he interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of
                                   the customer as soon as possible; and
                          (ii)     a non-interest charge on any account of the customer a
                                   reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the
                                   change.
                       b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or
                           she should have the right to exit the contract without penalty,
                           provided such right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                       c. The non-bank credit institution should inform the customer of
                           the foregoing right whenever a notice of change under
                           paragraph a. is made by the institution.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice C.2.
                    Given the general restriction of unilateral changes, there are no detailed rules
                    on consumers’ rights in the case of actual unilateral change of a contract.
                    While consumers have always an option to repay their loans earlier, in the
                    case or early repayment, a penalty fee is charged up to 150 percent of the
                    principal interest rate calculated from the outstanding amount by some
                    NBCIs.
Recommendation      SBV should clarify to what extent any unilateral change of contracts or terms
                    and conditions is possible under the current regulatory framework. Under all
                    circumstances, non-bank credit institutions should be required by regulation
                    to notify customers in writing of changes in interest rates and non-interest
                    charges.
                    The regulatory framework should allow consumers to exit a contract without
                    penalty in the circumstances described in Banking Sector Good Practice C.2.
                    Credit institutions should be required to inform customers of such right
                    whenever a notice of change of interest rates and non-interest charges is
                    made.
Good Practice C.3   Customer Records
                        a. A non-bank credit institution should maintain up-to-date
                           records in respect of each customer of the non-bank credit
                           institution that contain the following:
                            (i)     a copy of all documents required to identify the customer
                                    and provide the customer’s profile;
                            (ii)    the customer’s address, telephone number and all other
                                    customer contact details;
                            (iii)   any information or document in connection with the
                                    customer that has been prepared in compliance with any
                                    statute, regulation or code of conduct;
                            (iv)    details of all products and services provided by the non-
                                    bank credit institution to the customer;
                            (v)     a copy of all correspondence from the customer to the
                                    non-bank credit institution and vice-versa and details of
                                    any other information provided to the customer in relation
                                    to any product or service offered or provided to the
                                    customer;
                            (vi)    all documents and applications of the non-bank credit
                                    institution completed, signed and submitted to the non-
                                    bank credit institution by the customer;
                            (vii)   a copy of all original documents submitted by the
                                    customer in support of an application by the customer for
                                    the provision of a product or service by the non-bank
                                    credit institution; and


                                                                                                  124
                                                             IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                                              (viii) any other relevant information concerning the customer.
                                        b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible
                                            period for retaining all such records and, throughout this
                                            period, the customer should be provided ready free access to
                                            all such records.
  Description                        Paragraph (a)
                                     There are multiple provisions requiring NBCIs to collect and store information
                                     about their customers:
                                             The AML Law requires credit institutions to collect information on
                                              their customers including their full name, date of birth, nationality,
                                              occupation, position, phone number, identity card number or
                                              passport number, date and place of issue and address of permanent
                                              residence and current residence, in the case of foreign citizens also
                                              the passport number, date and place of issue, visa, and the address
                                              of residence abroad.267 Further, information about the purpose of the
                                              relationship between the credit institution and the customer must be
                                              recorded.268 Credit institutions must also classify customers on the
                                              basis of risk by type of customers, product/service used, and place
                                              of residence of the customer.269
                                             On the general level, all traders must keep concluded contracts until
                                              they expire.270
                                     Credit institutions must maintain loan files, including:
                                         loan contracts and data clearly specifying the purpose of use of
                                              loans and files on security measures;
                                         reports on actual financial status of clients;
                                         decisions extending credit signed by competent persons; where
                                              such decisions are collectively made, there must be minutes
                                              specifying the decision which was passed; and
                                         data related to the loan contract arising in the course of using the
                                              loan.271
                                     The requirements listed under (v), (vi), (vii) and (viii) of this Good Practice
                                     above are missing.
                                     Paragraph (b)
                                     Credit institutions must maintain loan files, including information about the
                                     purpose of the loan and customer’s financial status for a period specified by
                                     a law. However, such a period has been specified exclusively for the records
                                     collected in accordance with the AML Law - the record must be kept for the
                                     5-year period.272 Also, all traders must keep concluded form-based contracts
                                     until expiration.273
  Recommendation                     See Banking Sector Good Practice C.3.




267
      Article   9(1)(a) of the AML Law.
268
      Article   9(3) of the AML Law.
269
      Article   12(1) of the AML Law.
270
      Article   17(2) of the CP Law.
271
      Article   96(1) of the CI Law.
272
      Article   27 of the AML Law.
273
      Article   17(2) of the CP Law.

                                                                                                                  125
                                                      IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


  Good Practice C.4            Credit Cards
                                    a. There should be clear rules on the issuance of credit cards and
                                       related customer disclosure requirements.
                                    b. Non-bank credit institutions, as credit card issuers, should
                                       ensure that personalized disclosure requirements are made in
                                       all credit card offers, including fees and charges (including
                                       finance charges), credit limit, penalty interest rates and method
                                       of calculating the minimum monthly payment.
                                    c. Non-bank credit institutions should not be permitted to impose
                                       charges or fees on pre-approved credit cards that have not
                                       been accepted by the customer.
                                    d. Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment
                                       warnings on each monthly statement and the total interest
                                       costs that will accrue if the cardholder makes only the
                                       requested minimum payment.
                                    e. Among other things, the rules should also:
                                       (i)     restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and
                                               marketing of credit cards to young adults (below age of
                                               21) who have no independent means of income;
                                       (ii)    require reasonable notice of changes in fees and
                                               interest rates increase;
                                       (iii)   prevent the application of new higher penalty interest
                                               rates to the entire existing balance, including past
                                               purchases made at a lower interest rate;
                                       (iv)    limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged
                                               when consumers exceed their credit limits;
                                       (v)     prohibit a practice called ―double-cycle billing‖ by
                                               which card issuers charge interest over two billing
                                               cycles rather than one;
                                       (vi)    prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly
                                               payments in ways that maximize interest charges to
                                               consumers; and
                                       (vii)   limit up-front fees charged on sub-prime credit cards
                                               issued to individuals with bad credit.
                                    f. There should be clear rules on error resolution, reporting of
                                       unauthorized transactions and of stolen cards, with the ensuing
                                       liability of the customer being made clear to the customer prior
                                       to his or her acceptance of the credit card.
                                   g. Non-bank credit institutions and issuers should conduct
                                       consumer awareness programs on the misuse of credit cards,
                                       credit card over-indebtedness and prevention of fraud.
  Description                  Regulatory requirements regarding the issuance of credit cards are set by
                               the Regulation on Issuance, Use and Payment of Bank Cards and Provision
                               of Bank Card Support Service,274 which applies on banks as well as non-
                               bank credit institutions. For more details see Banking Sector - Good Practice
                               C.5.
  Recommendation               See Banking Sector Good Practice C.5.
  Good Practice C.5            Debt Recovery
                                    a. All non-bank credit institutions, agents of non-bank credit
                                       institutions and third parties should be prohibited from
                                       employing any abusive debt collection practice against any
                                       customer of the non-bank credit institution, including the use
                                       of any false statement, any unfair practice or the giving of false
                                       credit information to others.
                                    b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a non-bank
                                       credit institution, the person who can collect any such debt and

274
      Promulgated by Decision No. 20/2007/QD-NHNN.

                                                                                                          126
                                                               IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                                         the manner in which that debt can be collected should be
                                         indicated to the customer of the non-bank credit institution
                                         when the credit agreement giving rise to the debt is entered into
                                         between the non-bank credit institution and the customer.
                                      c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a non-
                                         bank credit institution customer’s debt without informing that
                                         party (i) of the debt collector’s right to do so; and (ii) the type of
                                         information that the debt collector is seeking.
                                      d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is
                                         allowed by law, the borrower should be:
                                           (i)    notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable
                                                  number of days;
                                          (ii)    informed that the borrower remains obligated on the
                                                  debt; and
                                          (iii)   provided with information as to where to make payment,
                                                  as well as the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact
                                                  information.
  Description                    The Vietnamese credit market is experiencing low levels of NPLs ratios
                                 below 3 percent275 after quite turbulent previous years. MFIs report NPLs
                                 below 1 percent. Based on the information collected during the mission, the
                                 low levels of NPLs may be partially explained due to strict underwriting
                                 policies applied by some of the credit institutions. Moreover, in the case of
                                 MFIs (and VBSP) their underwriting policies are effectively complemented
                                 by debt recovery mechanisms that use structures of local government, mass
                                 organizations and local communities. The mission team was told that MFIs
                                 try to distinguish between reasons for late payments: if the reasons are
                                 objective (e.g. illness), the MFI mobilizes the relevant group to help the
                                 borrower to deal with the situation (another option would be to “freeze” the
                                 loan, that is, postpone repayment of interests); when the reason for late
                                 payments is deemed unreasonable, then a peer pressure will be exercised
                                 through mass organizations or local groups in order to ensure repayment.
                                 Paragraph (a)
                                 The Vietnamese regulatory framework expresses a preference for debt
                                 restructuring in the case of default: pursuant to the Regulation on Lending
                                 by Credit Institutions to Clients in the case when (i) repayment of principal or
                                 interest falls due, (ii) the customer is unable to repay on time, and (iii) the
                                 repayment period of principal or interest is not adjusted or extended, the
                                 credit institution shall reclassify the whole of the outstanding debt as an
                                 overdue debt.276 Overdue payments may be rescheduled when (i) a client is
                                 unable to repay the principal on the due date as agreed in the credit contract
                                 and makes a written request to adjust the schedule for repayment; (ii) a client
                                 fails to repay the whole of the principal within the loan term as agreed in the
                                 credit contract and makes a written request to extend the term of the debt. 277
                                 For information on debt collection, refer to Banking Sector Good Practice
                                 C.8.
                                 Paragraph (b)
                                 No such a requirement is prescribed.



275
    State Bank of Vietnam: Annual Report 2011, 39 (SBV, 2011). On the other hand, Vietnam News Brief issued on 22.5.2014
indicates inconsistencies in the reported numbers: “[t]he non-performing loan (NPL) ratio, as reported by the credit institutions, fell
sharply in the fourth quarter of 2013 and down to 3.61 percent at the end of the year.”
276
    Article 13(2) of the Regulations on Lending by Credit Institutions to Clients.
277
    Article 22 of the Regulations on Lending by Credit Institutions to Clients. For short term loans, the maximum period of debt term
extension shall be 12 months, while for medium and long term loans, the maximum period of debt term extension shall be equal
to one half of the loan term agreed in the credit contract. The chairman of the board of management or the general director
(director) of the credit institution may decide on exceptions and report it to SBV.

                                                                                                                                 127
                                                                    IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                                      Paragraph (c)
                                      No such a requirement is prescribed.

                                      Paragraph (d)
                                      If not agreed otherwise with the customer, credit institutions have the right to
                                      deal with the assets securing the loan as agreed in the credit contract in order
                                      to recover the debt or to require the guarantor to fulfill the obligations in the
                                      guarantee where the customer has provided a guarantee for the loan. 278
                                      Credit institutions may also trade in debts in accordance with SBV
                                      regulations and carry out debt restructurings, debt blockades or debt write-
                                      offs in accordance with regulations of the Government.279
                                      The Civil Code establishes general rules under which business organizations
                                      may transfer their rights to a third party, while they shall notify in writing the
                                      obligor, whose consent is not required if not otherwise prescribed by law or
                                      agreed by parties.280 Specific provisions require credit institutions to obtain
                                      the consumer’s consent with any transfer of the obligation is included in the
                                      CP Law: a clause of contract that allows any business organization to
                                      transfer its rights and obligations to a third party without the consumer’s
                                      consent is null and void.281
                                      There are no further detailed rules regarding this Good Practice.
  Recommendation                      See Banking Sector Good Practice B.5.
                                      Industry associations should consider the inclusion of provisions on debt
                                      collection practices in codes of conduct applicable to all their members and
                                      adequately enforced by the associations.




278
      Article   25(1)(e) of the Regulations on Lending by Credit Institutions to Clients.
279
      Article   25(1)(g) of the Regulations on Lending by Credit Institutions to Clients.
280
      Article   309(1) and (2) of the Civil Code.
281
      Article   16(1)(m) of the Civil Code.

                                                                                                                      128
                                                         IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector



 SECTION D                     PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

 Good Practice D.1             Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                                  a. The financial transactions of any customer of a non-bank
                                      credit institution should be kept confidential by the institution.
                                  b. The law should require non-bank credit institutions to ensure
                                      that they protect the confidentiality and security of personal
                                      data of their customers against any anticipated threats or
                                      hazards to the security or integrity of such information, and
                                      against unauthorized access.
 Description                   Paragraph (a)
                               Regulation of privacy and data protection is very limited and there is
                               currently no authority exclusively supervising and enforcing personal data
                               protection rules.
                               The most comprehensive regulation of protection of consumers’
                               information is set by Article 6 of the CP Law, which provides that
                               consumers’ information must be kept safe and confidential when they
                               participate in transactions except where competent state agencies require
                               the information. Consumers must be “clearly and openly” informed in
                               advance about the purpose of the collection and use of their personal data
                               and must provide their consent with the use of such data. The information
                               shall not be used for any other purpose than for the one on which the
                               consumer was notified.
                               Further, credit institutions must ensure confidentiality of information about
                               accounts, deposits, deposited assets and transactions of clients conducted
                               at such credit institution.282 Confidential information may be disclosed only
                               with the customer’s consent.283
                               Paragraph (b)
                               Pursuant to Article 6(2)(c) of the CP Law the organizations and individuals
                               trading goods and/or services must ensure safety, accuracy and
                               completeness of information.
                               Regarding technological aspects of data protection and IT security SBV has
                               issued Circular No. 01/2011/TT-NHNN on the Information Technology
                               Safety in Banking Operations. Further, specific provisions regulate the
                               provision of Internet banking services.284 Besides requirements on
                               confidentiality and security, the Circular on Internet Banking prescribes for
                               pre-contractual disclosure285 and disclosure regarding collection and
                               processing of customers’ data.286 Further specific requirements covering
                               use of personal information in the digital environment have been set by the
                               Law on Information Technology.
 Recommendation                An agency with a leading role in protection of consumers’ data and privacy
                               should be identified. Regarding financial institutions, it might be considered
                               to entrust SBV with these powers.

                               SBV should review the current practice in which information about
                               borrowers is being publicly displayed: for instance VBSP and some other
                               microfinance institutions post information about their borrowers (including
                               names, loans disbursed or actual balance) at branches or other public
                               places. SBV should assess the practice against the regulatory framework

282
    Article 14(2) of the CI Law.
283
    Article 14(3) of the CI Law.
284
    See, e.g. the articles 3(1) or 4 of Circular No.29/201/TT-NHNN Defining Safety, Confidentiality over Provision for Banking
Service on the Internet (Circular on Internet Banking).
285
    Article 5(a) of the Circular on Internet Banking.
286
    Article 55(b) of the Circular on Internet Banking.

                                                                                                                         129
                                                        IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


                                  as described above. Furthermore, SBV should identify the risks that such
                                  practice may pose to privacy and safety of consumers and to consumers’
                                  rights.

                                  See also Banking Sector Good Practice D.1.
 Good Practice D.2                Credit Reporting

                                       a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight,
                                          with sufficient enforcement authority.
                                       b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely and
                                          sufficient data. The system should also maintain rigorous
                                          standards of security and reliability.
                                       c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit
                                          reporting system should be: (i) clear, predictable, non-
                                          discriminatory, proportionate and supportive of consumer
                                          rights; and (ii) supported by effective judicial or extrajudicial
                                          dispute resolution mechanisms.
                                       d. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include
                                          the right of the consumer

                                            (i)    to consent to information-sharing based upon the
                                                   knowledge of the institution’s information -sharing
                                                   practices;
                                           (ii)    to access his or her credit report free of charge (at
                                                   least once a year), subject to proper identification;
                                           (iii)   to know about adverse action in credit decisions or
                                                   less-than-optimal conditions/prices due to credit
                                                   report information;
                                           (iv)    to be informed about all inquiries within a period of
                                                   time, such as six months;
                                           (v)     to correct factually incorrect information or to have it
                                                   deleted and to mark (flag) information that is in
                                                   dispute;
                                           (vi)    to reasonable retention periods of credit history; and
                                           (vii)   to have information kept confidential and with
                                                   sufficient security measures in place to prevent
                                                   unauthorized access, misuse of data, or loss or
                                                   destruction of data.
                                      e. The credit registers, regulator and associations of non-bank
                                          credit institutions should undertake campaigns to inform and
                                          educate the public on the rights of consumers in the above
                                          respects, as well as the consequences of a negative personal
                                          credit history.
 Description                      VBSP and MFIs have developed specific features of the underwriting
                                  process as previously discussed (e.g. local credit groups) and they have
                                  recently started using NCIC as well.287 Finance institutions use NCIC too.

                                  For more information see Banking Sector Good Practice D.4.
 Recommendation                   See Banking Sector Good Practice D.4.




287
      Responsible Finance in Vietnam, 36 (IFC, 2014).

                                                                                                          130
                                                            IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector




 SECTION E                        DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM

 Good Practice E.1                Internal Complaints Procedure

                                  Complaint resolution procedures should be included in the non-bank
                                  credit institutions’ code of conduct and monitored by the supervisory
                                  authority.
 Description                      Pursuant to the CP Law, consumers have the right to complain 288 and this
                                  right cannot be restricted.289 Besides this general rule, there is a specific
                                  provision in the Circular on Debit Card Charges that lists among the
                                  responsibilities of card issuers the obligation to answer and in a timely
                                  manner handle questions, complaints or technical problems of
                                  cardholders.290 Otherwise, there is a lack of precise complaints handling
                                  requirements, which translates into a rather diverse approach towards
                                  handling of consumer complaints.

                                  In general, NBCIs do not have written internal policies regarding complaints
                                  handling, which opens a space for inconsistency in complaints resolution.
                                  Moreover, complaints are only rarely recorded. Therefore any substantial
                                  data on number of complaints, their frequency and matters is missing.

                                  Credit institutions keep open different channels to file a complaint: (i) in
                                  person, (ii) through a complaints box, (iii) over the phone, mail or e-mail.
                                  However, there is a little evidence that the information on the channels for
                                  lodging complaints is properly disclosed to consumers. Since complaints
                                  are not recorded, NBCIs do not have precise statistics on the number of
                                  complaints received, they do not assess complaints to identify root causes
                                  of the most frequent complaints and to adopt an adequate action plan to
                                  address the root causes. NBCIs also do not report to SBV on the complaints
                                  received.
 Recommendation                   SBV should issue a regulation in order to prescribe for minimum
                                  requirements regarding complaints handling. The requirements should
                                  cover the following areas:

                                           disclosure requirements;
                                           channels for filing a complaint;
                                           a single complaints database;
                                           time limits;
                                           resolution of complaints;
                                           assessment of data on complaints; and
                                           reporting.

                                  See also Banking Sector Good Practice E.1.




288
      Article 8(7) of the CP Law.
289
      Article 16(1)(b) of the CP Law.
290
      Article 5(4) of the Circular No. 35/2012/TT-NHNN Stipulating on Charges of the Domestic Debit Card Service.

                                                                                                                    131
                                          IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector


Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms

                       a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek
                           affordable and efficient third-party recourse, such as an
                           ombudsman, in the event the complaint with the non-bank
                           credit institution is not resolved to the consumer’s
                           satisfaction in accordance with internal procedures.
                       b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution in dealing
                           with consumer disputes should be made known to the public.
                       c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial
                           and act independently from the appointing authority, the
                           industry and the parties to the dispute.
                       d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution
                           should be binding upon non-bank credit institutions. The
                           mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of these decisions
                           should be established and publicized.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice E.2.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice E.2.
SECTION F           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT
Good Practice F.1   Broadly based Financial Capability Program

                         a. A broadly based program of financial education and
                             information should be developed to increase the financial
                             capability of the population.
                         b. A range of organizations–including government, state
                             agencies and non-governmental organizations–should be
                             involved in developing and implementing the financial
                             capability program.
                         c. The government should appoint an institution such as the
                             central bank or a financial regulator to lead and coordinate the
                             development and implementation of the national financial
                             capability program.
Description         Currently, there are no coordinated activities focused on financial education
                    relating to NBCIs. However, some NBCIs publish leaflets in order to
                    promote and explain their products.

                    Further, mass organizations and local groups are used to educate clients,
                    including method of calculation of interest rates. In some cases, the training
                    may be mandatory in order for a borrower to be eligible for a loan.

                    For more information see Banking Sector Good Practice G.1.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.1.
Good Practice F.2   Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media

                       a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken by the relevant
                           authority to improve the financial capability of the population,
                           and especially from low-income communities.
                       b. The mass media should be encouraged by the relevant
                           authority to provide financial education, information and
                           guidance to the public, including on non-bank credit
                           institutions and the products and services they offer.
                       c. The government should provide appropriate incentives and
                           encourage collaboration between governmental agencies, the
                           supervisory authority for non-bank credit institutions, the
                           associations of non-bank credit institutions and consumer
                           associations in the provision of financial education,
                           information and guidance to consumers.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice G.2
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.2

                                                                                                132
                                       IV. Good Practices: Non-Bank Credit Institutions Sector




Good Practice F.3   Unbiased Information for Consumers
                       a. Consumers, especially the most vulnerable, should have
                           access to sufficient resources to enable them to understand
                           financial products and services available to them.
                       b. Supervisory authorities and consumer associations should
                           provide, via the internet and printed publications, independent
                           information on the key features, benefits and risks – and,
                           where practicable, the costs – of the main types of financial
                           products and services, including those offered by non-bank
                           credit institutions.
                       c. The relevant authority should adopt policies that encourage
                           non-government organizations to provide consumer
                           awareness programs to the public regarding financial
                           products and services, including those offered by non-bank
                           credit institutions.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice G.3.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.3.
Good Practice F.4   Consulting Consumers and the Financial Services Industry
                    The relevant authority should consult consumer associations and
                    associations of non-bank credit institutions to help the authority
                    develop financial capability programs that meet the needs and
                    expectations of financial consumers, especially those served by non-
                    bank credit institutions.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice G.4.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.4.
Good Practice F.5   Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                       a. Policymakers, industry and consumer advocates should
                           understand the financial capability of various market
                           segments, particularly those most vulnerable to abuse.
                       b. The financial capability of consumers should be measured,
                           amongst other things, by broadly based household surveys
                           that are repeated from time to time.
                       c. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should
                           be evaluated by the relevant authority from time to time.
Description         See Banking Sector Good Practice G.5.
Recommendation      See Banking Sector Good Practice G.5.




                                                                                         133
