DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent.




                       Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 2
Abbreviations and Acronyms (Volumes 1 and 2) ......................................................................... 4
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................ 5
Executive Summary ..................................................................................................................... 6
I.       The Banking Sector In the Philippines ............................................................................. 10
II.      Financial Inclusion in the Philippines ............................................................................... 13
III.     How the Philippines Compares Internationally ................................................................. 14
IV.      General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines ....................... 19

Appendix I: Methodology of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Review ...................... 32
Appendix II : Philippines Financial Access Data: Findex 2012 .................................................... 33
Appendix III: Institutional Structures .......................................................................................... 34
Appendix IV: Models of Financial Ombudsman Structures .......................................................... 35

Tables
Table 1.Summary of Key Recommendations ................................................................................ 8
Table 2. Banking Sector .............................................................................................................. 11
Table 3. Universal and Commercial Banks.................................................................................. 11
Table 4. Physical Composition: Distribution of Physical Network ................................................ 12

Table of Figures
Figure 1.Global Survey: Institutional Arrangements for Financial Consumer Protection .............. 15
Figure 2. Most economies have a legal framework in place and a number reformed between
2010 and 2013 ............................................................................................................................ 16
Figure 3. Legal framework is diffused: in more than a third of countries financial consumer
protection provisions are found in the consumer protection, financial and other laws .................. 16
Figure 4. More than half of the economies with a dedicated team for financial consumer
protection, have it separately from prudential supervision ........................................................... 17
Figure 5. More countries assigned a legal responsibility for financial consumer protection to
financial supervisors and created dedicated teams or units between 2010 and 2013 .................. 17
Figure 6. Most countries have a third party dispute resolution mechanism in place. .................... 18
Figure 7. In a third of economies financial supervisors operate an ombudsman-like entity .......... 18




                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 3
BSP    Bangko Sentral ng Philipinas
CDA    Cooperative Development Authority
CIC    Credit Information Corporation
CIS    Credit Information System
DoJ    Department of Justice
DTI    Department of Trade and Industry
EAPF   East Asia and the Pacific Region
FCAG   Financial Consumer Affairs Group
IC     Insurance Commission
MORB   Manual of Regulations for Banks
NCAC   National Consumer Affairs Council
OFC    Office for Competition
PDIC   Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation
SEC    Securities and Exchange Commission
WB     World Bank




                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 4
At the request of the Bangko Sentral ng Philipinas (BSP), a World Bank team conducted a
Consumer Protection Diagnostic Review of the banking sector in the Philippines between 12
and 23 September 2013, with a particular focus on debit and credit products provided by BSP
regulated banks (CP Review). The mission was received by Dr. Johnny Noe E. Ravalo,
Assistant Governor, Financial Supervision Research and Consumer Protection Subsector,
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) and held extensive consultations with relevant stakeholders
for the purposes of the review. They included senior representatives of: BSP and other relevant
stakeholders including government ministries and agencies universal, commercial, thrift and
rural banks, mobile money providers and banking industry associations.
The CP Review was conducted as part of the SECO-funded “Consumer Protection and
Financial Literacy” program of the World Bank.
The World Bank’s (WB) Good Practices for Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy were
used as a benchmark for the review.1 The areas covered included (i) Institutional Arrangements,
(ii) the Legal and Regulatory framework, (iii) Transparency and Disclosure, (iv) Business
Practices and (v) Complaints handling and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms. Normally a CP
Review would also include Consumer Empowerment and Financial Literacy, but this part of the
Review is to be conducted at a later stage.
The mission was led by Natalyia Mylenko, Senior Financial Specialist, Finance and Private
Sector Development (Philippines), East Asia and the Pacific Region (EAPF). The team included
Rosamund Grady, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, Financial Inclusion and Infrastructure
Practice and Financial Consumer Protection expert and Gem Guiang, Consultant, EAPF.
Adetola Adenuga, Financial Analyst provided inputs and support during mission preparation.

The mission team is grateful for the support and collaboration of all with whom they met and
who have contributed to the final report. The team particularly wishes to express its appreciation
to BSP for their cooperation and collaboration during the preparation of the Review.
The World Bank suggests organizing a dissemination workshop for all relevant stakeholders in
conjunction with BSP to disseminate the findings and recommendations of the assessment. All
relevant stakeholders (government agencies, financial institutions, industry associations and
bodies representing financial consumer interests) would be invited. The final report is also
proposed to be published on the World Bank’s website. The recommendations could also form
the basis for a potential follow-up technical assistance program to be supported by the World
Bank and/or other development partners.




1
 http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Misc/Good-practices-for-financial-
consumer-protection.pdf




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 5
1.       The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental
to increasing both access and usage of financial services in the Philippines, the quality
of those financial services, and supporting further financial sector deepening. Financial
consumer protection is a necessary precursor to building trust in the formal financial sector and
hence in encouraging financial inclusion. Further, consumer protection will help ensure that
expanded access benefits consumers and the economy as a whole. This is because, while
increased access can result in significant economic and societal benefits and enhance financial
stability, it can be neutral or even harmful if consumers are not able to: (i) exercise their rights
as consumers; (ii) select the financial products that suit them best; and (iii) be protected from
mis-selling, fraud, and other market abuses.
2.     A sound consumer protection regime is complemented with prudential regulation
and supervision. Prudential requirements are intended to ensure that the financial promises
made by financial institutions are met, while proper oversight by financial authorities ensures
adherence to these standards. In this sense, actions to strengthen the regulatory framework
and practice of supervision contribute directly to protecting the interests of consumers.



3.      There is an impressive focus on consumer protection in the banking sector in the
Philippines. This is shown by the wide range of laws and of regulatory instruments issued by
BSP (including Circulars) (together “laws”) relating to subjects such as Truth in Lending for loan
products, credit cards, microfinance, electronic banking, investment products, responsible
lending practices, confidentiality and data protection, cross selling of products, outsourcing of
bank functions and compliance systems. Discussions during the mission with BSP and various
banks also support the view that BSP is actively focused on enforcing these laws and in
providing complaint resolution services.
4.      The Philippines also compares well with other economies on its approach to
consumer protection in the banking sector (although there is no “international best
practice” in the strict sense given the importance of country context). This view is
supported by comparing the position in the Philippines to that of 114 other economies surveyed
in the 2013 Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection.2 Details of this comparison are in
Part III of this report below. Yet, there is space for further strengthening of the financial
consumer protection framework as presented in this report and summarized below.




2
 The Global Survey questionnaires were sent to central banks and bank supervisors in 145 economies and 114
responses were received. A summary report on the results is available at responsiblefinance.worldbank.org.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 6
Executive Summary



5.      There are multiple regulators involved in consumer protection in relation to debit and
credit products in the Philippines. Five different agencies are involved in regulation and
supervision: BSP (the lead regulator for banks and quasi banks), the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI) (in relation to the general purpose Consumer Act), the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) (in relation to certain lending companies), the Insurance Commission (IC) (in
relation to certain financing practices of insurance companies and mutual associations) and the
Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) in relation to cooperatives which provide savings and
credit facilities). Other relevant agencies are the National Consumers Affairs Council (NCAC) which
has overarching coordination responsibility for consumer protection in the Philippines and the
Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation. Of particular concern in this context is the lack of clarity
as to the extent to which the Consumer Act applies to banks and the consequential potential for
overlap between the functions of BSP and DTI and, in relation to policy matters, the NCAC.
6.     Supervision of banks in relation to compliance with BSP supervised consumer
protection laws is conducted by the same team that conducts prudential regulation
supervision. There is potential for competing priorities if the same team is responsible for
supervising the safety and soundness of banks and protecting consumers. Assistance is provided
by the Financial Consumer Affairs Group (FCAG) within BSP in raising consumer protection issues,
but FCAG does not currently have power to investigate banks, conduct on-site or off-site
supervision or to impose sanctions.
7.    BSP does not have an explicit mandate in relation to consumer protection. Ideally, the
BSP would have a clearly formulated mandate in consumer protection, which would translate into
adequate powers and resources to carry out the mandate properly.
8.      Whilst there are wide ranging transparency and business conduct laws in place, they
do not apply consistently to similar products and services and there are gaps. The regulatory
framework is strong in a number of respects (such as the truth in lending requirements and debt
collection practices relating to credit cards). However transparency requirements do not apply in the
same way to products which have inherently similar characteristics and there are gaps in relation to
issues such as statements of account and notice of changes in pricing. Some business conduct
issues also need to be addressed: for example in relation to debt collection practices for products
other than credit cards (which are already covered); the training of staff and intermediaries; and the
introduction of prohibitions on provisions which might inhibit prepayments and switching of banks.
Further, the extent to which relevant provisions of the Consumer Law apply to banks is not clear.
9.      Recourse mechanisms for consumers are incomplete. Although all banks met by the
mission team have internal complaints resolution systems, there are no mandated requirements
relating to such schemes. FCAG provides a comprehensive external complaint resolution scheme
from within BSP but has significant limitations on its powers and resources. For example, it cannot
make binding decisions and it cannot conduct on-site examinations of banks.



10.    Table 1 below lists the main recommendations and priority actions to enhance the
framework for financial consumer protection in the banking sector in the Philippines as at
the time of the Consumer Protection (CP) Review. Table 1 does not however provide a
comprehensive summary of all recommendations – rather it summarizes the most significant
recommendations. Further details are in Volume II. The reference to whether a recommendation is
Short Term, Medium Term or Long Term is intended to assist the BSP in developing its priorities for
implementation of the mission recommendations (to the extent that they are accepted). It is




                    Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 7
Executive Summary


envisaged that the relevant periods might be one, two and three years respectively. It is understood
that a number of the recommendations below may be covered by the BSP Financial Consumer
Protection Framework once it is given the force of law.3




    RECOMMENDATION (paragraph number in Volume 1)                       IMPLEMENTED BY       TERM

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
   Separate prudential supervision responsibilities and consumer
    protection responsibilities in BSP and ensure there are                   BSP          Short Term
    appropriate resources for consumer protection (32)
   Commence formal collaboration process with DTI/CDA (33)              BSP, DTI, CDA,    Short Term
   Clarify BSP mandate for consumer protection (34)                          BSP          Long Term
LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
   Clarify application of Consumer Law to banking products and
                                                                           BSP, DTI        Short Term
    services (42)
   Prohibit harassment of debtors in relation to all types of credit
                                                                              BSP          Short Term
    facilities (45)
   Introduce data protection rules for private credit bureaus and
                                                                             SEC           Short Term
    their users (51)
   Ensure current consumer protection framework applies in a
                                                                              BSP         Medium Term
    consistent manner to all banking products and services (38)
   Require debt collectors to be licensed (for BSP supervised
                                                                              BSP          Long Term
    entities) (45)
TRANSPARENCY AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION

   Require all terms and conditions for any banking product or                            Short Term
                                                                              BSP
    service to be provided before contract is finalized (50)

   Require all mandated disclosures to be in plain language and                           Short Term
                                                                              BSP
    at least 12 point font (53)
   Require Key Facts Statements for common debit and credit                               Short Term
                                                                              BSP
    products and that they be in prescribed form (52)
   Require regular statements of account for credit and debit
                                                                                          Medium Term
    products and that information on account balances be                      BSP
    available on request (55)
   Consider need for verbal explanations for illiterate customers
                                                                              BSP         Medium Term
    (52)

   Require customers to be given time to consider contracts (52)             BSP         Medium Term

   Introduce provisions requiring notices about changes to
    interest rates, fees and charges, defaults and mortgages and              BSP         Medium Term
    guarantees (57,59 and 60)

3
  The proposed Framework was reviewed during the CP Review Mission but had not been published at the
time of preparing this report.




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 8
Executive Summary



   Make disclosure requirements consistent across products,
                                                                       BSP           Long Term
    services and channels (50)

   Require customers to be advised about implications of checks
                                                                       BSP           Long Term
    (52)

BUSINESS PRACTICES

   Mandate reasonableness of prepayment fees, default interest
                                                                       BSP           Short Term
    charges and enforcement expenses (64)

   Require banks to ensure that their staff, third party agents and
    authorized representatives are adequately trained and              BSP         Medium Term
    advised on product suitability (67)

   Introduce provisions relieving consumers from the
                                                                       BSP         Medium Term
    consequences of being sold unsuitable products (68)
DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS
   Require banks to have internal complaint resolution systems
                                                                       BSP           Short Term
    (70)
   Consider support for civil society consumer organizations in
                                                                       BSP         Medium Term
    the Philippines (79)
   Require FCAG to conduct a public awareness campaign and
                                                                       BSP         Medium Term
    that banks inform consumers about FCAG (78)
   Give FCAG power to make binding decisions (78)                     BSP           Long Term




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 9
11.      BSP has a broad mandate to regulate the banking and quasi- banking sector. BSP was
established on 3 July 1993 pursuant to the provisions of the 1987 Philippine Constitution and the
1993 New Central Bank Act. The powers and functions of BSP are exercised by the Bangko Sentral
Monetary Board.4 BSP took over from the Central Bank of Philippines, which was established on 3
January 1949, as the country’s central monetary authority. BSP’s mandate is expressed as follows
in s. 3 of RA 7653 The New Central Bank Act of 1993:
    “The Bangko Sentral shall provide policy directions in the areas of money, banking, and credit. It
    shall have supervision over the operations of banks and exercise such regulatory powers as
    provided in this Act and other pertinent laws over the operations of finance companies and non-
    bank financial institutions performing quasi-banking functions, hereafter referred to as quasi-
    banks, and institutions performing similar functions.
    The primary objective of the Bangko Sentral is to maintain price stability conducive to a balanced
    and sustainable growth of the economy. It shall also promote and maintain monetary stability
    and the convertibility of the peso.”
12.     The banking sector is composed of universal and commercial banks, thrift banks,
rural and cooperative banks, as well as quasi - banks. In summary, these different types of
institutions may be described as follows:

       Universal and commercial banks offer the widest variety of banking services among
        financial institutions. In addition to the function of an ordinary commercial bank, universal
        banks are also authorized to engage in underwriting and other functions of investment
        houses, and to invest in equities of non-allied undertakings.

       Thrift and savings banks consist of savings and mortgage banks, private development
        banks, stock savings and loan associations and microfinance thrift banks.

       Rural and cooperative banks (which are differentiated from each other by ownership)
        operate in rural areas and are used for basic banking services.

       Islamic banks which can offer the services described in MORB X101(6).

       Non-banks with quasi banking functions, which the BSP describes as “institutions
        engaged in the borrowing of funds from 20 or more lenders for the borrower's own account
        through issuances, endorsement or assignment with recourse or acceptance of deposit
        substitutes for purposes of relending or purchasing receivables and other obligations.”5




4
S.6 RA 7653 New Central Bank Act.
5
See http://www.bsp.gov.ph/banking/bspsup.asp and also s. 4.6 of the General Banking Law of 2000.


                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 10
                                                                        The Banking Sector in the Philippines



13. Table 2 below shows that the banking sector is dominated by the universal and
commercial banks:


                                                                                                      % Market
                             Total Assets (bill.     % Market share          Deposits            share in terms
                                         PHP)       in terms of total       (bill. PHP)             of deposits
                               End-June 2013           assets (2013)    End-June 2013                    (2013)
Philippine banking
system                               8,616.5                                      6,351.7
Universal banks                      6,836.8             79.34 %                  5,048.7              79.48 %
Commercial banks                       872.7              10.1 %                    596.5               9.39 %
Thrift banks                           710.9               8.3 %                    571.1               8.99 %
Rural banks                            182.8               2.1 %                    126.1               1.99 %
Cooperative banks                       13.1               .15 %                      8.9                .14 %
                                                       6
Source: BSP Philippine Banking System Semester 2, 2013
14.   Table 3 below shows the top universal and commercial banks with their
corresponding assets, loans, and deposits:


                                     Top Banks (in billions of pesos)
                                                                                     Rank
                                                                                       for
                                        Rank                   Rank                  Total
                                         for                     for               Deposit               Total
Name of Bank                           Assets      Assets     Loans      Loans           s            Deposits
BDO Unibank, Inc.                         1        1,339.2         1      772.9          1             1,014.4
Metropolitan Bank & Trust Co.             2        1,218.2         3      523.6          2               878.7
Bank of the Philippine Islands            3        1,008.1         2      558.6          3               824.5
Land Bank of the Philippines              4          682.0         4      245.0          4               542.7
Philippine National Bank                  5          549.3         5      212.6          5               419.6
Rizal Commercial Bank Corp.               6          376.0         7      181.1          8               248.4
Development Bank of the
                                          7
Philippines                                         350.5          9      114.7             11           172.8
China Banking Corp                        8         343.1          6      181.8              6           290.4
Union Bank of the Philippines             9         333.7         11       92.8              7           259.8
Security Bank Corp                       10         293.3          8      125.9             10           178.9
Citibank                                 11         256.0         10       95.2             12           168.6
Source: Business World Research (August 2013)




6
  Other statistics of interest: the BSP Philippine Banking System Semester 2, 2013 also showed that in the
year to end-June 2013, the banking sector grew by 16.2 percent (from P7,410.1b) and that gross NPLs were
at 3.3 percent of the total loan portfolio (TPL), easing from 3.6 percent of a year earlier.



                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 11
                                                                          The Banking Sector in the Philippines


15. The physical network for the banking sector is almost entirely provided by domestic
banks, with universal banks providing the majority of branches:


                                                              Distribution of Physical Network
    As of June 2013                                                                         Branch/Other
                                                    Total               Head Office
                                                                                                Office
                                                                %
                                                  No.      Share         No.    %Share        No.    %Share
    All Domestic Banks                          9,405     98.6 %         663     97.1 %     8,742      98.7 %
      Universal Banks                           4,217        44.2         11        1.6     4,206        47.5
      Commercial Banks                            443         4.6           6       0.9       437          4.9
      Thrift Banks                              1,634       17.1          66        9.7     1,568         17.7
      Rural Banks*                              2,500       26.2         541       79.2     1,959        22.1
      Cooperative Banks                           147          1.5        36         5.3      111           1.3
      Government Banks                            464          4.9          3        0.4      461           5.2

    All Foreign Bank Branches and
    Subsidiaries                                  138      1.4 %         20       2.9 %        118       1.3 %

      Universal Banks                              17        0.2          6         0.9         11         0.1
      Commercial Banks                             93        1.0         10         1.5         83         0.9
      Thrift Banks                                 28         0.3         4          0.6        24          0.3
              Inclusive of microfinance-oriented rural banks
              Source: BSP Philippine Banking System Semester 2, 2013

BSP supervises 7,006 institutions, which represent 27,395 head offices and branches. In its
figures for June 20137, the following were reported:
             Among the number of financial institutions supervised by BSP, the biggest group were
              pawnshops (63.9 percent of total institutions, or 17,514 )8; rural banks and cooperatives were
              the next largest group, with about 577 head offices and 2,070 branches; and
             Due to ongoing industry consolidations, acquisitions and closures, the number of operating
              banks declined by 29 banks during the first half of year 2013, while 365 branch offices were
              added into the physical banking network.
16.     E-banking and payments services in the Philippines are expanding. There is a variety of
e-banking services on offer in the Philippines including internet banking, mobile phone banking and
e-money instruments such as cash or remittance cards and electronic wallets which are accessible
via mobile phones or other access devices. In the BSP 2013 Semester 2 Status report on the
Philippine Financial System9, the following figures were provided on e-banking services (amongst
others):
             74 banks offering an ATM network (67 in 2012)
             62 banks offering electronic wallets (62 in in 2012).
             29 banks offering cash or remittance card products (31 in 2012).
             43 banks offering internet banking (39 in 2012).

7
  BSP Philippine Banking System Semester 2, 2013
8
  The BSP has supervision powers over pawnshops pursuant to Presidential Decree 114 of 29 January 1973.
9
  BSP Philippine Banking System Semester 2, 2013.


                                 Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 12
                                                                        The Banking Sector in the Philippines


         16 banks offering phone banking (non – mobile based) (unchanged from 2012).
         30 banks offering mobile phone banking (24 in 2012).
17.     For completeness it is to be noted that banks are not allowed to outsource “ inherent
banking functions”, which are defined as “servicing the deposit transactions” of a bank.10
This would appear to prevent reliance on agents for the delivery of traditional banking services as
has happened in other countries. However, electronic money services are well developed and it is to
be noted that as at end – June 2013 off-site ATMs grew by 20.5 percent to 5,405 units compared to
on-site ATM growth of 12.9 percent to 7,724 units.
18.       There are two electronic money providers in the Philippines:
         The SMART Money card enables customers to engage in a wide variety of payments
          transactions through either the use of Smart Money MasterCard debit card or through
          a mobile phone (e-wallet) where the Smart Money Card is linked. SMART Money is an
          electronic wallet, similar to a bank account, that allows bill payment, reloads of airtime and
          money transfers using a SMART Mobile phone. With the SMART Money MasterCard, a
          cardholder can also do transactions over the ATM and and Point-of-Sale (POS) terminals. It
          is considered to be a bank based model because the e-money issuer is a bank while the IT
          infrastructure/platform and network of agents are being provided/outsourced to Smart.
         GCash presents a nonbank-based model of branchless banking. GCash clients load
          cash onto electronic “wallets” on their mobile phones from which they can then make
          payments (via SMS) to other GCash clients using their Globe mobile phone. Other services
          include the ability to use the service to pay for utilities, credit cards, Globe Telecom bills and
          top ups for mobile phones. Value in GCash accounts, and information about transactions, is
          held by G-Xchange, Inc. (GXI), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Globe Telecom, Inc. that is
          registered with BSP as a remittance agent and Electronic Money Issuer-Others.11




19.    See Annexure II for details of the 2012 position in relation to financial inclusion in the
Philippines, as reported in the World Bank’s Global Financial Inclusion (Global Findex)
base.12




10
   MORB X162.2 and also s.2.1 of BSP Circular 268 of 2000.
11
   Both are registered as remittance companies under Circular 471 of 2005 and the third parties who provide
cash-in and cash-out services are also required to be registered as remittance agents and comply with the
related AML training requirements as well as other administrative obligations.
12
  http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/EXTPROGRAMS/EXTFINRES/EXTGLOBAL
FIN/0,,contentMDK:23147627~pagePK:64168176~piPK:64168140~theSitePK:8519639,00.html



                              Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 13
20.     Philippines compares well with other economies on its approach to consumer
protection in the banking sector based on the results of the World Bank Global Survey on
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy conducted in 2013. The following paragraphs set
out the indicators we have considered in this context and compare the position of the Philippines
with other economies, as indicated by the 2013 Global Survey.
21.     The Philippines multi-agency model for consumer protection in the financial sector is
a common one: the Global Survey results indicate that 74 percent of jurisdictions with multiple
regulators are involved in financial consumer protection, as is the case in the Philippines. Further, in
26 percent of economies, the responsibilities are shared between financial and general consumer
protection regulators.




                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 14
                                                            How the Philippines Compare Internationally




22.     The Global Survey shows that there are many other countries with the Philippines’
diffuse financial consumer protection legal framework: as mentioned above, the Philippines’
Consumer Law specifically regulates the providers of credit products as well as having general
provisions which appear to apply to all financial services providers. Further, there are also specific
consumer protection provisions within the framework of financial sector laws in the Philippines
(especially in the BSP regulations, but also in SEC and IC regulated laws). The results from the
Global Survey suggesting this is not uncommon are indicated in Figures 3 and 4 below:




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 15
                                                             How the Philippines Compare Internationally




Figure 2. Most economies have a legal           Figure 3. Legal framework is diffused: in more
framework in place and a number reformed        than a third of countries financial consumer
between 2010 and 2013                           protection provisions are found in the consumer
                                                protection, financial and other laws




23.     The proposal to enhance the responsibilities of FCAG is in line with global trends:
FCAG provides complaint resolution and financial education services but does not currently
have power to pro-actively supervise FCP laws. However the mission team understands that
consideration is being given to enhancing the responsibilities of FCAG under the proposed BSP
Financial Consumer Protection Framework so that they have a more direct supervisory role. The
BSP Financial Consumer Protection Framework is envisioned to encompass: (i) standards of
consumer protection conduct for BSP-supervised financial institutions; (ii) on-site consumer
protection assessment; (iii) rating and enforcement actions, (iv) off-site surveillance; and (v) market
monitoring. This would be in line with findings from the Global Survey in which the number of
agencies responding that they have a responsibility for financial consumer protection increased from
74 in 2010 to 97 in 2013. Further, the number of economies that have agencies with dedicated
resources and staff in this area of work also increased from 46 in 2010 to 70 in 2013. To put it
another way, 72 percent of agencies with in responsibility for financial consumer protection had a
dedicated team or unit in place to perform this function, as compared to 62 percent of economies in
2010.
24.     The Global Survey also indicates that there is an increasing trend to separate
prudential supervision and consumer protection supervision. See Figures 5 and 6 below. This
is also broadly consistent with our understanding of the approach being proposed by BSP under the
BSP Financial Consumer Protection Framework.




                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 16
                                                            How the Philippines Compare Internationally




Figure 4. More than half of the economies with a    Figure 5. More countries assigned a legal
dedicated team for financial consumer protection,   responsibility for financial consumer
have it separately from prudential supervision      protection to financial supervisors and created
                                                    dedicated teams or units between 2010 and
                                                    2013


                                                                                   Agency has a
                                                                                   dedicated unit for
                                                     2013             70           consumer
                                                                            97
                                                                                   protection

                                                                                   Agency has a
                                                                                   responsibility for
                                                                                   financial
                                                                 46                consumer
                                                     2010
                                                                       74          protection




Note: data for 100 countries that have a            Note: data for 109 countries with data for
responsibility for some aspect of financial         2010 and 2013
consumer protection in 2013.

25.     The Global Survey suggests there is an increasing trend to require financial
institutions to have internal complaints resolution mechanisms, which we understand is
being proposed in the Philippines and is recommended in this report. According to the Survey
results, financial service providers in 73 percent of economies (83 out of 114) are required to
implement procedures and processes for resolving customer complaints.
26.   As in the Philippines, the majority of economies responding to the Global Survey have
an independent third party dispute resolution mechanism in place, with that service being
provided by the financial supervisor in approximately one third of such economies:




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 17
                                                                       How the Philippines Compare Internationally




Figure 6. Most countries have a third party                    Figure 7. In a third of economies financial
dispute resolution mechanism in place.                         supervisors operate an ombudsman-like entity


        Financial Ombudsman                              69


Mediation /Arbitration service                30


 No dispute resolution system                 29


         General ombudsman               18


                                 0      20     40   60    80




Note: for 114 economies responding 2013                        Note: for 69 economies with financial
                                                               ombudsman of similar institution




                                     Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 18
27.      The overall institutional arrangements for consumer protection applicable to debit and
credit products are somewhat fragmented as there are overlapping, and to some extent
inconsistent provisions, applying to BSP, DTI, SEC, IC and CDA regulated entities. The
institutional arrangements are summarized in Scheme 1 below. The relevant agencies include:
      BSP itself: BSP has a broad mandate over the banking and quasi- banking sector
       expressed as follows in s. 3 of RA 7653 The New Central Bank Act of 1993 (emphasis
       added):
       “The Bangko Sentral shall provide policy directions in the areas of money, banking,
       and credit. It shall have supervision over the operations of banks and exercise such
       regulatory powers as provided in this Act and other pertinent laws over the operations of
       finance companies and non-bank financial institutions performing quasi-banking
       functions, hereafter referred to as quasi-banks, and institutions performing similar functions.
       The primary objective of the Bangko Sentral is to maintain price stability conducive to
       a balanced and sustainable growth of the economy. It shall also promote and maintain
       monetary stability and the convertibility of the peso.”.
       Although the abovementioned mandate does not specifically mention BSP as having a
       consumer protection mandate, there is a variety of consumer protection related laws
       and Circulars applicable to BSP regulated entities. They include (amongst others) the
       disclosure requirements in the Truth in Lending Act (RA 3765) and the related Circulars 730
       and 754 and disclosure rules applying specifically to credit card issuers and the providers of
       electronic banking services.
      The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI): The DTI administers the Consumer Law,
       which specifically regulates the providers of credit products as well as having general
       provisions which appear to apply to all financial services providers. However the mission
       team was told that the DTI relies on two opinions from the DoJ to the effect that the BSP is to
       be considered as the implementing agency for the application of the Consumer Law to BSP
       regulated institutions with respect to consumer credit card transactions. This is
       notwithstanding that the Consumer Law does not mention BSP and the DTI is mentioned as
       the implementing agency for some (but not all) of the relevant provisions.
      The National Consumers Affairs Council (NCAC): The NCAC was established by the
       Consumer Law. It has wide ranging functions (in summary) to rationalize and coordinate the
       functions of all agencies charged with consumer protection in the Philippines and to advise
       on policy and legislation and conduct consumer education functions. Notwithstanding these
       broad functions, the mission team was advised that the budget for the NCAC is a very limited
       budget of around 2 million pesos and it has only 3 full time staff. Its members consist of 4
       consumer representatives, 2 business and industry representatives and representatives of
       the DTI, Agriculture, Health and Education, Culture and Sports. Significantly, its members do
       not include a representative of the BSP. However the mission team was advised that there is
       consultation with the BSP on relevant programs.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 19
                                    General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines


        The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC): The SEC has jurisdiction over “lending
         companies” (which do not include regulated banking institutions or, indeed, any financial
         institution otherwise regulated).13 The only specific consumer protection provision in the SEC
         Lending Company Act appears to be designed to ensure that loan agreements with Lending
         Companies are consistent with RA 3765 Truth in Lending Act of 1963 and with RA 7394 The
         Consumer Law of the Philippines. The SEC has also applied the BSP Truth in Lending
         Circular 730 to the institutions they regulate.14
        The Cooperative Development Authority (CDA): The CDA is responsible for regulating
         and registering cooperatives (which include credit cooperatives and the purposes of which
         can include the ownership of cooperative banks).15 The promotion and development of
         cooperative banks is described as a “major concern” of the CDA, which is to be undertaken
         in collaboration with the BSP.16 Further, Chapter V111 of the 6938 Cooperative Code
         contains detailed provisions concerning cooperative banks, but makes it clear they are under
         the supervision of the BSP.17. There do not appear to be any consumer protection provisions
         in either RA 6938 Cooperative Code of the Philippines or in RA 6939 Establishment of
         Cooperative Development Authority. However, the CDA has applied the BSP Truth in
         Lending Circular 730 to the institutions they regulate.18
        The Insurance Commission (IC): The IC regulates insurance companies and mutual
         benefit associations, which may provide finance on the security of their policies. The IC, like
         the SEC and the CDA, has applied the Truth in Lending Circular to the institutions they
         regulate.19
        PDIC: The PDIC Charter provides for a deposit insurance scheme for member banks up to a
         prescribed limit which is currently 500,000 Pesos for both individual and corporate customers
         and which applies on a per customer / per institution basis.20 The scheme applies to banks
         incorporated under Philippine laws (such as universal and commercial banks, savings banks,
         development banks, rural banks, cooperative banks and stock savings and loan associations
         and branches and agencies of foreign banks in the Philippines). The PDIC Charter also gives
         PDIC wide ranging powers to deal with insolvent banks. PDIC’s powers are frequently used:
         the mission team was advised that, over the last 5 years, on average around 25 PDIC
         insured banks per year have been closed (in the period until 30 June 2012, 22 had been
         closed).
        The Department of Justice (DoJ): the DoJ has been designated as the Competition
         Authority and an Office for Competition (OFC) has been established to exercise this function.
         The DoJ also supervises the Office for Alternative Dispute Resolution established by the
         Alternative Dispute Resolution Act of 2004.




13
   RA 9474 Lending Company Regulation Act of 2007
14
   Memorandum Circular No.7 series of 2011
15
   RA 6938 Cooperative Code of the Philippines and RA 6939 Establishment of Cooperative Development
Authority
16
   S.12 RA 6939
17
   S.105 RA 6938
18
   Memorandum Circular 2012- 05
19
   Circular 31 of 2011
20
  The PDIC Charter is provided for under RA 3591



                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 20
                                    General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines


28.    Active steps are also being taken to achieve coordination between relevant agencies (.
Of particular importance is the Financial Sector Forum. The Forum, which was launched in 2004,
seeks to deepen coordination among its four participating agencies, including in relation to financial
consumer protection and education issues. The four agencies involved are the BSP, the PDIC, the
IC and the SEC. Collaboration with DTI is also ongoing through the participation of BSP in the
consumer protection initiatives of the NCAC (which is under the auspices of DTI). There is also
ongoing collaboration between BSP and CDA through the participation of BSP in the coordinating
committee organized by CDA which monitors programs, provides a system of consultation, and
recommends policies related to the development of the cooperative sector.
29.     Although the BSP supervises relevant consumer protection laws and, through its
Financial Consumer Affairs Group (FCAG), provides a comprehensive external complaints
resolution service, there are limitations in this approach. From numerous meetings with BSP
supervisory units and banks, it seems to be the case that the BSP seeks to actively supervise the
consumer protection laws currently in place. The limitation is that this supervision is currently carried
out by the same team that undertakes prudential supervision and it is not clear that the relevant
officers have specialized training on consumer protection matters or make use of consumer
protection specific supervisory tools (such as mystery shopping, review of advertisements, or
consumer forums). On-site supervision is also dependent on annual visits (other than in exceptional
cases approved by the Monetary Board or the Governor). Further, although FCAG appears to
provide a comprehensive complaint resolution service, it does not currently have the power to pro-
actively supervise market conduct matters or conduct on-site supervision.



30.     There should be a clear separation within BSP of responsibilities for supervision of
banking consumer protection laws and responsibility for prudential supervision and be
properly resourced so as to encourage pro-active supervision and to avoid conflicts between
supervising financial institutions and protecting the interests of their customers. A practicable
way to achieve this would be to provide FCAG with the relevant responsibilities (as we understand is
currently proposed under the BSP Consumer Protection Framework) on the assumption that FCAG
would also be given the resources to undertake these new responsibilities.
31.    BSP should continue to actively consult and collaborate with other supervisors of
providers of debit and credit products, including the DTI, the SEC, the IC and, in the future,
also including the CDA. This is important to ensure consistency of protection for consumers and to
minimize the risk of regulatory arbitrage.
32.      While the present legal framework provides BSP jurisdiction over banks and quasi-
banks, it may be useful to clarify the legal mandate for consumer protection for the
institutions BSP regulates. S.3 of the New Central Bank Act provides in this regard that “The
Bangko Sentral … shall have supervision over the operations of banks and exercise such regulatory
powers as provided in this Act and other pertinent laws over the operations of … quasi-banks, and
institutions performing similar functions.”




                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 21
                                   General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




33.      A wide range of laws and regulatory instruments (including Circulars) (together
“laws”) apply to the banking sector in the Philippines and support consumer protection.
These include laws in relation to Truth in Lending for loan products, credit cards, microfinance,
electronic banking, investment products, responsible lending practices, confidentiality and data
protection, cross selling of products, outsourcing of bank functions and compliance systems. The
laws specifically applicable to regulated banking institutions are consolidated in the voluminous 2008
BSP Manual of Regulations for Banks (MORB). Details of relevant laws are discussed in Volume II
of this report.
34.    Improvements could, however, be made in a number of respects to the existing
consumer protection framework of laws. The key issues and related recommendations are
discussed below.


35.     Although there are many examples of strong consumer protection provisions in the
laws which apply to BSP regulated entities, they do not apply in a consistent manner and are
incomplete. For example: the requirements for disclosures in the Truth in Lending laws apply to
“loans” (which are not defined); apply in different terms to credit cards; and do not apply at all to
other lines of credit; the provisions dealing with collection of credit card debts do not apply more
generally in relation to all consumer credit products; and periodic statements of account are only
required in relation to check accounts.21 Further there is no overarching requirement for disclosure of
all terms and condition of a banking product.



36.     Conduct a review of the current consumer protection framework applying to BSP
regulated entities to ensure that it applies in a consistent manner to all products and
services. The aim should be to ensure that the same rules apply to products and services which are
similar in nature. For example, transparency and disclosure rules should be the same for all credit
products, subject only to differences in product features (for example, credit card products provide
for revolving balances whereas a fixed term loan product does not). Although specific proposals to
assist with this recommendation are set out below under “Transparency and Disclosure”, it is
considered that a more general review would be helpful.


37.      The Consumer Law and the legislation supervised by the BSP both apply to regulated
banks but there are overlaps and differences. This has the potential to cause confusion amongst
regulated entities and consumers who seek to understand their rights. For example, both laws
contain disclosure requirements for credit contracts but they are expressed in different terms.
Further, the Consumer Law contains specific provisions in relation to credit sale and installment
contracts which reflect the nature of those products. There are also provisions in the Consumer Law
dealing with prepayments, rebates due on prepayment and delinquency and deferral charges and
credit advertising which do not appear in the BSP laws. See Annexure II of Volume II of this Report
for further details of the differences.




21
     MORB X185.12(c)


                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 22
                                     General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines


39.     The inconsistencies are of concern given that the Consumer Law on its face applies to
all service providers, including BSP regulated banks. However the BSP does not at present
supervise compliance with the Consumer Law, although the mission team was told that the DTI
relies on two opinions from the DoJ to the effect that the BSP is to be considered as the
implementing agency for the application of the Consumer Law to BSP regulated institutions with
respect to consumer credit card transactions. This is notwithstanding that the Consumer Law does
not mention BSP and the DTI is mentioned as the implementing agency for some (but not all) of the
relevant provisions. Notwithstanding this lack of clarity, some of the banks the mission team
interviewed said that they treated the Consumer Law as applying to them. For example, they comply
with the provision confirming a borrower’s right to prepay a credit contract22. It is also to be noted
that there is currently a DTI proposal to make the BSP the implementing authority for the application
of the Consumer Law to the institutions it regulates (although to date it is understood that the BSP
has not been consulted on this proposal).



40.   Clarify the application of the Consumer Law to BSP regulated entities and the
products and services they provide, and of the BSP’s supervision mandate in relation the
Consumer Law. This should be preferably achieved through the following steps:
          Conduct a careful review of the Consumer Law to identify those provisions which should
           appropriately apply to regulated banks but are not currently covered by other laws
           specifically applying to such banks (for example, the provisions dealing with prepayments
           and unfair terms); and

          Then apply the relevant provisions to banks, whilst at the same time making it clear that the
           Consumer Law does not apply to banks.
41.     An alternative approach would be for the BSP to actively supervise compliance of
regulated banks with the Consumer Law. This approach would seem to require the BSP to be
formally designated as the “implementing authority” for the relevant general and specific provisions
of the Consumer Law (unless, of course, the BSP wished to rely on the DoJ Opinion referred to
above). However this approach would give rise to supervision and compliance complexities given
the differences between the Consumer Law and BSP specific laws. Therefore, this alternative is not
recommended.


42.    The only laws relating specifically to debt collection practices apply to credit cards,
and there are no laws requiring the licensing of debt collectors. The relevant provisions
concerning harassment of credit card holders were introduced as a result of specific complaints. It is
considered that debt collectors should be supervised more generally given the sensitivity of the
information they handle and the commission incentives they have to take strong measures to collect
debts. Further considerations in support of this view are that, given the ongoing expansion in the
availability of retail banking services in the Philippines and the low levels of financial literacy, there is
a high risk of debtors not understanding their rights in relation to the collection of debts and of them
being abused.




22
     Article 137


                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 23
                                   General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




43.    Debt collectors in the Philippines should be required to be licensed and to comply
with specified business conduct rules. There should also be strict requirements prohibiting the
harassment of borrowers (regardless of the type of debt) and to keep debtor information confidential.
These recommendations are made notwithstanding that there are general controls over the
outsourcing of services by banks as well as regulation against unfair collection practices (helpful
though they are, they do not provide consumers with specific protections).



44.     There is not at present an overarching Competition Law applying to the banking
sector in the Philippines, although it is understood that various attempts have been made to
have such a law passed by Congress in recent years. However this position is not of immediate
concern as the banking system appears to be competitive judging by the number of banks and the
apparent lack of restrictions on switching banks and closing accounts. There are also relevant
provisions in laws applying to BSP entities and in the Constitution. The 1987 Constitution (Article XII,
Section 19) prohibits anti-competitive conduct and unfair competition and there are numerous laws
dealing with different aspects of competition. Although the BSP itself does not have a specific
mandate in relation to competition in the banking sector, to some extent it relies on its mandate over
the operations of the banking sector to exercise this function. For example, mergers of banks require
the approval of the BSP.23 Further, the DoJ has been designated as the Competition Authority and
an Office for Competition (OFC) has been established to exercise this function. The DoJ also
supervises the Office for Alternative Dispute Resolution.


45.    In the long term, we support the enactment of a Competition Law clearly applicable to
the banking sector in the Philippines. However this is not an immediate priority for the reasons
given above.



46.   The provision of clear, standardized and comparable information to consumers–which
is consistent to the extent applicable across all products – is an important mechanism to
promote competition, bringing down the cost of financial products and services.


47.    The requirements for disclosures in contracts for bank services are incomplete and
fragmented because they do not include a requirement to disclose all contract terms, do not
cover debit products and, even in relation to credit products, are incomplete. Although the
mission team acknowledges the importance of the new Truth in Lending rules and the credit card
disclosure requirements, there remain a number of gaps. They include the following:
         There is no requirement for pre-contractual disclosure of all contractual terms or for a
          customer to be given a copy of the contract document;


23
     MORB X108.1



                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 24
                                   General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines


      The Truth in Lending requirements are incomplete in that they do not require disclosure of
       key information such as the term of the loan, repayments or the security to be given;
      The Truth in Lending requirements apply to “loans” but the term is undefined for the
       purposes of MORB 307. For example, it is not clear that this term applies to credit-sales
       contracts for the purchase of cars and other goods;
      The credit card disclosure requirements in MORB X320.4 do not reflect the revolving nature
       of a credit card (for example, they refer to installment loans);
      Further, the credit card disclosure requirements do not apply to other types of revolving credit
       facilities (such as overdrafts and other lines of credit) and do not require disclosure of the
       method for determining the minimum monthly amount due (for example, a percentage of the
       outstanding balance); and
      The use of the “sample” form of disclosure attached to Circular 730 applies only in relation to
       loans (not revolving lines of credit) and its use appears to be optional, provided the required
       information is disclosed in the contract itself.
48.     The current framework also does not address the need to ensure customers
understand the terms of the contracts they are signing and the features of the related
products. This is of particular concern in a country such as the Philippines where there are low
levels of financial literacy and high levels of illiteracy and where the banking products being made
available to customers are changing rapidly and are increasingly complex through their reliance on
new technologies.



49.     Ideally, there would be a comprehensive, consistent contractual disclosure regime
applied to banking products and relevant distribution channels which goes beyond the
current Truth in Lending regime and the disclosure rules for deposit products and credit
cards. For credit products this should include requirements for disclosure of, at a minimum: the
amount borrowed; the applicable interest rate and total interest charges; details of all fees and
charges; whether interest rates are fixed or variable, the method of calculating interest charges (flat
or on a declining basis); the amount and frequency of repayments, of any security given and the
applicable default rate of interest; any applicable insurance premiums and commissions; and a
requirement to give reasonable notice of changes (say 20 days). For deposit products the minimum
information should include: the applicable interest rate; details of all fees and charges; whether
interest rates are fixed or variable; the method of calculating interest charges (flat or on a declining
basis); and any minimum balance requirement. Similarly, there should be a clear requirement for
pre–contractual disclosure of all terms and applicable charges relevant to electronic banking and e-
banking channels. For distribution channels, the minimum information should include notice of fees
and liability in relation to errors and fraud. Further, the requirement to disclose information about
fees on overseas remittances should also apply to remittances in the Philippines.
50.     The abovementioned information is the minimum that should be given to customers if
they are to be able to make an informed decision about the service and to be fully aware of
their rights and responsibilities.
51.   Contract documents could also be made comprehensible through summaries of key
information, clear language and format and explanations from bank staff in appropriate
cases. This might be achieved by implementing the following specific recommendations:




                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 25
                                   General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines


      A Key Facts Statement should be provided on the first page of every contract summarizing
       the key terms. More specifically for loans, it is recommended that consideration be given to
       amending the requirements of Circular 730 so that is clear that the use of the prescribed form
       is mandatory, it is required to be in a minimum of a 12 point font and so that the mandated
       information required to be disclosed includes all key terms of a loan contract. In particular, it
       is considered that the required information should also include the total amount to be repaid,
       the term of the loan, the total amount of repayments and information about any security
       which must be provided (for example, in the case of a housing loan secured by real estate);
      It is also recommended that consideration be given to new requirements to provide a “Key
       Facts Statement” for revolving credit products (such as credit cards and overdrafts) and
       deposit products;
      Contracts should be both intelligible and legible and in a minimum of 12 point font;
      Contract documents should be explained to customers who would not otherwise understand
       them;
      Customers should be given time to consider documents before the contract is signed; and
      Customers should be required to be advised on the implications of issuing checks and their
       liability as drawers or endorsers of checks.


52.    Although statements of account are provided by banks as a matter of practice, other
than in relation to checking accounts, there are no mandated requirements for banks to
provide customers with regular statements or up-date account information on request. This
information would enable customers to check for the accuracy of balances and debits and credits
and generally facilitate management of their accounts. This is particularly important for long term
and revolving credit facilities (such as overdrafts and credit card contracts) and variable rate
contracts.


53.    Consideration should be given to requiring banks to provide regular statements of
account for debit and credit products and, in addition, to make information on account
balances available on request. There should not be any requirement to pay a fee in either case.
Information in statements could include, for example, details of opening and closing balances, debits
and credits and especially of interest charges and fees and charges in the statement period.
Exceptions may apply in particular cases – for example, there might be no need for a statement with
a fixed rate loan where the repayment amounts and all applicable fees are set out in the contract
and there has been no change to the contract requirements.


54.    A further concern is that there does not appear to be any requirement for BSP
regulated banks to advise customers of any changes to interest rates and fees and charges.


55.    There should be a requirement for advance notice to customers of changes to
applicable interest rates and fees and charges. Ideally the amount of notice would be around 20
days so that customers have time to consider the implications of the notice and, if need be, change
banks. This notice should be given by mail, email or having regard to the most appropriate/relevant
channel (given the particular conditions of the client).


                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 26
                                           General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




56.    There do not appear to be specific requirements for debtors to be given a notice of
default and time to remedy the default or for debtors and guarantors to be given notice of the
effect of giving a mortgage or a guarantee (as the case may be). Although the mission team did
not identify any problems in practice in this regard, it is considered that the identified gaps relate to
important consumer protection issues and there is a need for action to be taken.


57.     It is recommended that banks be required to give debtors at least 30 days’ notice
before any action is taken in relation to a default. The notice should include advice as to the
action the debtor needs to take to remedy the default and as to the implications of any acceleration
clause in the contract.
58.    It is also recommended that there be included on the front page of any mortgage or
guarantee document a clear warning in a statutorily prescribed format of the effect of a
default on the relevant loan or of the guarantee (as the case may be). For a mortgage, the
warning could be as simple as a clear statement in large print to the effect that a default means that
the mortgagor could lose their home in the case of default. A similar statement of the effect of giving
a guarantee should also be provided, with a suggestion that the guarantor obtain legal or financial
advice if they have any concerns about the effect of the guarantee.




59.     Consumer protection rights applying to credit information are fragmented and
incomplete. Presently RA 9510 An Act Establishing the Credit Information System and for Other
Purposes provides the legal basis for the establishment of the public–private Credit Information
Corporation (CIC) and contains various provisions designed to protect the rights of data subjects.24
However the Corporation is not yet fully operational. At the same time there are two private credit
bureaus for banking activities operating in the Philippines.25 Debtors whose credit information is held
by these credit bureaus do not have the rights provided for by RA 9510. Further, the credit bureaus
are not required to be licensed and their operations are not supervised in any way. However the
operations of both the credit bureaus and the CIC are also subject to the provisions of the new Data
Privacy Act of 2012.26 The banks using the services of the credit bureaus are also required to
comply with relevant BSP rules (for example, the rule requiring banks to keep up to date information
they have given credit bureaus).27 This fragmentation of the law on credit information means that
there is uneven protection of the rights of data subjects.




24
   60 percent of the stock of the CCIC is to be owned by the National Government and 40 percent by private investors
(Article 5 of RA 9510).
25
   The BAP Credit Bureau operated by the Bankers Association of the Philippines, which provides positive and negative
information (http://www7.bapcb.com/v2_services.bap.htm). The other credit reporting service is provided by TransUnion in
relation to credit cards (http://www.transunion.ph/philippines/business/service-solutions/credit-reporting.page). There is
also a credit bureau for microfinance called the Microfinance Data Sharing System (MiDAS), which was formed by the
seven (7) largest microfinance institutions in the Philippines in 2012 (http://business.inquirer.net/39021/credit-bureau-for-
microfinance-formed ).
26
   RA 10173
27
   MORB X306.7



                                Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 27
                                    General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




60.    The legal framework for the overall credit information system should be reviewed to
address consumer protection concerns in relation to the credit information contained in all
credit bureaus. In summary, there should be a level playing field so that the rights of data subjects
are the same, regardless of whether their information is held by the CIC or a private credit bureau.


61.   The Philippines does not at present have any significant restrictions on the interest
charges or fees that may be charged by banks for credit and debit facilities, which is helpful
from a competition viewpoint. The few restrictions, which we have identified, which do exist are in
the Consumer Law. They include, for example:
        The prohibition on “penalties” for prepaying a contract28;
        A requirement to give at least a 10 days grace period before a delinquency charge is
         payable29; and
        The rule that deferral charges can only be made if they have been previously agreed30.



62.    In the interests of encouraging the ability to switch banks (and completion) and
fairness, limited restraints on the certain fees and charges should be introduced. They
include the following proposals:
        Prepayment and account closure fees could be required to reflect the true cost of the
         closure. This would mean that these fees would only be able to be charged to the extent they
         reflect the reasonable administrative costs of the relevant event;
        Default interest charges should only relate to the amount in default. Ideally these charges
         would only be on the amount in default (i.e. not on the entire outstanding balance) and while
         the default continues; and
        Enforcement expenses should be required to be reasonable.


63.    Although it is understood that banks conduct training programs on a regular basis for
their staff in relation to products and services, there are only limited requirements in this
regard. For example there are specific requirements in relation to directors and officers and
concerning staff engaged in specific activities such as microfinance and anti-money laundering
programs. However there are no requirements of a general nature to the effect that all staff and
intermediaries have to be appropriately trained and qualified so as to ensure that consumers are
appropriately advised.
64.    Further, consumers do not seem to have any rights when they are sold products
which were clearly unsuitable for their needs. For example, there are detailed provisions in place
designed to ensure responsible lending practices from a credit risk perspective, but there do not
appear to be rules in place which deal with the rights of consumers if these rules are breached (and
the consumer receives credit which was clearly not affordable).

28
   Article 137
29
   Article 134
30
   Article 135


                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 28
                                     General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




65.    It is considered that, at a minimum, it should be a banking license condition that the
bank in question must ensure that their staff, third party agents and authorized
representatives are adequately trained and have the skills, experience and professional
qualifications necessary to ensure that they can competently carry out their functions and
advise consumers. This would include, for example, a requirement that those staff and others who
provide financial product advice have all the competencies and qualifications required to ensure that
they perform the services that they are authorized to provide to an acceptable standard and so as to
ensure that products provided to consumers are suitable for their needs, capacity and objectives
(which should also be required to be ascertained).
66.    There should also be provision for protecting a consumer from the consequences of
being provided with unsuitable products. For example, the current regime requiring responsible
lending practices should be reviewed with a view to introducing laws which protect a consumer from
the consequences of “irresponsible” lending. A court might, for example, be given the right to adjust
the amounts payable under the contract or order the discharge of a mortgage or make other
changes to the contract terms. The relevant laws should also be reviewed so as to ensure that they
apply consistently to different credit products and to an increase in the amount of credit, as well as a
new credit facility.




67.     Although all banks met by the mission team have internal complaints resolution
systems, there are no mandated requirements relating to such schemes. It is a fundamental
principle of global standards on consumer protection that “financial services providers and
authorised agents should have in place mechanisms for complaint handling and redress”.31 There
are a variety of reasons why this is important in addition to the fundamental interest in ensuring
consumers are treated fairly and equitably: having such systems in place assists in building trust in
financial institutions which can in turn assist in meeting financial inclusion targets; if information on
complaints is required to be provided to financial regulators it can be a useful source of information
on systemic issues of concern as well as being a source of information for consumers if the
information is required to be published; and, finally, having effective complaint resolution systems in
place reduces the pressure on external dispute resolution bodies such as FCAG.


68.     Organizations regulated by BSP should be required to meet internal dispute resolution
standards set by BSP. At a minimum, the standards should set timelines for resolving complaints,
require regular reporting to the customer and reasons for adverse decisions and require reporting of
complaint statistics to the BSP. International standards on complaint resolution could be helpful in
this context.32




31
   Extract from Principle 9 of the G20 High- Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection (see also the
WB’s Good Practices on Financial Consumer Protection)
32
   See e.g. AS ISO 10002-2006 Customer satisfaction - Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations
(http://infostore.saiglobal.com/store/details.aspx?ProductID=341668)


                            Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 29
                                   General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




69.       At present the responsibility for providing an external dispute resolution system in the
Philippines rests with FCAG in BSP. BSP does not have explicit power to deal with consumer
complaints but at present provides a comprehensive complaint investigation and mediation
resolution service through FCAG. Although FCAG does not have a power to issue binding decisions,
it is understood that regulated banks generally comply with the decisions arrived at through FCAG
facilitation and mediation services.
70.     FCAG was established pursuant to BSP Officer Order No. 892 on 15 October 2006 to
support the Supervision and Examination Sector of BSP (SES) through the following
functions: facilitating communication with BSP supervised financial institutions to address
consumer complaints or disputes; initiating the adoption or modification of policies, rules and
regulations in line with consumer protection laws and BSP’s financial literacy programs (but FCAG
does not itself have the relevant powers (e.g. to make regulations although it can (and does) make
suggestions for changes); and providing liaison activities and advice between the BSP supervision
departments and the public, the legislature and financial institutions.
71.      Complaints must be lodged in writing but can be delivered personally, by email or fax
to the FCAG office in the BSP Manila building. FCAG will then take the issue up with the financial
institution, which is required to reply directly to the complainant, with a copy to FCAG. FCAG may
also facilitate a meeting between the complainant and the financial institution. The purpose of the
meeting is to provide an opportunity to both parties to explain each other's position on the issues
and possibly find ways to reconcile differences and resolve the concerns. In 2012, FCAG received
1,854 complaints from the public.
72.    FCAG may also raise issues of individual or systemic concern with relevant BSP
supervisors. For example, the mission team was advised that FCAG raised an issue concerning
debt collection practices in relation to credit cards which resulted in the introduction of strong BSP
rules concerning such practices.33
73.     There are, however, significant limits to FCAG’s powers. In particular, FCAG does not
have power to make binding decisions, to impose sanctions or to conduct on – site examinations of
financial institutions. Accordingly any issues of concern (whether individual or systemic) can only be
raised with the relevant BSP supervisory department. The mission team was advised that these
issues may be provided for under the proposed BSP Financial Consumer Protection Framework.
However details of the new proposals were not publicly available at the time of the mission.
74.     Apart from FCAG, there do not appear to be any bodies external to banking
institutions to represent the interests of bank customers. The mission team was not able to
identify any relevant civil society groups which might be interviewed to discuss issues relevant to
consumers of financial services. It is further noted that the National Consumer Affairs Council does
not have the resources or expertise to deal with consumer complaints about financial services. Such
complaints are usually referred directly to the FCAG when they are received by the Council.




33
  See http://www.bsp.gov.ph/about/ConsumerAssistanceMechanismFlyer.pdf for details of the current
mandate.


                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 30
                                   General Framework for Financial Consumer Protection in the Philippines




75.     Although the complaint resolution service offered by FCAG seems to operate very
effectively in a number of respects, there are a number of ways in which the current
operations might be improved in the interests of complying with international best practice
on financial ombudsman schemes. At a minimum, having regard to the World Bank’s publication
on Resolving Disputes between Consumers and Financial Businesses: Fundamentals for a Financial
Ombudsman34, it is proposed that

        FCAG could be given the power to make decisions which bind the financial institution
         concerned;
        Regulated banks could be required to advise customers with whom they have a dispute that
         the customer can take the complaint to FCAG (but only after the customer has first tried to
         have the bank deal with the complaint); and
        FCAG should undertake a public awareness campaign of the availability of its services.
76.    Consideration should be given to providing support to credible and independent
research or consumer advocacy groups that can represent consumer interests and, in
particular, help consumers compare offerings and prices. This information should go beyond
product and budgeting training to include information on consumers rights for recourse, to receive
statements on their accounts, receive information on products before committing to them, to be
treated with respect and in monitoring/correcting their information in the credit bureau.




34
  http://www.networkfso.org/Resolving-disputes-between-consumers-and-financial-businesses_Fundamentals-
for-a-financial-ombudsman_The-World-Bank_January2012.pdf.




                           Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 31
1. The CPFL Review is part of the World Bank Program on Consumer Protection and Financial
   Literacy, which seeks to identify key measures in strengthening financial consumer
   protection to help build consumer trust in the financial sector—and expand the confidence of
   households to wisely use financial services.
2. CPFL Reviews against Good Practices have been conducted by the World Bank in both
   middle as well as low income countries. These include Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and
   Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Latvia, Lithuania,
   Malawi, Mongolia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Romania, the Russian Federation,
   South Africa, Slovakia, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Ukraine and Zambia.
3. The main objective of the Review is to assess the legal/regulatory and institutional
   frameworks for financial consumer protection in a country, with reference to international
   practices. The Review addresses the following issues: (1) legal, regulatory and institutional
   framework, (2) transparency and disclosure of information, (3) retail business practices of
   financial institutions, (4) complaints and dispute resolution mechanisms, and (5) consumer
   awareness and education regarding the use of financial services as well as consumers' rights
   and responsibilities and provide prioritized recommendations in these areas.
4. The Review is based on compliance with a set of Good Practices developed using
   international benchmarks, such as the principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO
   and IAIS, as well as the OECD recommendations for financial education and awareness on
   pensions, insurance, and credit products. The Good Practices incorporate provisions of
   directives, laws, regulations and codes of business practices from the EU, United States,
   Australia, Canada, France, Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru and South Africa.
5. The CPFL Review includes a detailed assessment of each relevant financial segment
   compared to the Good Practices (Volume II), and a report summarizing the key findings for
   the assessment and prioritized recommendations (Volume I).




                      Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 32
Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 33
 Box 1. Models of Institutional Set up for Consumer Protection Regulation and Supervision
        Single Agency Approach. One institutional approach is to have prudential and consumer
protection supervision allocated within the same supervisory agency. This is the case in Kazakhstan, where
the Agency on Regulation and Supervision of Financial Market and Financial Organizations is statutorily
responsible for both the stability of the financial sector and maintenance of financial consumer protection. In
Malaysia the Bank Negara Malaysia (central bank) is responsible for both prudential and consumer
protection oversight of financial institutions (except securities). The two mandates are overseen by separate
departments but in close coordination. Placing consumer protection in the same department as prudential
supervision creates potential conflicts with the traditional and long-standing prudential supervisory roles
tending to dominate in allocation of resources and priorities. Prudential supervision can, however, provide
useful early warning signals for business conduct supervision. International experiences shows that, if a
supervisory agency adopts consumer protection as part of its mandate, business conduct supervision
should be separated from prudential supervision and have adequate specialized staff and resources to
perform its specialized responsibilities effectively in order to avoid conflicts of interest.
        Specialized Financial Consumer Protection Agency. Some countries have established one or
more specialized regulators for financial consumer protection. Australia was the first country to set up a so-
called ‘twin peak‘ structure where the Market Conduct Regulator is responsible for overseeing the way in
which market participants behave, while the other peak – the Prudential Regulator – is charged with
overseeing the financial health, safety and soundness of market participants. This approach was followed by
the Netherlands. Recent trends in financial consumer regulation point to the development of such
specialized agencies, as seen in the creation of the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada (2001), the
establishment of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in the United States (2011) and the proposed
Financial Conduct Authority of the United Kingdom. Conflicts of interest can thereby be avoided between
oversight that focuses on ensuring the stability of the financial system as a whole, and supervision that
seeks to ensure that individual consumers of financial services are protected in the market. While this model
has the advantage of clearly defined objectives and mandates of the respective agencies the challenge is to
provide a new financial consumer protection agency with sufficient authority and credibility within the
financial system.
        General Consumer Protection Body. A third approach is for a body with jurisdiction to cover all
consumer protection issues to be required as a result to include financial products and services in its
mandate as well. This is the case in Brazil, where many basic consumer protection rights are guaranteed in
the Consumer Protection Code. The Department for Consumer Protection and Defense (housed at the
Ministry of Justice) has oversight over consumer protection in general, including financial consumer
protection issues, although the Central Bank of Brazil covers some financial services issues not mentioned
in the Code. The challenge of the general consumer protection agency approach is to provide sufficient
resources in order to handle financial services issues properly since technical aspects of financial services
require specialized staff with sector-specific knowledge, expertise and experience.




                             Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 34
To further improve access to justice for citizens, governments often take further steps to provide alternative
dispute resolution systems that allow for an out-of court-decision to be taken when parties fail to arrive
voluntarily to a conclusion to a complaint. Generally, there are three models of financial ombudsman
applied:
         Ombudsmen established by financial services associations: Decision by such an ombudsman
is not legally binding but his findings are usually respected by financial institutions voluntarily as a part of
self-regulation of the market, sometimes with financial companies even publicly declaring to be bound by
the ombudsman's decisions. In countries, such as Germany, an industry-based ombuds structure for each
part of the financial sector has proven effective. However, in the case of such an ombudsman structure
established by professional association, attention should be paid to the presence of conflicts of interest.
Also, consumers may perceive the ombudsman as someone who will always decide in favor of the financial
institution and against the consumer.
         Statutory independent ombudsmen: In this approach, the ombudsman has functions and powers
set up by national laws and members appointed by government authority. For example, the UK established
a scheme by law to function as an independent institution, while Armenia legally requires financial
institutions to join a central bank-approved ombudsman scheme with binding rules for all member
institutions. A single statutory ombudsman would make it easy for consumers to identify to which agency
they should submit their inquiries and complaints. While this model has the advantage of clearly defined
objectives and mandates the challenge is to provide the new ombudsman with sufficient authority and
resources.
      Ombudsman structure established within the regulatory and supervisory agency: A third
model is the set-up of a financial ombudsman structure within a regulatory and supervisory agency. For
example in the case of Bosnia Herzegovina, a Banking System Ombudsman has been established as an
independent organizational unit within the Banking Agency of the Republic of Srpska. While this model has
the advantage of using existing institutional arrangements to build upon the challenge is to ensure
independence of such an ombudsman structure and avoid conflicts of interest.




                          Republic of the Philippines – Consumer Protection in the Banking Sector | 35
