DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed
herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or
the governments they represent.


                                             Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ........................................................................................ iv
Acknowledgements ..................................................................................................... vi
Preface .......................................................................................................................vii
Executive Summary...................................................................................................... 1
 Financial Sector Context for Consumer Financial Services
 and Financial Literacy ................................................................................................. 7
 Supply of Financial Services ........................................................................................ 7
 Demand for Financial Services .................................................................................. 15
 Financial Consumer Protection in Zimbabwe .............................................................. 18
 Institutional Arrangements........................................................................................ 19
 Legal and Regulatory Framework .............................................................................. 28
 Transparency and Disclosure .................................................................................... 35
 Business Conduct ..................................................................................................... 40
 Complaints Handling and Dispute Resolution.............................................................. 47
 Financial Literacy/Capability ...................................................................................... 51

Annex 1: Consumer Trust and Financial Literacy .......................................................... 54
Annex 2: List of Recommendations ............................................................................. 55

Table 1: Summary of High Priority Recommendations .................................................... 4
Table 2: Summary Digital Financial Services Data .......................................................... 9
Table 3: Overview of NBCIS Sector ............................................................................. 12
Table 4: Stock Market Indicators ................................................................................. 13
Table 5: Use of Financial Products By Zimbabwean Adults (15 + Years) ........................ 15
Table 6: Finanical Consumer Protection Regulators and Supervisors .............................. 19
table 7: List of Overall Recommendations .................................................................... 55

Figure 1: Account penetration by individual characteristics (2011) ................................ 16
Figure 2: Financial Literacy Quiz Overview
Figure 3: Financial Literacy Scores, By Socio- Demographic Groups ............................... 18
figure 4: Average Number of Financial Products, by Trust Levels in Banks ..................... 54
Figure 5: Self-Reported Barriers to Account Ownership................................................. 54
Box 1: Key Findings of The 2014 WB Focus Group Discussions ..................................... 17


                         Abbreviations and Acronyms
CPC           proposed Consumer Protection Commission
CCZ           Consumer Council of Zimbabwe
COOPA         Co-operative Societies Act (6/1990)
CPFL          Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
CTC           Competition and Tariff Commission
DIC           Deposit Insurance Corporation
Econet        Econet Wireless Zimbabwe
FCB           Financial Credit Bureau
GDP           Gross Domestic Product
ICZ           Insurance Council of Zimbabwe
IIZ           Insurance Institute of Zimbabwe
IPEC          Insurance and Private Pension Commission
NFLS          National Financial Literacy Strategy
MFI           Micro-Finance Institution
MNO           Mobile Network Operator and/or its subsidiary offering digital financial services
MoF           Ministry of Finance
MoIC          Ministry of Industry and Commerce
MoJ           Ministry of Justice
NAV           Net Asset Value
NBCI          Non-Bank Credit Institution
NGO           Non-Governmental Organization
NPS Act       National Payment System Act (21/2001)
POTRAZ        Postal & Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe
RBZ           Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
SECZ          Securities and Exchange Commission of Zimbabwe
SLA           Service Level Agreement
SME Ministry Ministry for SMEs and Cooperatives
USSEC         Federal Securities and Exchange Commission of the United States of America
WB            World Bank
ZSE           Zimbabwe Stock Exchange
                                 Acknowledgements

This report contains the findings and recommendations from a World Bank mission to Zimbabwe
between July 14 and July 25, 2014, which took place for the purposes of a diagnostic review of the
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL) laws, institutions and practices applicable to
regulated financial services in Zimbabwe (CPFL Review). The banking, non-bank credit institutions,
insurance, securities and pensions sectors were considered along with financial literacy programs in
Zimbabwe. Four consumer focus group discussions were also conducted with the view of gaining
quick and deep insights into people’s knowledge and understanding of financial concepts and
products and their attitudes, financial behaviors, and experience in accessing and using financial
products and services. The CPFL Review was undertaken in response to a request from the Reserve
Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) with the support of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
(MoF), the Securities and Exchange Commission of Zimbabwe (SECZ) and the Insurance and
Pensions Commission of Zimbabwe (IPEC).

The CPFL review was produced by a team led by Ros Grady (Co-Task Team Leader, Senior Financial
Specialist, GFMDR) and Siegfried Zottel (Co-Task Team Leader and Financial Capability Expert,
Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR). Other members of the team included Jennifer Chien (Banking
Expert, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), Ivo Jenik (Consultant, Non-bank Financial
Institutions Expert, GFMDR), Fiona Stewart (Pensions Expert, Senior Financial Sector Specialist,
GFMDR), Richard Symonds (Consultant, Securities Expert), Manuel Peraita (Consultant, Insurance
Expert), Crispen Mauta Mawadza (Finance and Private Sector Development Specialist, GFMDR) and
Seedwell Hove (Economist, GFMDR). The team was also supported by Marco Traversa (Analyst,
Consultant, GFMDR), Janet Chido Bvumbe Chiweshe (Program Assistant, Harare, AFMZW) and
Suran Kc Shrestha (Program Assistant, DC, GFMDR).

Peer review comments on this report were received from Yira M. Mascaro (Lead Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR), Uzma Khalil (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), and Juan Carlos
Izaguirre Araujo (Financial Sector Specialist, GFMGP). Overall guidance was provided by Douglas
Pearce (Acting Practice Manager, Financial Inclusion Practice, GFMDR). The mission team is grateful
for their valuable contributions.

The team wishes to express its appreciation particularly to the Zimbabwean authorities for their
strong support for the CPFL Review and their assistance during, and after, the abovementioned
mission. The team would also like to thank the consulting firm Research Bureau International which
has been hired to conduct the focus group discussions, as well as all respondents who participated
in the qualitative survey, and all those who so generously contributed to the final report.

Lastly, the team would like to thank the UK Department for International Development (DFID) who
generously funded the CPFL review.
                                                       Preface

The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental to
increasing access to and usage of financial services, and the quality of those financial
services, along with supporting further financial sector deepening. Financial consumer
protection is a necessary precursor to building trust in the formal financial sector and thus in
encouraging financial inclusion (see Annex 1). Further, consumer protection helps ensure that
expanded access benefits consumers and the economy as a whole. While increased access can
result in significant economic and societal benefits, it can be neutral or even harmful if consumers:
(i) cannot exercise their rights as consumers, (ii) cannot select the financial products that suit them
best; and (iii) are not protected from mis-selling, fraud and other market abuses.

A sound financial consumer protection regime needs to be complemented with
prudential regulation and supervision and a stable macroeconomic environment.
Prudential requirements are intended to ensure that the financial system remains sound and stable,
while the financial promises made by financial institutions are met. Proper supervisory oversight and
adequate resources are essential to ensure adherence to these standards. Further, even the
soundest legal, regulatory and supervisory framework for financial consumer protection will not be
effective in an unstable macroeconomic environment.

The World Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection are an assessment
tool for diagnostic reviews of a country’s consumer protection and financial literacy
framework (Good Practices).1 More than 30 such reviews have been conducted worldwide. The
Good Practices were developed using international benchmarks and take account of the legal and
regulatory frameworks in developed and developing countries.2

The main objective of a CPFL Review is to assess the legal, regulatory and institutional
frameworks for financial consumer protection in a country, with reference to the Good
Practices. The following areas are addressed: (i) Institutional Arrangements, (ii) the Legal and
Regulatory framework, (iii) Transparency and Disclosure, (iv) Business Practices, (v) Complaints
Handling and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms and (vi) Financial Literacy/Capability. All parts of a
financial sector can be considered including banking, non-bank credit institutions, insurance,
securities, private pensions and credit reporting.

There is an increased international focus on consumer protection in the financial sector.
As shown by the World Bank’s 2013 Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection, a legal
framework for financial consumer protection exists in 112 out of the 114 countries surveyed. The
most common approach is to have a financial sector – specific consumer protection regulatory
framework (as exists in 103 countries). The Global Survey also showed that the number of
regulatory agencies with a specific responsibility for financial consumer protection increased from
74 in 2010 to 97 in 2013.



1
  Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), available at
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Misc/Good-practices-for-financial-consumer-protection.pdf
(last visited on December 11, 2014).
2
  Relevant international standards include the principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO and IAIS and OECD
recommendations for financial literacy and awareness on pensions, insurance and credit products.
                                            EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. Key Findings and Recommendations presented in this report are based on the World
   Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection and consider all parts of
   Zimbabwe’s consumer financial sector. Banking, digital financial services,3 non-bank credit
   institutions, insurance, securities, private pensions and credit reporting aspects of the financial
   sector were covered. For the avoidance of doubt, it is noted that in the future a broader analysis
   of some aspects of the financial sector might be undertaken (for example in relation to payments
   services). The report reflects the legal and regulatory framework and relevant aspects of the
   financial sector at the time of the CPFL Review, with limited reference to existing and proposed
   significant changes the authors of the report were aware of at the time of writing.

KEY FINDINGS

2. The Zimbabwe authorities have demonstrated a deep interest in consumer protection
   and financial literacy (CPFL). This has been shown by (amongst other things): (i) the request
   for the CPFL Review and ongoing implementation support; (ii) the proposals for new consumer –
   oriented laws and regulations in the banking, mobile banking, insurance, pensions and securities
   sectors; (iii) the launch of the Government Inquiry into Pensions and Insurance Conversions; (iv)
   the introduction of the Microfinance Act; and (v) the creation of the Investor Protection Fund for
   the securities market.

3. The fundamental importance of a sound CPFL framework is particularly relevant in
   Zimbabwe, given the relatively low levels of financial inclusion and historic financial
   sector fragility. According to the FinScope Consumer Survey 2011, 38 percent of the adult
   population in Zimbabwe was formally served, including both banking and other formal products
   and services. Only around a quarter of adults were banked, while 41 percent had or used informal
   mechanisms for managing their finances. These numbers were recently updated by the Ministry
   of Finance and Economic Development and Zimstat in cooperation with Finmark Trust. Based on
   a survey they conducted (FinScope Consumer Survey 2014), 78 percent of the population is
   financially included, 31 percent is served by banks, 38 percent by other formal financial institutions
   and 9 percent by an informal financial service provider.4 Financial consumer protection is a
   necessary precursor to building trust in the formal financial sector and in encouraging responsible
   financial inclusion (see figure 4, Annex 1).

4. Zimbabwe is experiencing rapid innovation in mobile financial services. Relevant
   services include payment products and micro-credit, bank account savings and insurance products.
   Such services can help fulfil important financial inclusion objectives but can add a further degree
   of complexity and risk to the payments system and the financial system generally, as well as to
   consumers with low levels of financial literacy. At the same time there is a need to develop a
   proportionate regulatory and supervisory regime for new service providers such as
   telecommunication companies, mobile phone providers and agent network managers.




3
  The term “digital financial services” can be interpreted broadly to mean, in summary, situations where digital services are used to access
an existing account with a financial institution (the additive model) and where they are used to enable the unbanked to access financial
services such as e-payment and value storage services (the transformative model). For more detail please see Annex I, Vol. II. The focus
of this report is on additive financial services which are provided via mobile phones (mobile financial services).
4
  FinScope Consumer Survey Zimbabwe 2014 (forthcoming).
5. The main consumer protection and financial literacy/capability challenges are as
   follows with the related high priority recommendations in Table 1 below:

           The increased availability of mobile financial services raises important consumer
            protection issues. Relevant risks include the significant take-up of the services (even if the
            amounts involved are small), the fact MNOs are regulated by POTRAZ rather than financial
            sector regulators, the important role of unregulated intermediaries, the rapidity of innovation,
            and the limited written disclosures and records of accounts and transactions. If any of these
            risks eventuate, the potential for a significant loss of trust in the Zimbabwe financial sector
            cannot be underestimated, especially given the country’s history of financial fragility and the
            EcoLife failure5. The mission acknowledges the significant steps taken by RBZ to supervise this
            sector but there remains an urgent need to establish a sound legal and regulatory environment
            for the protection of consumers of such services.

           Whilst the new Microfinance Act, and other proposed reforms are impressive in
            their scope, there remain other significant gaps in the overall consumer protection
            legal and regulatory framework. For example, apart from the Microfinance Act, there are
            virtually no legally binding transparency or business conduct consumer protection provisions
            for the financial sector and no laws on the licensing and conduct of credit bureaus, data
            protection or requiring debt collectors to be registered and to refrain from abusive collection
            practices. It is understood, however, that there are relevant proposed laws being considered
            for the banking, pensions, securities and insurance sectors as well as a general Consumer
            Protection Law which would apply to all services (including financial services).

           The Microfinance Act contains important consumer protection provisions for the
            microfinance sector but there are concerns about its scope of application and
            implementation. In particular, it needs to be actively supervised and enforced and it is not
            clear why the Act does not apply to financial co-operatives and only applies in a limited way to
            banks and building societies.

           Although there appears to be a high level of commitment to CPFL reforms, the
            capacity and resources of regulators to supervise and enforce new CPFL laws are
            limited. If the mission’s recommendations are accepted, there will be a consequential need
            to develop consumer/investor protection supervisory arrangements, tools and capacity within
            the financial sector supervisors. In doing so it will be important to bear in mind the need to
            focus on the areas of highest risk and limited supervisory resources.

           Bundling of insurance and credit products occurs in the banking and NBCI sectors.
            Issues to be considered include: (i) disclosure of policy terms and exclusions and the identity
            of the insurer in a standardized, comprehensible format; (ii) the circumstances in which
            bundling can be required by the lender; and (iii) whether consumers should have a choice of
            insurer.




5
    See further below more information regarding the EcoLife failure.
      There is an important need to protect pension and insurance assets of consumers.
       Pension and insurance schemes in the country were severely, adversely affected by the
       hyperinflationary period and the switch to the multi-currency economy. On-going concerns
       relate to issues such as failure of some employers to transmit pension contributions to the fund
       manager, the need to ensure that pension fund assets are held with independent custodians,
       the lack of standardized training requirements for fund trustees, and the need to ensure the
       market conduct provisions in the proposed new pensions and insurance laws meet international
       best practice standards. The mission also notes the July 2014 launch of the Government Inquiry
       on Pensions and Insurance Conversions, which focuses on the transition to the multi-currency
       economy and its impact on pensioners and policyholders in general and the conversion issues
       in particular. As a matter of high priority the Inquiry should be run in a transparent manner
       and its recommendations should be implemented in a timely manner in order to address any
       failures and restore consumers’ trust in the sector.

      Important measures are being taken to improve investor protection in the
       securities market. The creation of the SECZ, the Central Depository and the Investor
       Protection Fund have all added to the ability of market institutions to provided increased
       investor protection. The upgrade of the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange’s (ZSE) trading system will
       also provide for a more transparent market for the benefit of investors. Other initiatives include
       the proposed SECZ Securities Rules and the preparation of new ZSE rules. These need to be
       completed in a timely fashion and fine-tuned to bring them into line with international practice.

      Consumers of financial services have limited recourse rights. The fragmented
       requirements for internal complaint resolution procedures are not enforced and there are very
       limited avenues for third party dispute resolution.

      Zimbabwe does not have a coordinated financial literacy strategy and no
       assessment has been made of financial capability levels. Figure 1 (see Annex 2)
       provides an overview of the main challenges faced by participants in the focus group
       discussions conducted by the mission with regard to various important concepts for financial
       decision-taking.

6. A summary of the High Priority Recommendations is outlined in Table 1 below. These
   are recommendations in respect of which it is considered implementation activities
   should commence as soon as possible, whilst acknowledging that some may take
   longer than others to implement (see the reference to the relevant Term). All
   recommendations are summarized in Annex 2 to this Volume I. Further detail is
   provided in the Vol. II of this report.
                    TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF HIGH PRIORITY RECOMMENDATIONS6
                                                                                                 RESPONSIBI
      SECTOR                               RECOMMENDATION                                                                TERM*
                                                                                                    LITY
                                          Institutional Arrangements
                        Develop consumer / investor protection specific                         RBZ, IPEC,
       Cross-
                        supervisory arrangements, tools and capacity,                           SECZ, ZSE,              ST
       cutting
                        focusing on highest risk activities.                                    SME Ministry
                        Establish      coordination      and     consultation                   RBZ, IPEC,
       Cross-
                        arrangements between key consumer protection                            SECZ, ZSE,              ST
       cutting
                        regulators and develop MoUs.                                            SME Ministry
                                      Legal and Regulatory Framework
                        Revise and reinstate the Code of Banking Practice
                        to provide clear industry standards for banking
      Banking                                                                                   RBZ, BAZ                ST
                        institutions pending the introduction of binding
                        laws.
                        Develop consumer protection laws for digital
                        financial services in general and mobile financial
                        services in particular, e.g. regarding safeguarding                     MoF, RBZ,
      Digital                                                                                                           ST
                        e-wallet funds, disclosures, security, limitations of                   IPEC, POTRAZ
     Financial
                        liability, data protection and unauthorized
     Services
                        transactions.
                        Develop rules for the licensing of providers of digital                 MoF, RBZ,
                                                                                                                        LT
                        financial services.                                                     POTRAZ
                        Ensure that Government Inquiry on Pensions and
     Insurance          Insurance Conversions is conducted in a
        and             transparent and independent manner, with clear                          MoF                     ST
      Pensions          conclusions and recommendations which are made
                        and acted on in a reasonable timeframe.
                        Develop standardized training requirements for
      Pensions                                                                                  MoF, IPEC               ST
                        pension fund trustees and intermediaries.
                        Finalize draft investor protection rules and market                     MoF, SECZ,
     Securities                                                                                                         ST
                        conduct rules for brokers.                                              ZSE
                        Ensure Pension and Provident Fund Bill meets
                        international good practices and covers issues such
      Pensions                                                                                  IPEC/MoF                MT
                        as disclosures, cross selling, confidentiality and
                        dispute resolution.7
                        Develop licensing and minimum competency
     Securities         requirements for all persons providing investment                       MoF, SECZ               MT
                        services.
                        Develop a comprehensive financial consumer
                        protection law covering e.g. disclosures, sales
                                                                                                MoF, RBZ,
                        practices, responsible lending, product suitability,
       Cross-                                                                                   IPEC, SECZ,
                        insurance contracts, staff and intermediary training,                                           LT
       cutting                                                                                  ZSE, SME
                        restrictions on rights,     account handling, data
                                                                                                Ministry
                        protection, cooling off periods, advertising,
                        customer records and dispute resolution.

6
 A reference to “laws” includes a reference to Acts, regulations and other forms of subordinate legislation.
7
 International good practices refer to the World Bank Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), which this
diagnostic is based upon, and also more detailed, pension specific standards which have been issued by the OECD as part of the Core
Principles of Occupational Pension Regulation - http://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/private-pensions/33619987.pdf.
                                                                RESPONSIBI
 SECTOR                    RECOMMENDATION                                      TERM*
                                                                   LITY
  Cross-    Clarify application of Consumer Protection Bill to
                                                                MoF, MoIC      LT
  cutting   financial services.
            Finalize credit bureau licensing and operational
   Cross-   rules, develop public awareness campaign and MoF, RBZ,
                                                                               LT
   cutting  consider providing access to a central database of SME Ministry
            registered national IDs.
                       Transparency and Consumer Disclosure
            Develop      comprehensive     product   disclosure
  Banking
            requirements for fees, charges, interest rates,
and Digital
            terms and conditions, total cost of credit, MoF, RBZ               ST
  Financial
            advertising, mandatory risk warnings and for notice
  Services
            of changes.
            Develop comprehensive disclosure requirements for
 Insurance policy holders including as to key policy terms, Mof, IPEC          ST
            premiums, exclusions and risks.
            Ensure new investor protection rules include
            specific disclosure requirements, including as to
 Securities                                                     SECZ           ST
            disclosures by investment advisers, uniform Key
            Facts Statements, contract notes and statements.
            Develop specific requirements on disclosures to
  Pensions  members of pension funds, including on choice of IPEC              MT
            retirement income products.
            Develop disclosure and operational rules for unit
 Securities                                                     SECZ           MT
            trusts.
                                   Business Conduct
            Enforce rules relating to abusive collection
    NBCIs                                                       RBZ            ST
            practices.
            Take action to recover non-remitted, employee
  Pensions                                                      IPEC           ST
            contributions from plan sponsors.
            Develop separate custodian arrangements for
  Pensions                                                      IPEC           ST
            pension assets.
            Develop rules to limit unreasonable practices
   Cross-                                                       MoF, RBZ,
            relating to bundling and tying of credit and                       MT
   cutting                                                      IPEC
            insurance products.
                           Dispute Resolution Mechanisms
            Develop standard requirements for complaints
                                                                MoF, RBZ,
   Cross-   handling by all financial institutions and require
                                                                SECZ, IPEC,    ST
   cutting  complaints statistics to be reported to relevant
                                                                SME Ministry
            regulator.
            Establish within financial sector regulators a MoF, RBZ,
   Cross-
            dedicated unit to consider consumer complaints and SECZ, IPEC,     MT
   cutting
            analyze complaints statistics.                      SME Ministry
            Consider development of a single financial services
            ombudsman or equivalent scheme which provides MoF, RBZ,
   Cross-
            an independent, transparent, free dispute SECZ, IPEC,              LT
   cutting
            resolution service for consumers and which can SME Ministry
            make binding decisions.
                             Financial Literacy/Capability
                                                                                   RESPONSIBI
     SECTOR                          RECOMMENDATION                                                 TERM*
                                                                                      LITY
                     Establish a public, private sector and NGO National
      Cross-
                     Financial Literacy Coordinating body chaired by MoF                           ST
      cutting
                     MoF.
      Cross-
                     Conduct a National Financial Capability Survey.               MoF             ST
      cutting
                                                                                   MoF, and wide
                                                                                   range of
      Cross-                                                                       public /
                     Develop a National Financial Literacy Strategy.                                MT
      cutting                                                                      private sector
                                                                                   / not for profit
                                                                                   stakeholders
                                                                                   Ministry of
                                                                                   Primary and
      Cross-
                     Provide school-based financial education programs             Secondary        LT
      cutting
                                                                                   Education,
                                                                                   MoF
ST: Short-term (say 1 year); MT: Medium-Term (say 2 years); LT: Long-Term (say 3 years)
    FINANCIAL SECTOR CONTEXT FOR CONSUMER FINANCIAL
            SERVICES AND FINANCIAL LITERACY

                                     SUPPLY OF FINANCIAL SERVICES
7. Zimbabwe’s financial sector has been subject to several distress periods in the last
   decade including periods of hyperinflation and the collapse of the national currency
   which lead to the adoption of a multi-currency system in early 2009. Consequently,
   financial sector activity in Zimbabwe has shrunk considerably. For instance, while domestic credit
   provided by the financial sector as a percentage of GDP peaked at 164 percent in 2002, it dropped
   to 75.5 percent in 2006, which is the last year for which this indicator is available.8 This value of
   the given indicator is still higher than the average of lower middle income countries (50 percent)
   but lower than the average of the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa (79 percent). The following parts of
   this section of the report give an overview of the different parts of the financial sector, followed
   by information about the demand for financial services. Further details of the supply of financial
   services are in Volume II. For the avoidance of doubt, it is noted that in the future a broader
   analysis of some aspects of the financial sector might be undertaken (for example in relation to
   payments services).

BANKING SECTOR
8. The financial sector in Zimbabwe is dominated by 18 commercial banks, 2 merchant
   banks, and a state-owned savings bank (People’s Own Savings Bank).9 As of March 2014,
   banking sector deposits totaled USD 4.82 billion, while loans and advances totaled USD 3.64
   billion.10 Banking sector assets as a percentage of GDP equaled 51.7 percent in 2012, compared to
   67.4 percent in Kenya, 33.2 percent in Uganda, and 29.2 percent in Rwanda in 2013.11 The banking
   sector is concentrated, with the deposits of five banks constituting a market share of 61.2
   percent.12 The banking sector is mainly driven by transactional and savings products, with lending
   primarily consisting of consumer loans (not production loans). Effective lending rates in the
   banking sector allegedly ranged from 13 to 38 percent per annum in January 2014.13
9. While the banking sector is considered to be stable, banks face several systemic
   challenges. These challenges include the general illiquidity in the market, the lack of long-term
   capital, the high cost of funds which are only partially mobilized internally and thus still heavily
   rely on external, often more expensive sources, low capitalization, and a high level of non-
   performing loans (NPLs).14 Credit risk is a significant concern for banks, increasing the reluctance
   to lend.



8
  See World Bank Data available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FS.AST.DOMS.GD.ZS (last visited on October 19, 2014). The
current ratio for the banking sector is circa 28.43 percent GDP. Given the predominance of the banking sector this means that the
numbers have not improved since 2006.
9
  The RBZ’s list of licensed and registered financial institutions. Available at http://www.rbz.co.zw/publications/banksurveillance.asp (last
visited on December 9, 2014).
10
   Banking Sector Report for Quarter Ended 31 March 2014, 2 (Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, 2014).
11
   See Zimbabwe IMF Country Report No. 12/279, 44 (International Monetary Fund, 2012) and Banking in Sub-Saharan Africa –
Challenges and Opportunities, 46 (European Investment Bank, 2013).
12
   African Economic Outlook Zimbabwe, 6 (AfDB, 2014), available at
www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/2014/PDF/CN_Long_EN/Zimbabwe.pdf (last visited on December 9, 2014).
13
   African Economic Outlook Zimbabwe, 6 (AfDB, 2014), available at
www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/2014/PDF/CN_Long_EN/Zimbabwe.pdf (last visited on December 9, 2014).
14
   The average ratio of non-performing loans to total loans was 15.9 percent as of December 2013. See African Economic Outlook
Zimbabwe, 9 (AfDB, 2013).
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES

10. The Zimbabwe digital financial services market, and especially the mobile phone based
    payments market, is extremely dynamic and appears to be growing rapidly. There are
    3 mobile network operators (MNOs) offering mobile financial services, with the EcoCash payment
    service being dominant. At the time of the mission, EcoCash, which was launched in September
    2011, had around 3.5 million customers and around 90 percent of the market by number of
    subscribers and 98 percent by value and number of transactions.15 The average amount held on
    an EcoCash wallet is USD 20, although this amount is likely to vary substantially between
    customers in urban areas and those in rural areas. EcoCash is serviced by around 14,000 agents,
    which number is increasing by around 100 per week (the mission team was advised that there
    were around 18,000 agents in Zimbabwe). EcoCash can be used throughout Zimbabwe to make
    and receive payments, pay bills, pay merchants and receive a salary. It can also be used overseas
    to remit funds to Zimbabwe. Other relatively new e-wallet services are TeleCash (provided by
    TeleCel Zimbabwe and launched in February 2014) with around 600,000 customers and OneWallet
    (provided by NetOne, a 100 percent Government owned organization, from November 2013 with
    around 70,000 customers).

11. Various new digital financial services were launched around the time of the CPFL
    Review. They include:

        MasterCard linked EcoCash Debit Card. This card was launched on 31 July 201416 and
         will enable EcoCash customers to access their EcoCash e-wallet funds wherever a MasterCard
         can be used anywhere in the world.17

        Telecel Gold Card. This card, which was launched on 18 July 2014, is linked to the customer’s
         e-wallet and can also be used as a debit card to send and receive money from any bank
         account where the relevant bank is linked to ZimSwitch (21 banks and building societies and
         5000 points of sale are linked).18

        EcoCash has also recently launched a mobile phone linked savings product
         (EcoCash $ave), an EcoCash Loan facility and an EcoFarmer crop insurance product
         and are also considering a life insurance product. Applications and transactions can be
         made via a mobile phone (with no face to face contact), with prices, terms and conditions
         being available on-line, from agents, from Steward Bank branches and, to a limited extent, on
         the phone itself. For example, for the EcoCash $ave and the EcoCash Loan products, a
         customer is deemed to have accepted the 4 page terms and conditions by clicking on the
         “Accept” option on the phone menu.19 The EcoCash $ave and EcoCash Loan are provided by
         Steward Bank, which is 100% owned by Econet Wireless Zimbabwe Limited.20




15
   As advised to mission team. See also https://www.econet.co.zw/ecocash/ (last visited on December 30, 2014).
16
   This is the first time that MasterCard debit cards have been linked to a mobile money service in Africa.
17
   There are, however, apparently limitations to using the card for online payments: see http://www.techzim.co.zw/2014/08/ecocash-
mastercard-online-payments/.
18
   http://www.techzim.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Telecash-Gold-Card-Press-Release.pdf.
19
   https://www.econet.co.zw/save/terms-and-conditions.pdf.
20
   https://www.stewardbank.co.zw/about-steward-bank
          Services allowing remittances to be sent directly to e-wallets have also been
           launched. They include the Telecel – Mukuru arrangement for remittances from South Africa21
           and the recently announced EcoCash arrangements with WorldRemit and Western Union.22

                      TABLE 2: SUMMARY DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES DATA23
     MNO        SERVICES              E-VALUE as at          NUMBER                 OF             SERVICE FEATURES
                                      30 June 2014*          CUSTOMERS as at 30
                                                             June 2014*
     EcoNet24   EcoCash e-wallet      USD 45.17m    25       3.5 million as at 30 June    Funds transfer to other EcoNet
                                                             2014                         customers, bill payment (e.g. utilities,
                                                                                          school fees, DSTV), cash deposits and
                                                                                          withdrawals, pay merchants for goods
                                                                                          and services, receive salary, receive
                                                                                          remittances from diaspora, online
                                                                                          payments, link ewallet to bank
                                                                                          accounts and purchase airtime.
                MasterCard            N/A                    N/A                          MasterCard linked to EcoCash e-wallet
                linked EcoCash                                                            which can be used locally and
                Debit Card                                                                internationally to pay for goods and
                                                                                          services (including on line payments)
                                                                                          wherever a MasterCard can be used.
                EcoSave               N/A although it is     1,180,000 around July        Savings account with Steward Bank
                                      understood that        23rd 2014 (total bank        which is made available to EcoCash
                                      around        USD      deposit      accounts        users and which is applied for and
                                      20,000 per day is      estimated at around          operated via the customer’s mobile
                                      being deposited        824,000)                     phone (“Your phone is like your bank”).
                EcoCash Loan                  N/A            N/A                          EcoCash $ave customers for over 3
                                                                                          months are also eligible for the
                                                                                          relatively new EcoCash Loan product
                                                                                          from Steward Bank of between $5 to
                                                                                          $500 for up to 30 days. The average
                                                                                          amount lent at the time of the mission
                                                                                          was $80. There is not a specific interest
                                                                                          rate although there is a 5% handling
                                                                                          fee which is deducted when the loan is
                                                                                          provided. There is also a default
                                                                                          interest rate of 8%. The amount lent is
                                                                                          based on activity on EcoCash $ave,
                                                                                          EcoCash usage and airtime usage.
                EcoFarmer             N/A                    N/A                          A micro insurance product available to
                                                                                          EcoCash users designed to insure
                                                                                          inputs and crops against drought or
                                                                                          excessive rainfall.
     Telecel    Telecash        e-    USD 1.89m              0.6 million                  Funds transfers to recipient on any
                wallet26                                                                  mobile phone network, bill payments
                                                                                          (e.g. DSTV and local councils), cash
                                                                                          deposits     and    withdrawals,     pay
                                                                                          merchants for goods and services and

21
   http://www.techzim.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Telecash-and-Mukuru-partner-in-remittances.pdf.
22
   http://www.bh24.co.zw/ecocash-taps-into-diaspora-remittances/ and http://www.techzim.co.zw/2014/10/ecocash-introducing-service-
western-union-can-expect/.
23
   Details of the abovementioned remittance services were made available after the abovementioned mission and data is not available.
24
   See https://www.econet.co.zw/ecocash/ and https://www.econet.co.zw/ecofarmer for further details of EcoNet / EcoCash services.
25
   Total deposits in bank accounts at 30 June, 2014 were USD 659 million
26
   http://www.telecel.co.zw/telecash
                                                                                                 purchase airtime. The card is also
                                                                                                 linked to ZimSwitch so that funds can
                                                                                                 be transferred between any ZIPIT
                                                                                                 certified bank account and the e-wallet.
                    Telecash Gold         N/A                     1,300 within 7 days of         Available to Telecash customers and
                   Card      (debit                               launch on 16 July 2014         can be used to pay for goods and
                   card)27                                                                       services at any of the more than 5,000
                                                                                                 ZimSwitch points of Sale (POS) and to
                                                                                                 withdraw cash at ZimSwitch branded
                                                                                                 ATMs.
                   Onewallet              USD 0.22m               0.4 million                    Funds transfers to recipient on any
     NetOne28                                                                                    mobile phone network, limited bill
                                                                                                 payments (e.g. electricity), cash
                                                                                                 deposits     and    withdrawals,   and
                                                                                                 purchase airtime.
Source: RBZ and MNOs * unless otherwise indicated

12. RBZ requires that mobile phone based e-wallet services are offered by a subsidiary of
    the relevant MNO.29 RBZ recognizes three main mobile payment system models, while it keeps
    an option to recognize any other model deemed suitable for mobile payments.30 For more details
    see Annex I, Vol. II.

13. Further, each MNO is required to have an arrangement with one or more prudentially
    regulated banks (the number depends on the amount involved) in order to protect
    customers’ funds. Under such an arrangement the MNO must ensure an amount equivalent to
    the outstanding e-wallet balances at any time is held in a trust accounts in the relevant bank(s).
    The requirement for multiple banks is to avoid concentration of risk. The trust accounts are non-
    interest bearing.

14. The mobile insurance market also seems to be developing, notwithstanding the failure
    of the EcoLife product. These issues are discussed below under Insurance.




27
     For further details see http://www.techzim.co.zw/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Telecash-Gold-Card-Press-Release.pdf
28
     For further details see http://www.netone.co.zw/onewallet/
29
     MNO is used in this report to describe both the actual MNO and its subsidiary, which offers digital financial services.
30
     Section 8.18.1. of the RBZ Electronic Payment Systems Guideline.
NON-BANK CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (NBCI) SECTOR
15. The NBCI sector consists of multiple categories of NBCIs operating under different
    regulatory and supervisory regimes. Zimbabwean NBCIs can be categorized based on
    different criteria such as: (i) the type of activity performed (credit-only microfinance business,
    deposit-taking microfinance business, moneylending business); (ii) the law primarily governing
    establishment and operations of specific types of NBCIs (microfinanciers31, building societies, co-
    operative societies); or (iii) the supervisor responsible for regulation and supervision of the NBCIs
    (MoF, RBZ and the Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises and Cooperatives (SME Ministry)).

16. Although detailed statistics are not available, it is clear that there has been a
    significant decline in the number of NBCIs since the hyperinflation period. According to
    data from the Zimbabwean Association of Microfinance Institutions (ZAMFI), in 2003 the number
    of licensed MFIs exceeded 1600 whereas there were only 147 MFIs as of February 28, 2014 and
    the number further dropped to 130 registered microfinance institutions at 30 June 2014.32

17. The formal NBCI sector in Zimbabwe is primarily composed of three categories of non-
    bank credit institutions (NBCIs): (i) microfinanciers;33 (ii) building societies; and (iii)
    cooperative societies. While building societies and SACCOs may take deposits, currently there
    is no licensed deposit taking MFI. Asset-wise, building societies dominate the NBCI sector with
    assets totaling USD717.14 million in 2012 (see the comparison between banks, building societies
    and microfinance credit providers in Volume II of this report). The building societies are also the
    most concentrated sector with only 4 players34 one of which (specifically CABS) has a market share
    of almost 90%.35 Building societies also accounted for 12% of total bank deposits in December
    201236 and the industry seems to be gradually converging with the banking sector.

18. All types of co-operatives including savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs) fall
    under the regulatory framework established by the Co-operatives Act and are
    exclusively supervised by the Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises and
    Cooperatives (SME Ministry). No specific distinction has yet been made between SACCOs and
    other types of co-operatives, although the SME Ministry acknowledged to the mission team the
    necessity for a specific regulatory and supervisory regime regarding SACCOs. Currently, there are
    around 6000 co-operative societies operating nationwide.37 In 2013, there were 72 SACCOs active
    in Zimbabwe, associating 153,000 members with savings and shares of USD 4,250,000, loans of
    USD 1,200,000 and the total assets of USD 5,300,000.38

19. The mission team was also told that there is a large informal sector in Zimbabwe which
    is served by informal providers such as ROSCAs and short-term money lenders.

31
   The category of microfinanciers further includes microfinance institutions, corporate microfinanciers and moneylenders.
32
   Quarterly Microfinance Industry Report, 2 (RBZ, June 2014), available at
www.rbz.co.zw/pdfs/MFI%20Industry%20Report%2030%20JUNE%202014....pdf (last visited on December 11, 2014).
33
   The MFA uses the term microfinanciers to cover, as explained further below in this report, all types of non-bank credit institutions
including moneylenders and MFIs in the traditional meaning of the word.
34
   The RBZ’s list of registered and licensed institutions available at www.rbz.co.zw/publications/banksurveillance.asp (last visited on
December 12, 2014).
35
   Interview with CABS.
36
   Annual Report 2012, 48 (RBZ, 2012).
37
   Interview with the SME Ministry.
38
   Statistical Report 2013 (World Council of Credit Unions, 2013), available at www.woccu.org/publications/statreport (last visited on
August 15, 2014). The statistical reports issued by the World Council of Credit Unions offer an interesting comparison: in 2006, which
means before the economic meltdown, in Zimbabwe there were 53 SACCOs, associating 88,000 members, however, with the total
deposits/shares of 5,020,856 USD, total loans of 2,915,959 and total assets of 8,110,613. In other words, as compared to 2013/2014 less
SACCOs provided for higher economic performance in 2006.
       However, data on the size of this sector is not available. For the summary of the NBCI sector see
       table 3 below.

                                       TABLE 3: OVERVIEW OF NBCIs SECTOR
                  Type of NBCI                             Number of NBCIs                          Primary supervisor
          Microfinanciers                           130                                         RBZ
          Building societies                        4                                           RBZ
          SACCOs                                    70+                                         SME Ministry
          Informal moneylenders                     N/A                                         None

INSURANCE SECTOR
20. The insurance sector in Zimbabwe is diverse yet highly concentrated. Pursuant to the list
    of the registered companies available on IPEC’s website, there are 9 life assurers, 2 life reassures,
    11 funeral assurers, 27 short-term/non-life insurers, 10 short-term reinsurers, and 30 brokers.39
    The three largest life companies accounted for 82.7 percent of the premiums; the three largest
    funeral insurers for 86.4 percent; and the top 4 short-term insurers accounted for 50 percent of
    premiums.40 41

21. In terms of premiums, the insurance market in Zimbabwe is small but growing fast.
    The insurance sector has to some extent moved on from the severe adverse effect on policy values
    of Zimbabwe’s hyperinflation and subsequent dollarization period.42 In 2013, premiums for life and
    funeral insurance grew by 34.8 percent and for short-term insurance by 9.3 percent, leading to an
    overall growth of total insurance premiums of 22.2 percent. As of December 2013 Zimbabwe
    reached USD 38 insurance premiums per capita. In contrast, South Africa had USD 1,025 insurance
    per capita, Kenya had USD35 per capita and Nigeria had USD 11 per capita.43 The insurance
    penetration ratio is currently claimed to be around 5 percent44 (as compared to 1.70 percent in
    201245), slightly above the average for the African continent which is 3.56 percent.46

22. There is evidence of innovation in the insurance market in Zimbabwe, including
    development of the mobile phone based insurance market. Examples include distributing
    insurance products through banks and other financial institutions (such as credit life insurance
    products)47 and, significantly, the sale of insurance through mobile phones. Two examples of the




39
   The IPEC’s list of registered companies, available at www.ipec.co.zw/images/stories/pdffiles/registered%20companies.pdf (last visited
on December 9, 2014).
40
   Source: IPEC December, 2013 reports: http://www.ipec.co.zw/
41
   The mission team was also told anecdotally that another area of rapid growth is the health insurance / medical aid sector and that there
are concerns about the administration and supervision of these schemes, which are not prudentially regulated (although this is proposed).
However such schemes are not the focus of this report, which considers consumer protection issues relevant to products and services
issued by the financial sector.
42
   See paragraph 20 below for a discussion of the effects of the dollarization on the pension industry. These effects were also relevant to
the value of insurance policies and their impact on this sector will also be considered in the recently announced Government Inquiry into
Pensions and Insurance Conversions.
43
     Source: SIGMA publication of SwissRe
44
   Zimbabwe: Insurance Penetration Rate to Increase (Herald, 2014), available at allafrica.com/stories/201405261202.html (last visited on
December 11, 2014).
45
   Sector Report: Insurance in Africa, 2 (KMPG, 2014), available at www.kpmg.com/Africa/en/IssuesAndInsights/Articles-
Publications/Documents/Insurance%20in%20Africa.pdf (last visited on December 11, 2014).
46
   Sector Report: Insurance in Africa, 1 (KMPG, 2014) available at www.kpmg.com/Africa/en/IssuesAndInsights/Articles-
Publications/Documents/Insurance%20in%20Africa.pdf (last visited on December 11, 2014).
47
   See https://www.newsday.co.zw/2013/02/14/banking-meets-insurance/
     mobile insurance market of note are the recently launched e-FML Mobile Funeral Cash Plan48 and
     the EcoFarmer product49.

23. The failure of the EcoLife mobile insurance product is a reminder of the consumer
    issues relevant to the mobile insurance market. EcoLife was a free life insurance product
    made available by Econet as part of a loyalty program. The product scaled up rapidly but was
    withdrawn after 7 months as a result of a dispute over royalties. The result was that around 1.6
    million Zimbabweans lost coverage and were not compensated.50 As noted in one of the consumer
    focus groups conducted during the mission: “I joined EcoLife, but up to now l don’t understand
    what happened to it, I was never refunded…It is so painful...” (Urban, Low Income).

SECURITIES SECTOR
24. Stock market capitalization as a percentage of GDP has improved over the last several
    years, while the number of listed shares and account holders has remained stable since
    dollarization. The market has played a significant role in the economy over the last several years
    with stock market capitalization almost doubling from around 50 percent to 95 percent of GDP
    (see table 4), although this may be due to a weak economy and strong foreign demand for a few
    of the top ten performers at the Zimbabwean stock exchange, particularly Delta and Econet. As
    further indicated in table 4, the number of shares listed on the stock exchange has been relatively
    stable over the last several years. Likewise, the number of account holders hardly changed since
    2009. Retail investors have, however, been basically inactive.

                                  TABLE 4: STOCK MARKET INDICATORS
               Year                  2012                  2011                  2010              2009
         Capitalization 11,816,165,408 10,902,845,012 11,476,483,244 3,829,925,096
            (USD)
           % of GDP                   94.7                  99.5                 121.4             47.0
              Listed                   76                    75                    76               76
             equities
           Brokerage               429,735               430,040               414,776            423,067
            accounts
       Source: WB, ZSE and SECZ 2014




48
   http://www.fmlzim.co.zw/?page_id=126
49
   https://www.econet.co.zw/ecofarmer
50
   See http://www.finmark.org.za/wp-content/uploads/pubs/Rep_M_insurance_Zimbabwe_20142.pdf and
http://www.southerneye.co.zw/2013/12/01/first-mutual-life-clients-limbo/
PENSIONS SECTOR
25. In total around one in ten elderly Zimbabweans aged 60 years and above receive a
    monthly pension.51 Coverage of pension schemes is limited to formal sector workers in the
    private and public sectors via mandatory social security schemes - the National Pension Fund (NPF)
    for private sector workers and the Public Service Pension Fund (PSPF). These are in a precarious
    financial position and are in need of reform, with the PSPF currently costing the government
    around 4 percent of GDP.52 In addition, around 1250 voluntary, occupational pension schemes are
    in existence (now mostly defined contribution funds, a few run in-house but most managed by
    pension administrators and insurance companies). These are the focus of this diagnostic, being
    closer to ‘consumer’ products. Fund membership is estimated at around 700,000 members,53 with
    the funds holding assets estimated at USD 2 billion (approximately 20 percent of GDP).54 Informal
    sector workers have no pension coverage and there is no age-based social protection for the most
    vulnerable elderly in Zimbabwe.

26. All pension schemes in the country were severely, adversely affected by the
    hyperinflationary period and the switch to the multi-currency economy. The 2009
    dollarization saw pension fund liabilities being drastically reduced with some members ending up
    with no pensions at all. Monetary assets were wiped out and real assets were severely marked
    down. There has been much criticism (by activist groups representing pensioners and trade unions,
    amongst others) over how the conversion from Zimbabwe to US dollars was handled.55 For
    example, no central guidance was given, no mandatory conversion formula was required to be
    used and the date at which the conversion process was undertaken was not mandated or required
    to be made public.56 Overall the lack of requirements to make public the basis of the conversion
    has been criticized as not being ‘inter-generationally’ fair. The MoF commissioned an independent
    actuarial report on the conversion issue in 2012, which is yet to be published. However, a recently
    announced Government Inquiry into Pensions and Insurance Conversions was launched on
    Wednesday July 23rd, 2014 which will undertake a public investigation into the issue.




51
   ZIMSTAT (2012) 2012 Labor Force Survey, Harare.
52
   World Bank (2014) draft report ‘Zimbabwe: Crafting a Coherent Social Protection System.’ See also International Labour Organization
(2012), ‘Zimbabwe – Report to the Government: Actuarial Study on the National Pension Scheme’
53
   Members of these voluntary schemes are formal sector workers and are therefore also members of the mandatory, social security NPS
scheme.
54
   See Insurance and Pension Commission Annual Report: Pensions 2012
55
   See Mazviona, B., W., (2013), ‘Managing Pension Funds in Zimbabwe: Ethical Issues and Challenges’, Chinese Business Review, ISSN
1537-1506 July 2013, Vol. 12, No. 7, 449-458;
Tarusenga,M., (2014), ‘Porting long-term pension and insurance contracts from an inflation-hit environment to a stable hard currency
environment: A perception of revaluation methods applicable in Zimbabwe’s case’.
56
   Circular No. 5 of 2010 issued by IPEC simply states the deadline for conversion exercise.
                               DEMAND FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES
27. On access to accounts and saving services measures, Zimbabwe compares favorably
    to lower middle income countries and regional peers, but lacks behind more developed
    countries in the region. According to the 2011 Global Findex database, as set out in table 5, 40
    percent of the adult population aged 15 and more hold an account at a formal financial institution.
    Similarly, the 2011 FinScope consumer survey indicates that 38 percent of the adult population
    has an account at a formal financial institution, of which around two thirds are at bank. The
    majority of adults still prefer to keep their savings at home.

28. The Ministry of Finance and Zimstat in cooperation with Finmark Trust recently
    presented updated FinScope Data. Pursuant to the latest data, the percentage of the formally
    served population increased to 69 percent. 31 percent of the population is served by banks, 66
    percent is served by non-bank financial institution and 41 percent is served by informal financial
    service providers, thus leaving 22 percent of the population unserved. The main contributing factor
    to the substantial increase in financial inclusion has been digital financial services.57

       TABLE 5: USE OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS BY ZIMBABWEAN ADULTS (15 + YEARS)

                                                     Finscope 2011                   Global Findex 2011

       Number of adults... (%)                                    Non-               Sub-         Lower middle
                                             Total     Banks      bank     Zimbabwe Saharan          income
                                                                 formal              Africa         countries
     ... with an account at
                                                38         24         14            40       24             24
     formal financial institution
     ... with a loan in the last
                                                  5          3         2            5         5             11
     year
     ... who saved in past year                 26         17          9            17       14             11

     ... using mobile phones to
                                               N/A        N/A        N/A            3        16              5
     send or receive money
     Source: Finscope, 2011 and Global Findex, 2011.

29. The degree of financial inclusion as measured by account penetration conceals larger
    inequalities between income groups, age, area of residence, and gender. Figure 2 below
    contains relevant details.

30. By far the most frequently cited barrier to account ownership is lack of money,
    followed by cost, lack of required documents and trust; the latter reason for not
    owning an account has been reported more often than other developing economies.
    According to Global Findex, lack of trust has been cited by 20 percent of non-account holders
    which is higher than the average of the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa (16 percent) and the group of
    lower middle income countries (11 percent). As in the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa, adults in
    Zimbabwe rely primarily on family and friends for credit (31 percent), with just 5 percent of adults


57
     http://www.finmark.org.za/publication/finscope-zimbabwe-consumer-survey-2014
   reported having borrowed from a formal financial institution including banks, NCBIs, etc. (see
   figure 5, Annex 1).

     FIGURE 1: ACCOUNT PENETRATION BY INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS (2011)

       High                                                                              63%
        Q4                                                                   52%
        Q3                                           32%
        Q2                                           32%
       Low                               22%

      Urban                                                                                     69%
      Rural                              22%

       65+                                                        45%
      25-64                                                              51%
      15-24                              22%

       Male                                                      43%
     Female                                                37%
              0%       10%         20%         30%         40%         50%         60%         70%    80%
     Source: Global Findex, 2011

31. Low use of formal financial services may also be partly explained by low levels of
    financial literacy/capability of the population. Although there is limited evidence, financial
    capability levels in Zimbabwe appear to be low. The FinScope Consumer Survey 2011 suggests
    that the majority of Zimbabweans (74 percent) lack knowledge and understanding of financial
    market terms. Given its implications for Zimbabweans long-term well-being, of particular concern
    may be the lack of substantial long-term orientation as revealed by the same FinScope Consumer
    Survey. Similarly, the results of the focus group discussions which were conducted as a part of the
    CPFL review show that the majority of participants lack long-term orientation and struggle to
    understand financial concepts such as compound interest (see Box 1).
BOX 1: KEY FINDINGS OF THE 2014 WB FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS

In order to obtain an insight into consumer’s financial capability levels, the World Bank
commissioned rapid assessments on consumer’s ability to take sound financial decisions, in
particular to choose and use financial products that fit their needs best. To this end, World Bank
commissioned the consulting firm Research Bureau International (RBI) to conduct a qualitative study, so
called focus group discussions. The assessment methodology was designed to enable rich and detailed
discussions of the factors and processes shaping financial decisions, and to provide a basis for comparative
analysis across rural and urban locations as well as socio-demographic criteria including gender and income.
Although extensive quantitative data and analysis on the status of financial literacy/capability is needed to
identify areas for improvement and target populations on a national level, the World Bank, at this point,
aimed to conduct rather focused surveys to gain quick and deep insights into the financial knowledge, skills,
attitudes, and behaviors of the selected respondents. It should therefore be noted that due to the non-
random selection procedure, the results of the focus group discussions cannot be extrapolated to the overall
population in Zimbabwe. They may be indicative, however, of the most pressing needs for policy action.

On average, the participants in the focus group discussions were able to answer around 4
financial literacy-related questions out of 7 correctly. In order to get a better understanding of
respondent’s financial knowledge and their basic numeracy skills, a short financial literacy quiz comprising
7 questions was delivered at the end of the focus group discussions. Based on the number of correct
responses provided by each focus group participant to the seven financial literacy questions we constructed
a financial literacy index. This index ranges from 0 to 7, whereby 0 indicates respondents who struggle the
most with correctly answering any of these questions, while a score of 7 indicates survey participants with
good numeracy skills and understanding of fundamental financial concepts.

A deeper exploration into the type of financial concepts being assessed reveals that
respondents master the task of basic calculus but struggle to understand more complex
concepts such as compound interest, etc. The participants are most comfortable with performing
simple divisions as revealed in figure 2. This finding is consistent with what we found in the similar
assessments in other countries. Two thirds of the sample demonstrated good understanding of the concept
of inflation which is notably high as compared to other countries, and can be explained by the period of
hyperinflation experienced in Zimbabwe and its adverse impacts on the economy. More complex concepts
and numeracy tasks on the other hand posed a challenge to a substantial proportion of the sample.

Respondents that scored the lowest on the financial literacy quiz include women, rural
dwellers, unemployed, low income populations, groups with lower educational attainment and
those who are more likely to use informal financial products and services. Findings from the focus
group discussions further suggest that awareness and understanding of the concept of inflation and the
main purpose of insurance products is especially lacking among the poor, women and those with low
educational attainment (see Figure 3). This result suggests there is room for policies to target these
segments, given that the adverse effects of high inflation may take the highest toll among these groups
and that they may benefit the most from any financial instruments that help them to manage the risks they
are facing, both the risks associated with their personal health and their livelihoods.
The focus group discussions further revealed that there is a lack of long-term orientation, a low
complaints culture and little or no awareness amongst respondents with regards to existing systems
of redress in the event of a financial service provider conflict. Regarding respondent’s financial behaviors,
the findings suggest that saving or setting aside some money for unexpected and old age expenses poses a
challenge for most respondents in the low and middle income groups. Another major finding is that only very few
respondents indicated that that they experienced a conflict with a financial service provider. In terms of actions
taken in the event of a dispute most respondents did not lodge a complaint with the relevant financial institution
or a third party (such as a regulator), as they were not aware of internal channels to take redress or any
government agencies they can approach for help. Moreover, they lacked confidence that conflicts with providers
of financial services could be resolved to their satisfaction.




FIGURE 2: FINANCIAL LITERACY QUIZ OVERVIEW                          FIGURE 3: FINANCIAL LITERACY SCORES, BY
SOCIO- DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS

                                                                6    5.0                            5.0
    Deposit Insurance     19%                                                  4.7
                                                                5                     4.4    4.3           4.2
  Compound Interest             47%                               3.7       3.9           3.6    3.7    3.6
                                                                4        3.1       3.4
    Compare Bargain             53%                             3
 Purpose of Insurance            59%                            2
      Simple Interest            63%                            1
                                                                0
             Inflation            66%
      Simple Division                 84%

                         0%   20% 40% 60% 80% 100%

                     Correct      Incorrect
       FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN ZIMBABWE

                          INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

32. The institutional arrangements for regulation and supervision of each part of the
    financial sector merit careful review. Of particular importance are the following issues: who
    is responsible for consumer protection in each sector? Are there gaps/overlaps/capacity/resource
    issues to be considered? Is there an appropriate allocation between prudential supervision and
    consumer protection supervision? Is there co-ordination between multiple agencies? Is the private
    sector involved e.g. through self-regulatory codes of conduct? Does the supervisor concerned have
    adequate resources, skills and expertise? There is, however, no “best practice” on how to structure
    financial consumer protection institutionally. The appropriate model in any country depends on
    the country-specific characteristics such as size and structure of the financial system and existing
    regulatory and supervisory arrangements.


GENERAL OVERVIEW
    TABLE 6: FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION REGULATORS AND SUPERVISORS
                                     REGULATED INDUSTRY /                   KEY LAWS (not including
   REGULATOR / MINISTRY
                                         RESPONSIBILITY                    regulations and guidelines)
                                    1. Banking institutions                Banking Act
                                       (including banks, building          Building Societies Act
                                       societies, People’s Own             Microfinance Act
                                       Savings Bank,                       National Payment Systems
               RBZ                     microfinanciers) and                 Act
                                       payment systems                     RBZ Act
                                    2. Regulation, monitoring,
                                       supervision and
                                       enforcement
                                    1. Stock Exchanges                     Securities and Exchange
                                       (partially), Brokers, Asset          Act
                                       Management Companies,               Asset Management Act
                                       Collective Investment               Collective Investment
                                       Schemes, Investment                  Scheme Act
                                       Protection Fund, Central
               SECZ                    Depository
                                    2. Day to day monitoring and
                                       supervision of the
                                       securities market, licensing
                                       of securities business,
                                       supervision and
                                       enforcement
                                    1. Non-Life Insurance                  Insurance Act
                                       Companies, Life Assurance           Insurance and Pension
               IPEC                    Companies, Funeral                   Commission Act
                                       Assurers, Re-Assurers,              Pension and Provident
                                       Brokers, Reinsurance                 Funds Act
                                         Companies, Brokers and
                                         Pension Funds
                                    2.   Regulation, monitoring,
                                         supervision and
                                         enforcement
                                    1.   Savings and Credit                Co-operatives Act
     Ministry of Small and               Cooperatives
    Medium Enterprises and          2.   Regulation, monitoring,
         Cooperatives                    supervision and
                                         enforcement
                                    1.   All sectors                       Microfinance Act
                                    2.   Policy, regulation and            Banking Act
                                         high-level oversight for all      Insurance Act
                                         sectors                           Pension and Provident
                                    3.   Oversight of supervisory           Funds Act
               MoF                       agencies and a point of           Asset Management Act
                                         appeals against their             Collective Investment
                                         decisions                          Schemes Act
                                                                           Securities Act
                                                                           Zimbabwe Stock Exchange
                                                                            Act
                                    1. All sectors                         Consumer Contracts Act
                                    2. General regulatory and
    Ministry of Industry and
                                       supervisory responsibilities
           Commerce
                                       in relation to consumer
                                       contracts
                                    1. All sectors (current focus          Competition Act
     Competition and Tariff            on mobile banking)
         Commission                 2. Monitoring and promotion
                                       of competition
          Postal and                1. Mobile Network Operators            Telecommunications Act
     Telecommunications             2. Licensing, regulation,
    Regulatory Authority of            supervision and
          Zimbabwe                     enforcement

33. The multiple sectorial regulators and supervisors have limited capacity and resources
   to focus on financial consumer protection issues and do not have an explicit mandate
   in relation to consumer protection matters (or financial inclusion more generally).
   Supervisory staff are responsible for both prudential and consumer protection supervision and do
   not appear to have a specific focus on the latter. These arrangements can in principle give rise to
   conflicts between prudential supervision objectives and market conduct supervision objectives.
   Consumer protection and prudential supervision also require different types of supervisory profiles,
   skills and approaches, with the latter focusing more on quantitative skills and analysis of an
   institution’s financial soundness, and the former on qualitative skills and assessment of how an
   institution deals with consumers. Further, staff do not use, in any systematic way, many of the
   specific tools relevant to this area (such as mystery shopping, customer focus groups and surveys,
   review of advertising materials or a systematic analysis of customer complaints made to the various
   mediation services on offer). There are also concerns as to whether the relevant regulators have
   the required resources (including skills and capacity) for the consumer protection functions they
   may have to carry out. These issues will become more serious in the future as Zimbabwe develops
   its consumer protection legal and regulatory framework.
34. The need for supervisors to develop consumer protection specific supervisory
    resources, tools and capacity is especially important given the range of new laws and
    regulations that are being, or have been, developed to cover financial sector consumer
    protection issues. Examples include: (i) the proposed new Consumer Protection Law; (ii) the
    proposed banking sector rules covering disclosure of business conditions and dispute resolution
    mechanisms; (iii) the proposed new Electronic Banking Regulations; (iv) the ongoing reforms
    proposed to market conduct rules relevant to the pensions and insurance sectors; (v) the
    enactment of the Microfinance Act; and (vi) the proposed new market conduct rules for securities
    brokers.

35. There is potential for overlap between the responsibilities of the various regulators in
    relation to consumer protection policies and other initiatives. Specific issues in this
    context include (i) the need for a consistent approach to consumer protection issues which are
    common to the different parts of the financial sector (such as transparency of terms and
    conditions, unfair terms and dispute resolution) so as to provide consumers with similar rights and
    responsibilities where relevant and to minimize the risk of regulatory arbitrage; (ii) the increasing
    convergence of the different parts of the financial sector (for example, in relation to the distribution
    of insurance and securities products through banks and the sale of insurance policies through
    mobile phone networks); (iii) the need to deal with issues affecting corporate conglomerates which
    have entities dealing in different parts of the financial sector; (iv) the increasing need for
    cooperation and clear delineation of powers between financial sector supervisors and other
    agencies whose supervised entities are making forays into the financial market (such as POTRAZ);
    and (v) the potential for overlap between the functions of the specific financial sector regulators
    and the general powers of the proposed new Consumer Protection Commission under the draft
    Consumer Protection Bill 2014.58

36. Currently, there is only one consumer protection association operating in Zimbabwe,
    however it lacks resources and does not deal directly with financial consumer
    protection matters. The relevant organization is the Consumer Council of Zimbabwe (CCZ)
    which was formed in 1975. CCZ has five primary objectives: (i) consumer education; (ii)
    information dissemination; (iii) complaints handling; (iv) lobbying and advocacy; and (v) research.
    The current focus of the CCZ’s activities is on the first objective, consumer education. However,
    due to a lack of resources (CCZ currently has less than 20 staff members) and specialized training,
    CCZ does not have a particular focus on financial sector issues.

Key Recommendation(s)

37. Consumer/investor protection specific supervisory arrangements, resources, tools and
    capacity should be developed within the financial sector regulators and supervisors.
    This includes RBZ for banking (including mobile banking), payments and microfinance; IPEC for
    insurance and pensions; SECZ and ZSE for the capital markets; and the SME Ministry for Co-
    operatives. Specific issues to focus on in this context include: (i) as noted above, the desirability
    of separating prudential and consumer protection; and (ii) ensuring regulators have adequate
    consumer protection – specific resources, tools and capacity and training so that they can focus



58
  The Commission’s functions and powers are likely to include promoting fair business practices, protecting consumers from
unconscionable and unjust trade practices and deceptive or unfair conduct, improving consumer awareness, and providing an accessible
and efficient dispute resolution system. The Commission is also proposed to have power to “regulate the formation of some consumer
protection bodies for specific sectors” (section 6(h)) and to “have oversight on sector specific bodies established under the Commission”
(section 6(i)).
       on the areas of highest risk (which could be particular types of products, services, providers or
       market segments) and on developing a proportionate, scalable approach to supervision.

38. Coordination and consultation arrangements should be established between the
    various consumer protection regulators. Such arrangements could involve, for example,
    consultations on policy development on common issues, exchanges of information about issues
    arising from consumer complaints and discussions on issues relevant to financial sector
    conglomerates. The arrangements might also usefully be formalized through a Memorandum of
    Understanding or a coordination committee.

39. Assuming the Consumer Protection Bill becomes law and a Consumer Protection
    Commission is created, it will be necessary to clarify the Consumer Protection
    Commission’s role in relation to consumer protection in the financial sector. The optimal
    role of the Consumer Protection Commission will depend on its level of resources and capacity.
    However, it would most likely be preferable for the financial sector regulators to have sole
    responsibility for financial consumer protection, independent of both the Consumer Protection Bill
    and the Consumer Protection Commission. These regulators are most likely to have the technical
    knowledge and supervisory experience to undertake such activities. If, however, this approach is
    adopted then it will be important that a coordinated approach is taken between the different
    regulators, as proposed above.

40. Consideration should be given to strengthening the role of consumer organizations
    such as CCZ in financial consumer protection. Consumer associations can play an important
    role in raising awareness of financial consumers’ rights, monitoring business practices (for example
    by mystery shopping), and giving advice to consumers, among other activities. CCZ should receive
    sustainable annual grant funding so as to enable it to develop a more effective financial consumer
    protection role. Training programs should be instituted for CCZ’s staff and members so that they
    better understand financial services, and mutual cooperation between CCZ and financial
    supervisors should be promoted.

41. The following paragraphs address issues specific to the different parts of the financial
    sector. Unless otherwise stated, the above mentioned recommendations apply to each regualtor
    and supervisor in the financial sector.

BANKING SECTOR
42. Currently, there are no regulatory bodies specifically tasked with supervising financial
    consumer protection in the banking sector. The functions of RBZ, as stated in section 6 of
    the RBZ Act,59 primarily focus on fiscal and monetary stability, though clause (6)(1)(c) refers to the
    RBZ’s function “to foster the liquidity, solvency, stability and proper functioning of Zimbabwe’s
    financial system,” clause (6)(1)(d) refers to the RBZ’s function “to advance the general economic
    policies of the Government,” and clause (6)(1)(e) refers to the RBZ’s function “to supervise banking
    institutions and to promote the smooth operation of the payment system.” These clauses could be
    broadly interpreted to include financial consumer protection given its importance for financial
    stability (as evidenced by the lack of responsible lending standards that contributed to the global
    financial crisis in 2008). However, in the long-term, it would be preferable for RBZ to have a clearer
    and more direct mandate with respect to both financial consumer protection and financial
    inclusion.


59
     Act No. 5 of 1999, as amended by Act No. 22 of 2001, Act No. 16 of 2004, and Act No. 29 of 2005.
Key Recommendation(s)

43. The mandate of RBZ should be clarified in the long-term to specifically include financial
    consumer protection and financial inclusion. Ideally there would be no ambiguity as to RBZ’s
    legal mandate to develop and enforce a comprehensive financial consumer protection framework.
    It would also be helpful to specifically incorporate a financial inclusion mandate as well, given the
    low levels of financial inclusion noted previously.

DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES
44. RBZ has functions and powers in relation to the payments system but does not have
    direct regulatory or supervisory powers in relation to MNOs who provide mobile phone
    based payments services (this is the responsibility of POTRAZ). RBZ is able to regulate
    mobile phone based payments in reliance on its functions in relation to payments systems and its
    powers under the Payments Act and having regard to internal non-binding guidelines to regulate
    mobile banking. Specifically, the RBZ’s functions include “to supervise banking institutions and to
    promote the smooth operation of the payment system’60 and, under the Payments System Act,
    RBZ has broad powers in relation to payment systems. The latter powers extend to institutions
    other than financial institutions which provide services in relation to deposits, money transmission
    services and issuing and administering means of payment.61 In reliance on these powers RBZ is
    also developing Electronic Payments Regulations which are likely to address a number of the topics
    raised in this report. However, RBZ does not have express power to regulate consumer protection
    issues relevant to digital financial services, including mobile banking services.

45. IPEC similarly does not have a clear and comprehensive mandate to regulate financial
   consumer protection issues in relation to insurance products that are sold, serviced or
   made available via mobile phones.

46. The Competition and Tariffs Commission is currently conducting an enquiry into
    mobile phone based payments services. The mission team was told their particular focus is
    on fees and on arrangements with agents, and that they are being supported by South African
    competition regulators.62 It is also understood that the Commission plans to review competition in
    the financial sector more generally, subject to available resources (which are very limited – at the
    time of the CPFL Review mission there was only one person in the Research Department of the
    Commission).

Key Recommendation(s)

47. The power of RBZ and IPEC to regulate financial consumer protection issues in relation
    to digital financial services should be made express. There should be no doubt as to the
    powers of RBZ and IPEC in this regard. Consideration should also be given to developing the
    capacity of RBZ and IPEC to regulate and supervise the consumer protection issues which are
    specific to this context.

48. The proposed MoU between RBZ and POTRAZ should be finalized and extended so
   that IPEC and the Competition and Tariffs Commission are also a party. In particular the
   MoU should cover consultation and coordination arrangements between the regulators in relation


60
     Section 6(1) (e) of the RBZ Act.
61
     Sections 2(b) and 3 of the National Payments System Act.
62
     See also http://www.zimbabwesituation.com/news/zimsit_m_sa-experts-roped-into-econet-inquiry-the-herald/
       to matters such as new policy initiatives, approvals of new products and service providers and
       investigations, the establishment of a Coordination Committee and confidentiality. It is understood
       that many of these issues are proposed to be covered in the draft MoU that has been prepared
       for RBZ and POTRAZ.

49. RBZ should closely monitor the current inquiry into mobile phone based payments
    services by the Competition and Tariffs Commission and consult and collaborate as
    required. In the longer-term, consideration could be given to formalizing consultation
    arrangements under a MoU (see above). Consideration should also be given to expanding the
    research resources of the Commission and their capacity to investigate financial sector issues
    which are likely to have an adverse effect on consumers.

NBCI SECTOR
50. Continuous efforts have been made to establish cooperation between relevant
    authorities responsible for regulation and supervision of the NBCI sector. RBZ and the
    SME Ministry are the principal sector–specific regulators and supervisors in the NBCI sector. They
    include: (i) RBZ in relation to the new Microfinance Act;63 (ii) the RBZ is similarly responsible for
    supervision of building societies under the Building Societies Act;64 and (iii) the SME Ministry of
    supervises savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs) under the Co-operative Societies Act.65 To
    facilitate coordination between RBZ and the SME Ministry a MoU has been signed and it has been
    proposed to form a joint commission. However these arrangements have not yet been
    implemented.

51. The NBCI sector gives rise to specific capacity issues for RBZ. Under the new Microfinance
    Act, RBZ is responsible for market conduct supervision of all formal NBCIs except for SACCOs.
    There are multiple challenges for RBZ with this role: (i) the number of NBCIs is relatively high; (ii)
    they operate in both rural and remote areas of the country; (iii) they substantially differ one from
    each other in terms of size, client base, funding, products offered and modes of; and (iv) the
    mission team was told that there are significant numbers of NBCIs operating informally or in the
    shadow zone. It is also not clear whether RBZ has the skills, tools and resources to supervise
    microfinance institutions, especially as the Microfinance Act only came into operation in 2013 and
    RBZ had not previously exercised market conduct supervision.

52. The SME Ministry also faces capacity challenges in relation to its supervision of
    SACCOs. The total number of co-operative societies is high thus making it challenging for the
    SME Ministry to effectively oversee all of them and SACCOs in particular.66 On one view, this
    challenge might be partially addressed by shifting a part of the supervisory burden to a self-
    regulatory organization. However care would need to be taken to ensure that any such
    organization had the resources, skills and capacity, as well as the enforcement powers to take on
    such a role. It is also not clear that there is the regulatory power to make such a delegation of
    powers. For instance, pursuant to section 89 and section 90 of the COOPA registered apex
    organizations may form a National Co-operative Federation to represent the industry at national
    and international level67 and exercise other functions listed under the section 90(2) of the COOPA.
    However, the COOPA does not list self-regulation among the roles to be played by the National
    Co-operative Federation. Moreover, there is no such federation currently active in Zimbabwe.

63
     Section 4 of the Microfinance Act
64
     Section 5 of the Microfinance Act
65
     Section 4 of the Microfinance Act
66
     See paragraph 12 above re the total number of SACCOs
67
     Section 90(1) of the COOP Act.
       Further, the COOPA does not distinguish between prudential and market conduct aspects of
       supervision and regulation. The emphasis is more on the overall stability of co-operatives, their
       accounting and governance principles rather than on market conduct issues.

53. One option would be for the RBZ to take over responsibility for supervising SACCOs.
    The objective would be to ensure a harmonized approach to the regulation and supervision of
    SACCOs and other types of NBCIs, a level playing field and to minimize the risk of regulatory
    arbitrage. Non – financial cooperatives should however remain under the jurisdiction of the SME
    Ministry.

Key Recommendation(s)

54. Formal consultation and cooperation arrangements should be developed between
    NBCI supervisors. This might be done through the proposed MoU and the related joint
    commission. Such arrangements could cover detailed rules of cooperation and coordination that
    would guide the stakeholders in different instances where mutual interaction is either inevitable
    or highly desirable (e.g. regulation, supervision, enforcement and education). Ideally a lead agency
    would be designated to be responsible for leading and monitoring cooperation efforts and reporting
    to a body such as the joint commission or another designated governance body (e.g. the MoF or
    a Parliamentary Committee).

55. RBZ should focus on developing its capacity to monitor and enforce the Microfinance
    Act. A proportional approach towards supervision and enforcement should be taken so the focus
    is on activities and NBCIs considered as being of the highest risk to consumers.

56. The responsibility for supervision of SACCOs should be clarified. The law should provide
    for a clear regulatory and supervisory mandate regarding prudential and market conduct regulation
    of SACCOs. The current responsibility of the SME Ministry should be reviewed and in the mid- to
    long-term consideration should be given to giving RBZ responsibility for supervising SACCOs. In
    the interim, close consultation and cooperation arrangements should be established between RBZ
    and the SME Ministry.

SECURITIES SECTOR
57. Activity in the securities sector in Zimbabwe over the last several years has
    demonstrated a commitment by the government and industry to develop the securities
    market and improve and create investor protection institutions and legal structures.
    The Securities Act No. 17 of 2004 (Securities Act) created the Securities Exchange Commission
    Zimbabwe (SECZ) with its first mentioned goal being “to provide high levels of investor
    protection”.68 Until the SECZ became operational, the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange regulated
    securities markets. Further amendments in 2013 concentrated the regulation of the entire
    securities sector in the SECZ. Additional protection for investors were provided by the requirement
    that securities accounts be held in investors’ names and by the creation of a Central Depository to
    hold dematerialized securities, with the Central Depository being almost ready for operations at
    the time of the mission. The recent creation of an Investors Protection Fund also provides investors
    with a mechanism for safeguarding their investments in the event of the failure of a broker.69 The
    Investor Protection Fund is operational, but in its early stages and has not had to make any
    payments to investors to date. Finally, the planned automation of ZSE should provide a more
    efficient and transparent mechanism for trading securities by investors.

68
     Section 4 (1)(a) of the Securities Act.
69
     Securities Act, as amended, Article IXA, sections 86A-86I.
58. Although statutorily created in 2004, the SECZ did not become operational until 2008
    with a mandate to oversee registered stock exchanges, brokers and a registered
    Central Depository. The mandate was extended in 2013 to include collective investments, asset
    managers and oversight over an Investor Protection Fund. The Central Depository will be
    operational in 2014. The SECZ is funded by the industry in the form of fees and charges for
    licenses, and levies imposed by the SECZ on licensed entities. Due to the low amount of current
    activity in the securities market, this has resulted in limited funds for the SECZ which has limited
    its ability to carry out its responsibilities. Nonetheless, the SECZ has examined all of the brokers
    every year through on-site and off-site examinations. The additional responsibility of examining
    asset managers and unit trusts will stretch its resources. New training will also be needed for its
    staff to handle its new responsibilities.

Key Recommendation(s)
59. SECZ’s capacity needs to be enhanced by the government, at least until it is able to be
    self-funded so as to enable it to fully carry out its mission. Further, additional training for
    the SECZ’s staff will be needed to increase their capacity to handle their new responsibilities and
    the developments in established responsibilities such as automated stock markets operations and
    Central Depository activities.

INSURANCE AND PENSIONS SECTORS
60. The Insurance and Pensions Commission (IPEC) is responsible for the supervision of
    the insurance and pension sectors, with the MoF having policy responsibility for
    insurance and pension’s legislation. The scope of the IPEC’s supervisory activities is primarily
    determined by the principal legislation relevant to the insurance sector: the Insurance Act and
    IPEC Act. The Insurance Act governs the organization and operation of insurance business, and
    auxiliary professions and includes very limited provisions dealing with consumer protection
    issues.70 However, section 87 gives the power to IPEC to declare a specified practice or method
    of conducting business an irregular or undesirable practice or an undesirable method of conducting
    business.
61. Thus, IPEC has an overall responsibility for consumer protection and market conduct.
    The IPEC’s objectives under the Insurance Act include “the protection of the rights, benefits and
    other interests of policy owners and of any beneficiaries of policies” as well as “the monitoring of
     the solvency of insurers and the maintenance of sound insurance principles and practices in the
     conduct of insurance business in Zimbabwe”.71 However, the IPEC’s mandate regarding consumer
     protection and market conduct is rather vague. Moreover, the capacity of IPEC is currently
     stretched, with only 24 staff in total for both the insurance and pensions sectors, thus making it
     difficult for IPEC to fully meet the statutory objectives. IPEC also lacks much needed specialists,
     such as staff with an actuarial or legal training.

Key Recommendation(s)
62. A comprehensive analysis should be undertaken of the roles and responsibilities of
    IPEC’s current functions and those that are proposed in relation to market conduct
    and the related required skills and resources. Moreover, the hiring of a trained actuary is
    recommended in the short-term for IPEC, with general capacity building over the medium-term.

70
   For instance, provisions dealing with court actions by policy holders against insurers (section 75); requirements for the display of
information at business premises (section 78) and requirements for life and funeral policies to be printed in no less than 8 point font and
other policies to be in clearly legible letters (section 83).
71
   Sections 5(b) and (c).
     Joining and active participation in regional and international supervisory organizations (such as
     the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the Committee of Insurance, Securities and
     Non-banking Financial Authorities (CISNA is part of SADC) and the International Organization of
     Pension Supervisors) could help IPEC build knowledge of international, supervision related good
     practice.72 In the longer-term, specific training on consumer protection issues and related
     supervisory tools will be needed as contemplated in the General Overview above. The need for
     such capacity building is more urgent at present for consumer protection rules relevant to the
     insurance market, but will also become necessary for pensions as the retail market develops.




72
  CISNA- Committee of Insurance, Securities and Non-bank Financial Authorities – is part of the Southern Africa Development Community
(SADC). IOPS stands for the International Organisation of Pension Supervisors.
                               LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
63. A strong legal and regulatory framework for financial consumer protection is crucial
    to protect financial consumers and proactively prevent market abuses. Market conduct
    regulation should at a minimum ensure that consumers: (i) receive information to allow them to
    make informed decisions; (ii) are not subject to unfair or deceptive practices; and (iii) have access
    to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes. All laws and subordinate legislation relating to
    consumer protection in the financial sector should be considered in this context with a view to
    assessing their scope and sphere of application, any related gaps and overlaps and with a particular
    focus on issues such as licensing, transparency and disclosure, business conduct, recourse
    mechanisms, data protection and credit reporting. The legal and regulatory framework should also
    be supported by supervisory agencies which have the capacity to ensure effective implementation
    (see Institutional Arrangements above).

GENERAL OVERVIEW
64. There are very limited consumer protection rules specifically applicable to the financial
    sector, with the exception of the Microfinance Act which is not yet being actively
    supervised or enforced. Details of the few laws that exist are described below in the sector –
    specific sections.
65. There are, however, scattered laws of general application with limited provisions on
    issues relevant to consumer protection. They include the Consumer Contracts Act (which
    primarily deals with unfair terms and conduct and contains a requirement for plain language) and
    the Contractual Penalties Act (which allows courts to provide relief to debtors when penalties are
    considered excessive). However the mission team was told that consumers do not often seek to
    rely on these acts. Also relevant is the anti- money laundering legislation in Zimbabwe which
    includes rules relating to data collection and record keeping.73 Further, the Competition Act
    contains provisions on unfair business practices such as misleading advertising74 as well as
    concerning anti-competitive practice more generally.
66. The proposed Consumer Protection Bill provides for an overarching consumer
    protection framework. The Bill, which was released for public comment in October 2014 after
    several years in development, includes provisions providing for: (i) establishment of the Consumer
    Protection Commission (there is no provision for either the MoF or RBZ to be represented on the
    Board) and its enforcement powers; (ii) fundamental consumer rights such as rights to plain and
    understandable language; to be heard and obtain redress; and to consumer education; (iii) relief
    against unfair contract terms and unfair contracts and (iv) the establishment of a Consumer Court
    (a special court to enforce consumer rights). The Bill applies generally to all sectors, and does not
    refer specifically to the financial sector.
67. Other new consumer protection laws and regulations are being, or have been,
    developed to cover financial sector consumer protection issues. Examples include: (i) the
    proposed banking sector rules covering disclosure of business conditions and dispute resolution
    mechanisms; (ii) the proposed new Electronic Banking Regulations; (iii) the ongoing reforms
    proposed to market conduct rules relevant to the pensions and insurance sectors; (iv) the
    enactment of the new Microfinance Act; and (v) the proposed new market conduct rules for
    securities brokers.


73
     Bank Use Promotion and Suppression of Money Laundering Act (2004).
74
     First Schedule of the Microfinance Act.
68. However there remain significant gaps in the overall financial consumer protection
    legal and regulatory framework. For example, despite the Microfinance Act, there are virtually
    no legally binding transparency or business conduct/consumer protection provisions for the
    financial sector and no laws on the licensing and conduct of credit bureaus, data protection or
    requiring debt collectors to be registered and to refrain from abusive collection practices.

Key Recommendation(s)

69. In the near to medium-term it is recommended that: (i) the proposed new laws be
    reviewed against international best practice standards and finalized and implemented
    as a priority; and (ii) the role of the proposed Consumer Protection Commission in
    relation to financial products and services be clarified.

70. A comprehensive financial consumer protection law should be developed in the long
    term to cover all parts of the financial sector. This law should establish clear rules on
    disclosure and sales practices, business conduct, account handling and maintenance, advertising,
    privacy and data protection and dispute resolution mechanisms, among other topics. Ideally it
    would cover all parts of the financial sector, with regulations being made for the purposes of
    specific products (such as for credit cards and insurance contracts). However, it is appreciated
    that the development of such a law can only be a long term objective, given the likely complexity
    of its provisions and the need for widespread industry and public consultations as well as the
    parliamentary process.

71. A pragmatic approach in the short-term would be for the relevant regulators to issue
   regulations on key topics. Examples include disclosure and transparency and complaints
   handling mechanisms. Proceeding in such an incremental manner would provide the added benefit
   of also allowing for supervisors to gradually build capacity for implementation and for providers to
   adjust their internal systems accordingly. This would not, however, be necessary in the
   microfinance sector given the comprehensive provisions in the Microfinance Act.

72. The role of the proposed Consumer Protection Commission in relation to the financial
    sector needs to be clarified. This issue is discussed above under Institutional Arrangements.
    In summary, the recommendation is to specifically carve out financial services from the Consumer
    Protection Bill and to make it clear that the financial sector regulators have responsibility for
    consumer protection in the financial sector.


BANKING SECTOR
 73. There are currently very few laws or regulations with respect to financial consumer
     protection which specifically apply to the banking sector.75 There are however informal
     requirements from RBZ regarding complaints handling mechanisms and disclosure of “business
     conditions” in bank branches and websites and in newspapers, for which compliance appears to
     be based primarily on moral suasion. Further, the mission team was advised that amendments to
     the Banking Act currently being drafted by the Attorney General will include provisions on
     enhanced internal dispute resolution mechanisms and enhanced disclosure of business conditions
     for banks, as well as provisions on the creation of an Office of the Public Financial Protector for
     banking sector customers. The RBZ has also published the Minimum Disclosure Requirements for

 The Microfinance Act No. 3 of 2013 includes provisions on financial consumer protection and does technically apply to any subsidiary or
75

division of a banking institution engaging in microfinance business. It is discussed in the NBCI context.
      Financial institutions76 concerning disclosure of financial statements and other information about
      the financial condition and health of financial institutions.

Key Recommendation(s)

 74. The recommendations in the General Overview above are especially relevant to the
     banking sector. Pending their implementation the Code of Banking Practice should be revised
     and implemented (see Business Conduct below).

DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES
 75. RBZ has comprehensive internal guidelines relating to new electronic payment
     systems, but there is currently no legislation which specifically applies to consumer
     protection issues relevant to digital financial services in Zimbabwe. The RBZ Electronic
     Payments Guidelines cover important consumer issues such as the need for approval of new
     electronic payments systems and requirements for: risk management systems, security measures,
     capacity for interoperability, finality of payments, ongoing availability of services, full disclosures,
     audit trails, transaction authentication, dispute resolution procedures and the requirement to hold
     an amount equivalent to e-money balances in a trust account. They also have general obligations
     for “comprehensive” policies on complaints handling, disclosure, transparency, displays of fees
     and charges and an obligation “to continuously adopt international best practices as guided by
     Central Bank”.77 The Guidelines, however, apply only to payment systems and payment system
     participants, that is “systems that enable the transfer, payment and cash withdrawal of funds
      between a payer and payee, utilizing instruments and procedures that relate to such payment
      systems like auto teller machine and point of sale cards, mobile phones, and computers among
      other electronic instruments.”78 Thus, the Guidelines do not cover specifically other types of
      financial products and services offered through digital means.

 76. RBZ exerts further influence over payment system participants by requiring that each
     MNO partner with a bank. Specifically, each MNO is required to enter into a Service Level
     Agreement which covers various matters relevant to market conduct, as well as more general
     obligations. Relevant areas covered include the applicable tariff schedule, customer terms and
     conditions and confidentiality and dispute resolution. Although these requirements are important,
     they lack detail and, importantly, they do not clearly have the force of law, are not transparent
     to the general public, are uncertain as they can be changed at any time and do not provide
     consumers with any rights. Further, they apply only to payment systems and not other types of
     digital financial services (such as insurance products provided through mobile phones).

Key Recommendation(s)

77. There is a need to clarify the consumer protection rules relating to digital financial
    services and to actively supervise those rules. In particular, there is a need for binding laws
    or regulations relating to: (i) safeguarding client’s funds (and especially a requirement to hold an
    amount equivalent to outstanding e-money wallets in a trust account which cannot be used for
    operational purposes); (ii) customer – specific disclosures relating to product features and
    limitations, relevant interest rates, fees and terms and conditions and the identity of the service
    provider; (iii) the confidentiality of client data and appropriate limits on its use and disclosure for
    marketing purposes; (iv) the ability to form electronic contracts and make electronic disclosures;

76
   Guideline No. 03-2004/BSD.
77
   RBZ Electronic Payment Guidelines, section 10.
78
   RBZ Electronic Payment Guidelines, Purpose.
     (v) liability for unauthorized and mistaken payments, system malfunctions, and lost or stolen
     devices; and (vi) complaint resolution. Financial sector supervisors should also be able to actively
     supervise MNO’s compliance with these laws, in consultation with POTRAZ.

NBCI SECTOR
78. There are strong consumer protection measures in place for microfinanciers, but there
    are important gaps in the scope of application of the Microfinance Act. The principal
    sector – specific legislation for NBCIs is the Microfinance Act, which requires registration of
    microfinanciers; certain disclosure requirements to be met;79 responsible lending standards;80
    and, importantly, requires compliance with a statutory code of conduct (Microfinance Code). The
    Microfinance Code deals with issues such as fair treatment of clients; maximum collateral values;
    transparency; over indebtedness standards; debt collection practices; privacy; complaint
    resolution, and client education and financial literacy.

79. The Microfinance Act does not apply to SACCOs81 and applies only to some activities
    of banks and building societies.82 Thus, there exists an uneven level playing field, which is not
    clearly justified by the different types of NBCIs. Further, particularly with regard to the limited
    application of the Microfinance Act to banks and building societies, the risk of regulatory arbitrage
    exists. This is a concern as while the Microfinance Act provides for a comprehensive market
    conduct and consumer protection framework, banking regulation is less complex, and the COOPA
    includes only scattered and often minimalistic market conduct and consumer protection provisions.

Key Recommendation(s)

80. The regulatory framework should be enhanced in order to establish a level playing
    field and prevent regulatory arbitrage. Similar types of activities and products/services should
    be subject to the same rules, notwithstanding differences in the type of the service provider.
    Specifically, the Microfinance Act should apply to SACCOs. Further the provisions should apply to
    all relevant microfinance activities carried out by banks and building societies. The continued
    application of the Moneylending and Rates of Interest Act also needs to be clarified.

SECURITIES SECTOR
81. SECZ has the authority to license all major participants in the securities market, but
    has limited power to sanction entities that contravene the law. Further, in certain areas,
    such as the sales of unit trusts through banks, the SECZ does not qualify, license or supervise the
    relevant sales personnel. This is a significant gap in the regulatory structure for protection of retail
    investors in unit trusts.

82. A number of investor protection initiatives to fully implement the Securities Act have
    either yet to be completed or are missing and are necessary in order to put in place a
    comprehensive investor protection regime. Draft rules for market conduct by brokers have
    been drafted and are still in review. Regulations for the creation of a Brokers’ Institute are also
    under review. Some regulations authorized by the Securities Act, such as regulations for sales
    practices by brokers and Unit Trusts, have not been prepared, nor have the regulations for the
    unit trust subsector as a whole. For example, the Collective Investments Act and the Securities Act

79
   Section 15 of the Microfinance Act.
80
   Section 26 of the Microfinance Act.
81
   Section 3(2) of the Microfinance Act.
82
   Sections 2 and 3(1) of the Microfinance Act.
        both provide for a prohibition of unsolicited calls unless they are made in conformity with
        regulations prepared by the SECZ and issued by the Minister. These regulations have not been
        prepared. Proposed new regulations for the ZSE which contain significant investor protection
        provisions are also on hold. Many areas covered by the ZSE rules need to be transferred to SECZ
        rules, such as broker conduct and disclosure. In the interim the ZSE is operating under old rules
        prepared under the Securities Exchange Act and deemed to be currently effective. All of these
        will need to be put in place in order to fully establish an effective and transparent investor
        protection regime.

83. During the transition to the full SECZ regulation of the securities market, a number of
    the ZSE rules will need to migrate to the SECZ, such as the rules applying to broker
    conduct with its clients, disclosure rules and dispute resolution of client complaints.
    This process has already begun and should continue as quickly as possible under current market
    and regulatory conditions and priorities.

Key Recommendation(s)

84. In order to extend the enforcement powers of the SECZ beyond registration and
    deregistration, the government should permit the SECZ to impose fines. Although the
    ability to do so varies from country to country, the US SEC and the UK Financial Conduct Authority
    have the authority to impose fines on licensed entities and it has proven to be an effective tool.

85. The prepared draft market conduct rules need to be finalized and put in place as
    quickly as possible. Regulations regarding broker conduct and disclosure should also be
    prepared and implemented. It is also urgent that bank employees selling unit trusts should be
    required to be licensed, educated and supervised in their activities and it should be clear to
    potential investors that the relevant bank is not in any way responsible for investments in the unit
    trust. Finally, the SECZ also needs to prepare regulations for unsolicited calls, although they may
    not be urgent under current market conditions.

INSURANCE SECTOR
86. The Insurance Act contains only very limited provisions concerning consumer
    protection but IPEC is preparing amendments to the Insurance Act which may address
    some of the issues. There are general provisions concerning licensing, actions against insurers,
    registration of brokers, the legible printing of policies, the display of information at business
    premises (if the Commissioner so requires), and the Commissioner has power to declare “a
        specified practice or method of conducting business an irregular or undesirable practice or an
        undesirable method of conducting business”.83 It is understood that IPEC is in the process of
        preparing proposed amendments to the existing laws which will provide for significantly expanded
        consumer protection provisions.

87. Third party motor insurance is compulsory in Zimbabwe but there is no arrangement
    in place to deal with situations where there the guilty party in an accident is not
    insured. The Insurance Council of Zimbabwe (ICZ) in the past used to run a pool created among
    all motor insurers to take care of these claims, by paying the corresponding indemnity, but the
    mission team was advised that the scheme is no longer operating.




83
     Section 87 of the Insurance Act.
88. Insurance products are increasingly being sold by third parties at the premises of the
    banks or other financial institutions under the “bank-assurance” model and through
    the internet and by mail. Third parties selling such products should be subject to the same
    training, ethical standards and financial guarantee requirements that apply to a registered broker
    or insurance agent as established by the regulation. Further, consumer protection rules need to
    be developed applying to the case of a sale through Internet or by mail if there is not a “visible”
    intermediary.

Key Recommendation(s)

89. The regulatory framework for consumer protection in insurance should be reviewed
    as a matter of urgency with a view to providing comprehensive consumer protection.
    As well as provisions concerning transparency, time limits for the transmission of premiums and
    claims settlement and dispute resolution mechanisms, there should be specific rules to deal with
    insurance contracts generally (including in relation to the duty of disclosure, when liability arises
    and the basis for indemnity and avoidance and termination). The sale of insurance products via
    mobile phones should also be covered. See above under “Digital Financial Services” for the
    consumer protection issues which are specific to digital financial services.

90. Consideration should be given to introducing a nominal defendant scheme or an
    equivalent indemnity arrangement (third party motor insurance). Options could include
    re-introduction of the abovementioned scheme or a variation of it or a more formal statutory
    nominal defendant arrangement as exists in some countries (e.g. South Africa). A public awareness
    campaign should accompany any new rules.

91. There should be formal standards of practice to deal with the sale of insurance
    products by third parties. These standards should contain the minimum disclosures and product
    suitability assessments required.

PENSIONS SECTOR
92. The current pension legislation provides little by way of direct guidance in terms of
    consumer protection. For example, no specific function is articulated in relation to IPEC having
    to protect the rights of members of pension funds in the Insurance and Pensions Commission Act.
    Likewise, the fiduciary duty of trustees is not explicitly outlined in the Pension and Provident Fund
    Act. The Pensions and Provident Fund Regulations 1991 are silent on issues such as member
    disclosure, selling and advertising procedures etc.

93. In addition to the general application of consumer protection laws, the rights of
    pension fund members should be protected by a board of trustees, which includes their
    representatives. However, few of these representatives have any knowledge of pension issues
    as only basic qualifications are specified (such a minimum education levels) and no training is
    required.84

94. When it comes to legal challenges related to pensions, cases (in particular relating to
    the conversion issue) have been launched, but have not come to trial. The Public Inquiry
    will be an important source of information and redress relating to these on-going disputes.


84
  See for example (Mazviona 2013) quotes a study that revealed that trustees lack investment expertise to manage pension funds, and
this has impacted negatively on the pension funds (60 percent of the respondents blamed the behavior of trustees for low levels of
retirement income).
95. One key legislative protection for pension fund members is that their pension assets
    should be separated from the plan sponsor and /or plan administrator and held by a
    custodian. Although the Pension and Provident Fund Regulations 1991 requires insurance
    companies to establish a separate and distinct fund - ‘The Pensions Fund’ – the appointment of a
    custodian is not required. This is a concern even though appointment of custodians is gradually
    becoming industry practice.

Key Recommendation(s)
96. It is recommended that the revised Pension and Provident Fund Act (2014) include
    specific requirements on consumer protection. The draft Bill (version as of July 2014)
    contains some such clauses (for example on communication with stakeholders), but should be
    reviewed when in due course in light of the World Bank Good Practices and other international
    pension related standards. For instance, mandatory custodian requirements are urgently needed
    for all funds as this is a key protection mechanism for the assets owned by pension fund members.
    The requirement for pension fund assets to be held by a custodian should be included in the
    revised Pension and Provident Fund Bill (2014) and the regulator should require that custodian
    functions are introduced for all funds urgently in new rules reflecting the World Bank’s Good
    Practices for Financial Consumer Protection and the OECD pension standards.85
97. Further training is required to support employee appointed trustees in particular and
    allow them to fulfill their key role in providing protection for pension fund members.
    This should cover issues such as fund management issues relating to investments, the nature of
    trust law, the role of trustees, what questions to ask service providers etc. A standard on-line
    training course could be provided by IPEC (adapted from existing international material, such as
    that provided by the UK Pension Regulator).86 All trustees should be required to take the course
    upon appointment.
98. It is further strongly advised that the recommendations from the Public Inquiry should
    be implemented in a timely manner (as noted above).




85
     OECD Guidelines on Pension Fund Governance No. 8 Custodian.
86
     https://trusteetoolkit.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk/
                          TRANSPARENCY AND DISCLOSURE
99. Specific disclosure requirements can help create an informed consumer marketplace,
    enable product comparisons and encourage competition. It is, however, important that
    any new requirements in this regard are proportionate in the sense of reflecting the risks of the
    relevant activity, the literacy/capability level of the relevant consumers and do not impose costs
    which outweigh the benefits. A further consideration in drafting disclosure requirements for an
    economy with low levels of financial inclusion is the likely low levels of understanding of the nature
    of some financial products (such as mobile banking and insurance products).

GENERAL OVERVIEW
100. Whilst there are some provisions requiring disclosure of terms and conditions of
   financial products (especially in the Microfinance Act), there are significant gaps. In
   particular, there is a need to enhance the legal and regulatory framework to provide for further
   transparency in relation to: (i) the specific items of information which should be included for the
   different types of financial products: (ii) the availability of summary information about common
   financial products which highlights the most important information and features of a product and
   encourages comparability; (iii) periodic account statements; and (iv) electronic disclosures and
   contracts.

Key Recommendation(s)

101. In the short-term, it is recommended that the relevant regulators focus on the
   following activities (subject to the comments below concerning the Microfinance Act):

          Contractual disclosures: Each financial sector account holder should receive a copy of
           their contract which should contain all relevant terms and conditions, interest rates and
           applicable fees. For example, a loan contract should include the interest rate and how
           interest is calculated, all fees, charges and commission amounts, repayment amounts and
           frequency, details of any insurance related to the contract (such as credit life insurance),
           details of the credit provider, as well as information on the consequences of late payment
           of debt by customers, information about any security which must be provided (for example,
           in the case of a housing loan secured by real estate) and information about complaints
           handling mechanisms available in the case of a complaint or dispute. Further, for SACCOs
           there could be a need to specify the minimum membership related information that should
           be provided.

          Key Facts Statements: It would be helpful for consumers’ understanding of financial
           products and would assist comparability if financial institutions were required to publish,
           and give to consumers, a short form (one page), clearly expressed Key Facts Statements
           for commonly used debit, credit and insurance products. By way of example, such a
           statement should include for a loan contract: the interest rate, fees and charges, the total
           amount to be repaid, the term of the loan and repayment details. Examples of countries
           which have requirements for such statements of this type include Australia, Ghana, Mexico,
           Peru, the United States and various European countries.

          Total cost of credit interest rate: Consideration should be given to including a
           requirement to disclose a total cost of credit interest rate which shows as a single rate the
           applicable interest rate and mandatory fees (such as a loan application fee) and charges
           (such as for a credit- life insurance premium);

          Statements of account and receipts: There should be a requirement to provide
           periodic statements of account free of charge for debit, credit and investment products
           and also for transaction records;

          Electronic disclosures and contracts: There is a need for clearer rules as to the
           circumstances in which contractual and transaction information can be provided
           electronically and as to the electronic formation of contracts;

          Legibility: All disclosures should be required to be simply and clearly expressed and in a
           minimum font size (for example, 11 point font); and

          Consumer testing of proposed new disclosure requirements: The aim is to ensure
           the disclosed information is easily understood and useful.

102. In the longer-term these issues might be covered by the proposed overarching
   financial consumer protection law.


BANKING SECTOR
103. Few rules exist regarding the consistent, standardized disclosure of banking
   product terms and conditions, fees and charges. The Monetary Policy Statement issued by
   RBZ in January 2014 (which is not clearly enforceable) requires that all banks “display their
   conditions of service (charges and interest rates) in banking halls and also publish them periodically
   in circulating newspapers” (section 102(e)). “Business conditions” observed to be disclosed by
   some sample banks include information on interest rates, certain fees and charges and maximum
   and minimum balances. Information about complaints handling mechanisms, deposit insurance
   and the consequences of default is not typically included and it is not clear that all fees and charges
   are disclosed. The lack of transparency as to fees and charges, and their high cost, was an issue
   frequently raised by stakeholders. There are also differences between banks as to the content and
   format of the information disclosed and not all banks appear to make the required disclosures.

104. There is no requirement for consumers to be given a copy of their contract for a
   banking product. Consumers are infrequently given a copy of their entire customer contract.
   Rather, customer-specific facility or offer letters are provided that include certain product-specific
   terms, but make reference to general “business conditions” published elsewhere (in newspapers,
   branch posters, and bank websites).

105. Many banking institutions do not provide periodic statements automatically. It is
   common practice to only provide them on request and to charge a fee for a hard copy.

Key Recommendation(s)

106. In the short-term, comprehensive guidelines should be issued by RBZ on disclosure
   and transparency. These guidelines should include the matters described above under the
   General Overview. At a minimum, the requirement for disclosure of “business conditions” should
   be formalized (ideally in regulations), clarified and enforced. RBZ should clearly specify details of
   the “business conditions” that must be disclosed and the format of disclosure. Banks should also
   be required to add a notation that additional fees and charges may apply and to provide
   information on where consumers can obtain further information.

107. Consideration should be given to requiring banks to automatically provide periodic
   statements to customers free of charge for all types of bank products and services.
   Information in statements could include, for example, details of opening and closing balances,
   debits and credits and especially of interest charges and fees and charges in the statement period.
   Fees charged for dormant accounts should be highlighted. Such statements should be provided by
   mail or, where that is not reasonably practicable, from a bank branch. Electronic copies should
   only be provided with the customer’s consent.

DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES
108. The abovementioned issues concering disclosure generally also apply in the digital
   context with some exceptions. The RBZ Electronic Payment Guidelines, which apply to all
   payment systems participants and providers, have general obligations for “comprehensive” policies
   on complaints handling, disclosure, transparency, displays of fees and charges. Presumably
   because of these requirements, the mission team observed that, as a matter of practice,
   consumers do receive a copy of the terms and conditions applicable to e-wallet services and
   information about fees and charges are generally displayed on MNOs’ websites and at agents’
   premises. However, the sample terms and conditions reviewed had many limitations. For example,
   they were in a font size which was so small that it was virtually unreadable, make provision for
   unilateral changes by the MNO (including as to fees and charges), provide that statements are
   available on request and contain broad limitations of liability for the benefit of the MNO.
109. The insurance sector, unlike digital payments, does not seem to have the benefit
   of any regulatory guidelines or regulations dealing with transparency issues in relation
   to insurance products which are provided digitally. In particular, it does not seem to be
   standard practice that insured persons are provided with clear, comprehensive disclosures in a
   form they can keep as to the terms of a mobile phone based insurance product including details
   of any exclusions and claims procedures and limitations on liability. However, it is understood that
   premiums and a general description of the benefits under the policy is provided, in some cases via
   a mobile phone.
110. There are no mandatory laws concerning the electronic disclosure of terms and
   conditions, statement of accounts, transaction records, policy terms and prices or in
   relation to electronic contracting. Significant issues in this context include: (i) the need for
   consumers to obtain disclosure of contractual and transaction information in a form which is clear,
   legible and in a form they can keep; and (ii) the legal efficacy of electronic contracts. Currently
   there appears to be a legal vacuum on these issues in Zimababwe, which is of concern given the
   rapid innovations which are taking place in the delivery of financial products through mobile
   phones.

Key Recommendation(s)
111. In the short-term, comprehensive mandatory regulations should be issued by the
   relevant regulator on disclosure and transparency. These guidelines should include the
   matters described above under the General Overview.
112. There should be provision made for the conditions on which contractual
   information may be disclosed electronicially and on which a contract may be formed
   electronically. At a minimum, there would be provisions to the effect that disclosures may be
   made electronically provided that: (i) the consumer consents; (ii) the information provided is in a
     minimum of an 11 point font, in clear, simply expressed terms and in a language that the consumer
     can understand; (iii) the consumer obtains the relevant information in a form they can keep; and
     (iv) written copies of contractual information are available through sources such as branches and
     agents premises and on request. There are a number of jurisdictions which have laws concerning
     electronic transactions, including Rwanda and Kenya.87

SECURITIES SECTOR
113. Draft rules have been prepared to implement the disclosure provisions in the
   Securities Act (Disclosure Rules), but have not been implemented. The Disclosure Rules
   contain a number of relevant provisions such as Know Your Customer rules; however, they do not
   contain provisions regarding the disclosure in writing of specific facts to potential customers, such
   as fees, risks, customer complaint procedures and account termination policies. Such disclosures
   are left to the discretion of individual brokers. Further, although the Disclosure Rules deal with
   some issues related to Unit Trusts, such as disclosures about past performance, they do not
   provide for a comprehensive regulatory regime for unit trusts. Such a regime should cover such
   areas as Net Asset Value (NAV) calculations; the rights of unit holders; redemption rights and
   circumstances when redemptions may be suspended; obligations to disclose broker commissions
   and other financial inducements by brokers who work for the unit trust; and policies with regard
   to frequent trading which allow investors to purchase and sell units of the unit trust during the
   day or other calculation period but prior to the calculation of the NAV at the end of the period.

Key Recommendation(s)

114. The above mentioned Disclosure Rules should be finalized and implemented as
   quickly as possible. In addition, the rules need to include more specific provisions as to
   requirements for disclosure of the terms and conditions of securities accounts in order to make
   such disclosure more uniform among brokers. Disclosure and operation rules for unit trusts also
   need to be drafted in order to have comprehensive, uniformly applied provisions for all unit trusts.

INSURANCE SECTOR
115. There are no provisions in the Insurance Act which explicitly require disclosure of
   policy terms and conditions and premiums or the provision of a Key Facts Statement
   which might facilitate product comparability and competition more generally. There is
   neither a specific provision in the Insurance Act or other insurance regulation, requiring disclosure
   of the fact that an insurance product sold by a bank is not a product of the bank or guaranteed
   by the bank.

Key Recommendation(s)

116. Comprehensive disclosure requirements for policy holders should be introduced as
   a matter of urgency. They should include disclosure of key policy terms, premiums, exclusions
   and risks. Moreover, a requirement should be introduced, in relevant cases, requiring disclosure
   of the fact that an insurance product sold by a bank is not a product of the bank, or guaranteed
   by the bank. Consideration should also be given to introducing Key Facts Statement requirements
   for commonly sold insurance products, such as simple life and funeral policies.


87
  See Law relating to Electronic Messages, Electronic Signatures and Electronic Transactions (Nº 18/2010 of 12/05/2010) and the Kenya
Information and Communications Act Chapter 411A 2011.
PENSIONS SECTOR
117. Though individual plan members have few choices to make in terms of their
   pension provisioning, the current pension legislation provides little by way of direct
   guidance in terms of member disclosure. For example, the Pension and Provident Fund
   Regulations 1991 contains requirements for the reporting of financial statements by pension fund
   and pension administrators and insurance companies. However, there are no sections regarding
   disclosure of information to fund members. This is particularly a problem in relation to the selection
   of a fund to cover income on retirement, which is the key decision individual fund members have
   to make.

Key Recommendation(s)

118. The revised Pension and Provident Fund Act (2014) should include specific
   requirements on disclosure to members of pension funds, including in relation to the
   choice of retirement income products. The draft Bill (version as of July 2014) contains such
   clauses, which will need to be reviewed in light of the World Bank Good Practices and other
   international pension related standards and with due consideration of the potential for a retail
   market for pension products to develop in the future.

119. In future, IPEC could become a source of central, comparable information on
   pension administrators, as is the case in countries such as Hong Kong, Chile and
   Mexico. Comparable information on performance, costs and products will be needed if a retail
   market develops.
                                    BUSINESS CONDUCT

120. A key consumer protection concern is that financial service providers, and their
   staff and other intermediaries, do not engage in fair business practices. Specific issues
   in this context include proper training of retail sales officers and other intermediaries, product
   suitability advice, responsible lending standards, misleading and deceptive advertising and sales
   practices, tying and bundling of different types of financial services and products, unfair contract
   terms, cooling – off periods and debt collection practices.

GENERAL OVERVIEW
121. There are various business practices of concern in Zimbabwe’s financial sector,
   some of which exist notwithstanding relevant regulations and some of which apply in
   the absence of a applicable law. The examples of most concern are described below.

          Staff training. Although (mostly larger) financial institutions commonly train their staff in
           how to communicate and deal with clients, there are no minimum competency and training
           requirements so far as the banking, NBCI and the securities sector are concerned.

          There are only limited obligations to assess the suitability of products for
           consumers. This is a particular concern in the securities and insurance industries, where
           products are likely to be complex, with little understood levels of risk and potential for
           large–scale losses. A further concern is the lack of product suitability standards for non–
           credit products sold or distributed by a bank or an NBCI. Issues relating to affordability of
           credit products are discussed below under Banking and NBCIs.

          Unilateral changes to contracts. The Micorfinance Act prohibits any change in an
           interest rate under a contract. Further, the Consumer Contracts Act contains generally
           expressed provisions dealing with broadly defined unfair terms. However, otherwise there
           are not any specific provisions dealing with unilateral changes to fiannce sector provisions
           and there is no requirement to notify consumers of such changes. Ideally there would be
           clarity as to when a unilateral change is permitted and the notice which should be given of
           any such change.

          There are only limited requirements relating to “cooling–off” periods. Mandated
           cooling off periods allow consumers a limited time to withdraw from contracts for financial
           products and services without penalties. They can help consumers deal with the
           cosequences of high pressure selling and mis-selling, as well as give them time to re-
           consider constracts for fianncial services which are becoming increasingly complex and
           may have long-term implications.

Key Recommendation(s)

122. The following reforms are proposed to deal with the various business practices of
   most concern:

          Financial institutions should be required to periodically train all the staff and
           intermediaries that deal with consumers (including marketing, compliance,
           complaints or sales). The training should, in particular, ensure that staff and other
                  intermediaries dealing with consumers: (i) understand the legal obligations of the relevant
                  product or service provider; (ii) have updated information about products and can clearly
                  explain their features, risks and prices to consumers; (iii) appropriately assess the
                  customer’s financial needs, objectives and understanding; and (iv) have adequate
                  knowledge of internal procedures (especially concerning complaint resolution).

                 Product suitability requirements should be reviewed. This is especially important
                  for non-credit products sold or distributed in banks and NBCIs and in the securities and
                  insurance sectors (such as a term deposit). It is important to ensure that new standards
                  result in appropriately detailed analyses being undertaken, and that records are retained
                  for lengthy periods to enable the facts of the analysis to be available to identify mis-selling
                  and for dispute handling. Affordability assessments for credit products are discussed below.

                 Provisions regarding unilateral changes of consumer contracts and their
                  application to financial consumer contracts should be clarified. Although there
                  may be circumstances where unilateral changes should be allowed (such as in contracts
                  which are clearly expressed as variable rate contracts), it is recommended that,
                  consideration should be given to requiring advance notice of any unilateral change in a
                  contract’s terms and conditions. At a minimum, notice of changes in interest charges,
                  repayments and fees and charges should be given as follows: (i) notice of a change in
                  interest rates should be given before the change takes effect, either personally or by
                  newspaper notice (in the latter case, the notice should be also given in the next statement
                  of account); (ii) there should be at least 20 days advance, personalized notice of a change
                  in the amount of a repayment (but if it is a reduction, it could be notified in the next
                  statement of account); and (iii) 20 days advance, personalised notice of a change in the
                  amount of a fee, or a new fee should also be given.

                 Consideration should be given to mandating a cooling-off period (e.g. for 14
                  days) for more complex financial products (such as those with a long-term
                  savings or investment component). An explicit provision banning financial institutions
                  from charging unreasonable termination fees, penalties or unreasonable additional costs in
                  the case of early termination during the cooling-off period should be included. However,
                  there could be a right to retain reasonable administrative fees relating to the cancellation
                  of the contract or for the application for the facility. Further, it may be that the right should
                  not apply where there has been a drawdown of a credit facility and a bank should be able
                  to recover any loss arising from an early withdrawal of a fixed rate term deposit which loss
                  arises because of a difference in interest rates.



BANKING AND NBCI SECTORS
123. The only specific legal requirements in Zimbabwe to assess a consumer’s
   creditworthiness are for entities covered by the Microfinance Act.88 Although entities such
   as banks and SACCOs may typically conduct creditworthiness assessments as a general business
   practice, it is considered that the requirements should be formalized.

124. Several credit bureaus exist in Zimbabwe, but they are not officially licensed or
   formally overseen by RBZ or any other authority. One credit bureau in particular, Financial
   Clearing Bureau (FCB), includes as its members, and collects information from, all banks as well

88
     Section 26 of the Microfinance Act and section 5 of the Microfinance Code.
     as a number of non-banks. FCB reports that all banks are relatively active users of its services and
     that it has informal communications with RBZ on its operations. However, credit bureaus are
     operating without any formal rules covering important consumer topics such as debtor consent to
     the inclusion of information on credit reporting files and the type of information that can be
     included, the right of consumers to be informed regarding adverse actions in credit decisions,
     access and correction rights, security, use and disclosure of credit sensitive information, data
     retention periods, dispute resolution, security of systems and confidentiality of debtor information.
     However, the Credit Reference Bureau Association of Zimbabwe produced its own code of conduct
     in 2013 as a means of self-regulation. The mission team also understands that RBZ and MoF are
     in the process of finalizing a legal and accreditation framework for the credit reference bureaus.

125. The only provisions relating to advertising of banking and NBCI facilities are the
   general prohibitions on misleading advertising in the Competition Act. However, there is
   a need for more specific provisions concerning effective and transparent disclosures relating to
   financial facilities. For example, there could usefully be a requirement to always disclose the issuer
   of the relevant product and details of relevant interest rates (including an effective interest rate)
   and fees and charges when there is a reference in the advertisement to the cost of the product.

126. There is a statutory code of conduct applicable to the NBCI industry, but there is
   currently no active code of conduct for the banking sector. All microfinanciers and relevant
   building societies and banks are bound by a principles-based code of conduct (‘Microfinanciers’
   Code of Conduct) that is prescribed by the Microfinance Act89. The Code is binding and compliance
   with the Code is subject to the RBZ’s supervision and enforcement. In addition, ZAMFI has adopted
   a ZAMFI Members Code of Ethics – a code of conduct binding on all of its 70 members. However,
   it is not clear that the ZAMFI Code adds to the consumer protection provisions in the Microfinance
   Act. Regarding the banking sector, a Code of Banking Practice was in place up until the period of
   hyperinflation and dollarization experienced by Zimbabwe in 2008. However, attempts to revise
   and update the Code of Banking Practice have not clearly moved forward.

127. Although aggressive or abusive collection practices have been prohibited by the
   Microfinanciers’ Code of Conduct, illegal collection practices remain an issue. The
   mission team was told of abusive collection practices including threats and physical violance in the
   microfinance industry (including informal credit providers). Moreover, in order to speed-up the
   recovery process in the case of the borrower’s default, some moneylenders, instead of requiring a
   proper collateral that would be registered in the Registry of Deeds, request borrowers to transer
   ownership of an asset (such as a car for instance) to the moneylender at the moment of signing
   of the loan contract.

Key Recommendation(s)

128. Responsible lending standards should be introduced for all credit providers (i.e. not
   just microfinanciers). In the long-term such provisions could be included in the proposed
   comprehensive financial consumer protection law. The rules should specify that the relevant
   entities are required to collect and independently verify information to assess a customer’s ability
   to repay a loan without substantial hardship and to assess whether a loan (or other financial
   product or service) meets a customer’s requirements and needs. There should also be provision
   for relief to be provided to debtors when the rules are breached (for example, by extending
   repayment periods or reducing repayment obligations).

89
  SACCOs that are excluded from the application of the Microfinance Act are currently not bound by any industry-wide and principles-
based code of conduct.
129. Collection of debtor information from NBCIs should be improved. A regulatory
   framework and licensing regime should be developed covering the operation of private credit
   bureaus and made the subject of a public awareness campaign. The new law should cover the
   consumer protection issues mentioned above. Further, re-consideration might also be given to the
   proposal to create a public credit registry housed at RBZ. Such an undertaking would require a
   significant financial investment, would be limited to credit information from banks (and not data
   from other sources such as retailers or utilities), and would create a risk of duplication with the
   services provided by private credit bureaus if the focus and content of the respective databases
   significantly overlap.

130. In the short-term, consideration should be given to the development of advertising
   rules and the prohibition of misleading and deceptive conduct and false and misleading
   statements in relation to the sale, distribution, and management of financial products
   and services. Over the long-term, the aforementioned provisions on advertising and sales
   materials should be included and expanded upon where necessary in the proposed comprehensive
   financial consumer protection law.

131. The development and further strengthening of industry Codes of Conduct for banks
   and NBCIs would benefit consumers. The Code of Banking Practice could usefully be reviewed
   and revised while a comprehensive financial consumer protection law is being developed. Although
   the Code of Banking Practice should not be considered a substitute for a comprehensive financial
   consumer protection law, it can be helpful to spell out voluntary standards agreed upon by all
   banks. Moreover, it is recommended to further promote the adoption of the Code of Ethics within
   the NBCI sector on consumer protection matters, which could build on the general principles
   already included in the Microfinance Act, but accommodate differences that exist between different
   types of providers. All codes of conduct should be published and there should be public awareness
   campaigns to make consumers aware of their existence.

132. The prohibitions on abusive collection practices in the Microfinanciers’ Code of
   Conduct should be actively enforced and similar provisions should apply to the banking
   sector. Close cooperation needs to be established between RBZ and law enforcement authorities
   such as police in order to address the issue of unfair and abusive debt-collection practices. In the
   long-term a regulatory framework for the registration and operations of debt – collectors should
   be developed.

DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES
133. There are no laws explicitly regulating the business conduct of MNOs in their
   mobile phone based financial services, although RBZ has in place the abovementioned
   RBZ Electronic Payments Gudelines. For example, there is no mobile banking specific law
   dealing with responsible lending, product suitability, requirements for e-wallet customers to open
   bank accounts or take out insurance policies, debtor harassment or dealing with misleading and
   deceptive conduct.

134. There are also no laws relating to the conduct, skills or training of MNO agents,
   requiring that they be registered or identifiable to the public or making it clear that
   MNOs are liable to consumers for the actions of their agents (for example in relation
   to fraud or misleading or deceptive conduct). RBZ leaves these matters up to the relevant
   MNO. The RBZ Electronic Payments Guidelines do, however, make it clear that agents have to be
        recruited on a non – exclusive basis so that they can offer services to multiple payment system
        providers.90

135.        The RBZ Electronic Payments Guidelines “seeks to provide for the operation,
        regulation, oversight, supervision and monitoring of payment systems in Zimbabwe.”
        The Guidelines apply to different types of entities, some of which may play multiple roles, including
        those of providing financial market infrastructures, pament systems providers, e-money services
        and mobile network operations. The Guidelines cover multiple areas including: (i) approval
        (registration) requirements; (ii) disclosure requirements; (iii) data security and confidentiality; (iv)
        consumer protection; (v) risk management; (vi) responsibility for agents; and (vii) regulatory
        reporting.

Key Recommendation(s)

136. The abovementioned issues should all be addressed in the medium-term. Of
   particular importance is the need for rules prohibiting misleading and deceptive conduct and
   requiring training of agents and responsible lending practices in relation to micro – credit facilities
   provided electronically.

SECURITIES SECTOR
137. The securities industry disclosure rules contain significant provisions regarding
   sales practices and advertising. As mentioned in the Legal and Regulatory Section, these rules
   need to be put in place. In addition, the disclosure rules should contain a detailed regulation for
   record keeping which sets forth all of the records that should be kept.

138. There is no comprehensive regime for the privacy of financial information. The
   Securities Act only deals with the duties and obligations of the SECZ in dealing with financial
   information. It does not set forth the duties of licensees in dealing with customer financial
   information which is necessary to strenghten investor confidence in the institutions and
   participants in the market regarding their handling of the investors’ confidential financial
   information.

Key Recommendation(s)

139. The Disclosure Rules should be implemented as quickly as possible and a detailed
   regulation prepared requiring record keeping which sets forth all of the records that
   should be kept. In the longer-term, a comprehensive regime for the privacy of investor
   information should be legislated and implemented.

INSURANCE SECTOR
140. The rules relating to bundling and tying of insurance and banking products are
   incomplete. This is a concern as the mission team was told that the practice of bundling and
   tying credit and insurance products is becoming prevalent and consumers, especially where there
   are low levels of financial literacy, may not fully understand that the bundled product requires
   additional payments, the commissions that may be payable or the nature of the related insurance
   product.


90
     RBZ Electronic Banking Guidelines, section 1.12.
141. A failure to pay a claim is likely to be based on an insured’s failure to comply with
   a duty of disclsoure at the time the policy was taken out. Although an insurer amy have
   the right to apply an averaging principle in the case of underinsurance or to adjust the sum
   assured, this result could be easily avoided by improving the consumer’s awareness of their duty
   of disclosure.

Key Recommendation(s)

142. In the short-term, when a product or service is bundled with different components,
   among which one is insurance, the amount of the insurance premium charged and
   related commissions should be disclosed to the consumer, along with key features of
   the policy. In the longer-term there should also be a clear prohibition on insurance forcing
   practices, coupled with disclosure and rebate provisions. However, there could be an exception to
   such a prohibition in certain cases – for example, where the requirement is for insurance over
   mortgaged property or where insurance is required by law. Further, where there is a tied insurance
   contract, credit providers should be required to give a proportionate refund of the applicable
   premium if the consumer pays out a loan early. Consumers should also be given a choice of at
   least 3 insurers (where such a number operates in the relevant area).

143. Insurance proposals should be accompanied by clear and prominent warnings as
   to the duty of disclosure and the possible consequences of any error in the information
   provided. It would be helpful to include simple examples.


PENSIONS SECTOR
144. One of the key issues currently affecting pension funds in Zimbabwe is the non-
   payment of contributions. Contributions are in arrears at many funds. Critically, the mission
   team was advised that employee contributions are not being remitted to pension funds, as well as
   employer contributions not being paid.

145. Pensions are by and large not currently sold as retail products, hence there are no
   regulations specifically relating to advertising and selling of such products. Pension
   products are normally handled by licensed life insurance brokers and/or pension consultants
   employed by administrators, and such staff generally have a suitable background to make them
   sufficiently knowledgeable. Personnel departments, at least at the larger plan sponsors, do
   generally have staff training in pension issues.

146. There are currently no regulatory requirements around confidentiality of member
   information. Industry good practice currently and trustee and provider codes of conduct
   currently prevent occupational fund members’ information from being disclosed or sold to third
   parties, but this could be challenged in future if a retail market were to develop.

Key Recommendation(s)

147. In order to improve the protection of pension fund members, IPEC should launch
   actions to recover non-remitted, employee contributions from plan sponsors.

148. The future development of a retail pensions market could necessitate the
   introduction of regulations guiding these areas - either as part of the revised draft
   Pension and Provident Fund Bill (2014) or as separate, secondary regulations. For
   example, such regulations could address issues such as: Key Facts Statements explaining pension
   products which should be provided to consumers on purchase; and Know Your Customer Rules,
   which pension providers would have to apply to ensure that the products purchased are suitable
   for the individual’s circumstance and needs. Qualification requirements for pension consultants
   interacting with pension fund trustees could be introduced, and IPEC could recommend training
   for HR staff at pension plan sponsors (the training requirements should depend on the size of
   employer, size and nature of the pension fund).

149. Confidentiality of information needs to be formally recognized, and how member
   information can be used within the same financial service provider group clarified.
   Requirements on confidentiality of member information could be included in a revised Pension and
   Provident Fund Bill (2014) or drafted as separate regulations. Basic standards on the protection of
   member data could also be included in the Bill.
            COMPLAINTS HANDLING AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION

150. One of the key pillars of a robust system of financial consumer protection is to
   provide easily accessible, well–known and free recourse mechanisms for consumers
   who have a complaint about a financial product or service. Similarly, there is a need for
   an independent, transparent, accessible and, ideally free, external dispute resolution body.

GENERAL OVERVIEW
151. There are gaps and inconsistencies relating to the procedures that are required to
   be followed by financial institutions in dealing with consumer complaints and it is also
   not clear that the relevant rules are actively supervised and enforced. There are some
   requirements for internal complaints resolutions systems in some sectors (especially under the
   Microfinance Act). Details of the current position in the various parts of the financial sector are
   provided below. Although most of the larger financial institutions interviewed do have some
   complaints handling procedures in place, the lack of standardization of the arrangements is a
   concern. Further, the availability of complaints handling and dispute resolution mechanisms is not
   clearly conveyed to consumers. Finally, details of complaint statistics are not routinely given to the
   relevant regulators who accordingly do not have the opportunity to analyze the complaints with a
   view of identifying systemic issues of concern or to warn consumers about issues they should be
   aware of.

152. There is also no formal third party dispute resolution service available to
   consumers. Although this gap is to some extent filled by the relevant financial sector regulators,
   they have limited resources available to fulfill this important function and in any event do not
   appear to have any power to make a binding decision. Further, there is little evidence that
   consumers are aware that they might approach the relevant regulator and expect any relief. The
   mission team was also advised that Zimbabwe’s Small Claims Court does not, as a matter or
   practice, handle cases concerning financial services and that although the Civil Court may do so,
   such actions are brought by financial institutions rather than consumers. Finally, although CCZ is
   active in many areas, it does not have the resources to deal with complaints about financial
   services or, indeed, the mandate to make binding decisions. The result is that retail consumers do
   not have access to an alternative dispute resolution mechanism such as an ombudsman or
   equivalent that provides timely, affordable and predictable redress from an independent third
   party.

Key Recommendation(s)
153. Standard requirements for complaints handling by all types of financial services
   providers should be developed, implemented and consistently supervised by the
   relevant regulator (RBZ, IPEC, SSC, SME Ministry and ZSE). They should include
   requirements for: an easily accessible avenue for making a complaint (such as a hot line, via email
   or in writing or to an officer at any branch of a bank or MNO outlet or agent); written
   acknowledgement of receipt of the complaint; time limits for resolution; record keeping;
   management reporting and regular assessment of root causes and systemic issues. There should
   also be a requirement that the availability of the relevant service be widely publicized through
   various fora (e.g. by being highlighted in account applications, agreements and statements, in
   branch and agent posters, and on the websites of the relevant providers including the websites of
   a financial service provider and, in the case of e-wallet services, any website of an agent or agent
   network and the website of an MNO). This will enable the consumers to be informed about the
     complaint resolution mechanisms and know how to utilize them. Such requirements might be
     scaled to take into account the scope and size of the relevant institution’s operations. For example,
     the requirements might be less onerous for smaller NBCIs or SACCOs. The requirement to
     implement these procedures might be imposed as a licensing or registration condition for the
     relevant financial institution.
154. In the long-term, consideration should be given to the development of a single
   financial services ombudsman scheme. There is already discussion around creating an Office
   of the Public Financial Protector to enable bank customers to seek redress. The significant
   investment to set up a body should be leveraged to broadly cover as much of the financial sector
   as possible, especially given the similarity in products provided in some sectors (such as banking,
   NBCIs and mobile banking) and the multiple – sector nature of some products (such as credit-life
   insurance). If resources and capacity allow, it would be preferable to set up a financial ombudsman
   that covers all sectors, including banking, non-bank financial institutions, securities, pensions,
   insurance, and other relevant financial sectors. Such a scheme should provide an independent,
   transparent, free dispute resolution service for consumers which can make binding decisions.
   Different models might be explored to find an institutional arrangement which suits the Zimbabwe
   context. It is also recommended that it be a licensing condition that each institution concerned be
   a member of the ombudsman scheme. Further, the overseeing body should include consumer as
   well as industry representatives.91

155. Pending the establishment of a financial services ombudsman scheme, all financial
   sector regulators should be required to establish a dedicated unit to consider, monitor
   and analyze complaints. They should publicize the processes and procedures for making
   complaints and the timelines for dealing with them. They should also provide on their websites
   detailed and consolidated data regarding complaints on a regular basis; set up a complaints hotline
   and have power to make binding decisions. Financial sector regulators should also analyze the
   complaints data they receive (both from providers as well as directly from consumers) with a view
   to identifying, and acting on, issues of particular concern. The regulators could also usefully
   publicize details of systemic complaints as a consumer awareness initiative (without necessarily
   identifying the financial institutions involved).

156. The above recommendations apply to all parts of the financial sector. However,
   further background information in relation to specific parts is provided in the following paragraphs.

BANKING SECTOR
157. Most banks appear to have internal complaints handling and dispute resolution
   mechanisms in place, as required informally by RBZ. However, no specific details regarding
   this requirement appear to be in place, leading to inconsistencies across providers.

DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES
158. MNOs are not formally required to have internal systems to deal with complaints
   about the digital financial services they provide and there is no independent third party
   to whom consumers can turn if an MNO does not satisfactorily deal with a complaint.
   However, the mission team was advised that RBZ requires banks participating in these services to


91 Guidance may be obtained from the World Bank’s 2011 publication on Resolving Disputes between Consumers and
Financial Businesses: Fundamentals for a Financial Ombudsman: http://www.networkfso.org/Resolving- disputes-between-
consumers-and-financial-businesses_Fundamentals-for-a-financial-ombudsman_The-World- Bank_January2012.pdf
       in turn require MNOs to set up arrangements for dealing with complaints. Details of these
       arrangements were not provided to the mission team although it was noted that a reference to a
       Customer Service Center is routinely included in terms and conditions (in very small font and
       without the phone number being included).

NBCI SECTOR
159. Despite the existence of statutory requirements regarding internal complaints
   handling, there remain significant gaps in the regulatory framework that need to be
   addressed. Specific requirements have been prescribed only for corporate microfinanciers92 who
   must have formal procedures for dealing with consumer complaints, including disclosure of the
   right to complain to the Registrar and keep records of complaints.93 In practice large
   institutionalized microcredit providers have written complaints handling policies including
   requirements for: written acknowledgement of receipt of the complaint; time limits for resolution;
   disclosure of contact information; record keeping; management reporting and regular assessment
   of root causes and systemic issues.

 160. There are avenues for consumers to seek redress if dissatisfied with a
    microfinancier’s business conduct. Most importantly the Microfinance Act makes provisions
    for a disciplinary committee to be established for the purpose of investigating a complaint received
    from a consumer.94 The committee has broad inspection powers and may impose fines, vary or
    cancel the registration of the microfinancier, or caution or reprimand the microfinancier. However,
    the committee does not have power to order the microfinancier to compensate the complainant
    and, as the Microfinance Act is still new, it is not possible at this stage to say how effective these
    provisions will be in practice.

SECURITIES SECTOR
161. The statutory provisions for complaints handling and dispute resolution vary in the
   different statutes covering different subsectors of the securities market. The Asset
   Management Act provides for a complaint procedure and dispute resolution system to be overseen
   by the Chief Executive Officer of the SECZ. However, there are no such provisions in the Securities
   Act or the Collective Investments Act for the internal or external handling of customer complaints.
   In practice, licensees have internal procedures that vary from firm to firm, but there is not uniform
   framework for handling complaints. There is no external procedure for dispute resolution, other
   than taking a matter to court. Rule 48 of the draft Securities Rules provides that each license
   holder must have “effective, efficient and transparent procedures for reasonable and prompt
   handling of complaints received from retail customers or potential retail customers.” However, the
   manner in which this is done is left up to each licensee.

Key Recommendation(s)

162. The statutory provisions need to be harmonized with a standard procedure for
   complaint handling and dispute resolution that applies to all licensees. In addition, an
   industry wide dispute mechanism should be put in place for investor disputes, such as exists in
   the statutory instruments for disputes between market institutions made under the Statutory
   Instrument 100 of 2010, Securities (Registration, Licensing and Corporate Governance) Rules 2010


92
     Section 9(1) of the First Schedule of the Microfinance Act.
93
     A microfinancier established in the form of either partnership or a company.
94
     Sections 45 – 48 of the Microfinance Act.
   and in the Asset Management Act for investor complaints. In the longer-term, if a financial
   ombudsman service is developed as recommended above, it should cover complaints about the
   securities sector.

INSURANCE SECTOR
163. Currently there are not any formal requirements specifically relating to insurers
   handling of complaints from policy holders or beneficiaries and IPEC does not collect
   statistics as to such complaints and how they are dealt with. Although it is understood
   that IPEC requires that a prospective insurer provides a description of the proposed internal
   complaint resolution processes, there do not appear to be any follow up supervisory activities on
   the part of IPEC. Further, there is no requirement that policy holders be informed of the possibility
   of recourse to IPEC in relation to a dispute. IPEC currently receives around two disputes per month
   but there are no statistics available as to how these disputes are dealt with or systemic issues of
   concern.

Key Recommendation(s)

164. IPEC should put in place a formal procedure for handling those complaints and
   disputes that will reach it as a second stage recourse. Policyholders should be informed by
   the insurers of their right to recur to IPEC. IPEC should publish every year a summary with statistics
   and details of any systemic concerns arising from complaints reported to them.

PENSIONS SECTOR
165. Pension funds are required by the Pension and Provident Fund Regulations 1991 to
   provide for an internal dispute mechanism in their fund rules, but there are not any
   mandated processes and procedures for complaint resolution. In practice, an aggrieved
   employee is more likely to contact the HR department of the relevant fund, the Principal Officer of
   the fund and ultimately their representatives on the Board of Trustees. If disputes cannot be
   solved internally, they are taken to IPEC and could potentially then be taken to the courts.

Key Recommendation(s)

166. The revised Pension and Provident Fund Bill (2014) should make further provision
   for both internal and external dispute resolution mechanisms for pension fund
   members. IPEC should be involved in any discussions in the future to establish a financial sector
   ombudsman, with a view to complaints about pensions being able to be bought before the
   ombudsman. In the interim IPEC should continue to fulfill its current role in relation to disputes,
   whilst building the necessary procedures and capacity to do so in a more formal and transparent
   way (including publicizing the relevant procedures and, importantly, the number and nature of
   the disputes handled each year).
                         FINANCIAL LITERACY/CAPABILITY
167. As a complement to a strong financial consumer protection framework, it is
   important to have high levels of financial literacy/capability so consumers have the
   necessary knowledge and understanding to make informed decisions and to help meet
   financial inclusion targets by building trust in the financial sector. For instance, any
   regulations which require financial institutions to disclose, clearly and fairly, the key information
   on terms and conditions associated with their products and service will not affect a consumer’s
   behavior if the consumer does not understand why it is important to read disclosure documents
   or if they fail to understand the information contained in these documents. Likewise, any
   requirement for financial institutions to have standardized procedures for dealing with consumer
   complaints will be ineffective if consumers are not aware of their rights and the available
   complaints mechanisms or if they prefer not to take action to deal with a complaint. Financial
   literacy is especially important in an environment where there are high levels of innovation in the
   design and delivery of financial products.

GENERAL OVERVIEW
168. Results of focus groups discussions with adults in Zimbabwe suggest a number of
   areas for improvement, mainly relating to lack of understanding of financial concepts,
   lack of long-term orientation and a low complaints culture. Further, the focus group
   discussions revealed the need for certain segments of the population to be specifically targeted
   with financial capability enhancing programs, including women, rural dwellers, unemployed, low
   income populations, groups with lower educational attainment (for details see Box 1 and Appendix
   II). It is important to note that these results cannot be interpreted as being nationally
   representative. They are, however, indicative of pressing areas which deserve policy attention.
169. A range of stakeholders in the public and private sector are undertaking several
   scattered financial capability enhancing initiatives, creating the risk of gaps, overlaps
   and an inefficient use of limited resources. RBZ conducted several public education
   campaigns through mass media outlets, in particular through newspaper articles and press
   releases directed at the general public to raise awareness of issues related to the microfinance
   industry. Other topics covered by RBZ’s outreach activities are relating to consumers’ rights and
   responsibilities such as the right to complain or the responsibility to meet their financial
   commitments. The SECZ and the SZE have been focusing on particular groups of people with an
   immediate or potential interest in the securities market. ZSE has lately been emphasizing training
   for policy makers and this last week conducted a general educational workshop for
   parliamentarians. The SECZ generally focuses on individual investors by engaging in programs in
   the workplace, as wells as schools.
170. Financial institutions and industry associations have also been active in initiating
   financial capability programs, even though the division between marketing activities
   and financial capability is not always clear. For instance, Barclays Bank of Zimbabwe’s
   corporate social responsibility engagements with a NGO resulted in the provision of financial
   capability training courses to 500 women in agriculture focusing on such issues as budgeting,
   saving and borrowing. The Bankers Association of Zimbabwe publishes articles in major
   newspapers and on its website every week, mainly focusing on the importance of saving and using
   formal financial systems. MFIs such as Microking provide business training courses to their clients
   to improve their ability of proper record keeping and accounting. Other financial institutions are to
   some extent engaged in financial capability initiatives, although the division between marketing
   activities and financial capability is not always clear.
171. School curricula currently do not reflect the importance of the formation of sound
   financial habits at an early age. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education is about to
   assess existing curricula for gaps and will explore the opportunity of providing school based
   financial education programs for primary and secondary level students, starting at the age of five.

Key Recommendation(s)

172. To minimize gaps and overlaps in addressing the financial capability needs of the
   Zimbabweans, a national financial literacy strategy (NFLS) should be developed under
   the leadership of the MoF. Such a document should outline a set of essential priorities. Priorities
   could be set based on a number of criteria, including the need, goals (e.g. fostering access to
   finance through formal financial institutions), costs and availability of resources. Other essential
   elements of such a document include the roles and responsibilities of all involved stakeholders,
   the main groups which shall be targeted, a framework for monitoring and evaluation of planned
   financial capability enhancing strategies and most importantly the resources. For more information
   about the process of developing a NFLS see the OECD/INFE High Level Principles on National
   Financial Education Strategies.95

173. The development of a NFLS requires a wide consultation process and the
   establishment of a coordination body whose members include a wide range of public,
   private sector and non-profit stakeholders. The wide range of stakeholders is important for
   consensus building about the importance of financial literacy. To the extent possible all potentially
   relevant public stakeholders should be involved, including ministries (despite the MOF in particular
   the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education), RBZ, all other financial regulators and
   supervisors, as well as other public, region, and local authorities. The public sector has a crucial
   role to play in developing the NFLS by taking on responsibilities related to the public authorities’
   main areas of expertise, interest and resources. For instance, RBZ could focus on financial
   capability enhancing initiatives in the banking and non-banking sector, while the SECZ and ZSE
   could continue to focus on initiatives in the securities sector. The private sector is also very
   important since it can supplement available public resources and given the potential for broad
   outreach. Further, participation in designing and implementing a NFLS can be attractive to the
   private sector as a means of demonstrating a commitment to corporate social responsibility goals.
   However, it is important that the private sector understands the distinction between financial
   literacy programs and marketing initiatives.

174. Further, small pilots for targeted groups should be organized to assess the
   effectiveness of the proposed NFLS and/or specific educational activities before more
   resources are allocated to specific activities. Such an assessment would also help maintain
   momentum in the short term while an NFLS is being developed.

175. A nationally representative survey should be conducted to inform the design of a
   NFLS and create a baseline against which the impact of financial capability enhancing
   initiatives can be measured. Conducting a survey can be a complex, timely, and expensive
   task. Rather than conducting a standalone financial capability survey, it may therefore make sense
   to assess the population’s level of financial capability by adding a relevant survey module to the
   earmarked FinScope Consumer Survey 2014. Potential topics to be covered include the awareness
   and understanding of basic financial concepts and products. However, since knowledge does not

95
  Online available at: http://www.oecd.org/finance/financial-
education/OECD_INFE_High_Level_Principles_National_Strategies_Financial_Education_APEC.pdf.
   always translate into proper action, it would be beneficial to capture attitudes, such as
   impulsiveness, farsightedness and action orientation as well as behaviors related to day-to-day
   money management, planning for unexpected and old age expenses, choosing and using financial
   products and using information and advice. To get a better understanding if consumers in
   Zimbabwe benefit from the financial products they use, additional questions could relate to their
   reported incidences of conflicts with financial service providers and their levels of satisfaction with
   different types of financial products.

176. Over the long-term it is recommended that school-based financial education
   programs be provided as international evidence suggests that basic principles of
   financial decision taking (such as developing a savings culture or making provisions
   for old age) should be acquired at a young age. If children form habits on how to manage
   their money from a young age, they are more likely to adhere to them throughout their lives.
   Success has been observed for school based financial education programs, when providing
   financial education in ways in which students find relevant to their lives either currently or in the
   near future, and if it is interactive. High quality material or textbooks are required, and teachers
   need to be well trained on the content and techniques. In addition, as existing curricula may
   already be saturated, it is advisable to integrate financial education into a variety of existing
   subjects rather than adding a new subject into the curriculum. In case resources to train teachers
   and develop and provide teaching materials are scarce, it may be best to focus at the onset, on
   incorporating education into one or two subjects over three or four consecutive semesters.
          ANNEX 1: Consumer Trust and Financial Literacy

FIGURE 4: AVERAGE NUMBER OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS, BY TRUST LEVELS IN BANKS
   2.5
                                                                                                                         1.9
   2.0                          1.8
                         1.4                               1.3                                                   1.4
   1.5             1.2
                                                    1.1                                                    1.1
                                              0.9                                          1.0
   1.0                                                                              0.7
            0.7
                                        0.5                                 0.4                    0.4
   0.5
                                                                      0.1
   0.0
                      BIH                     Bulgaria                      Romania                    West Bank & Gaza

                                Don't know       Little trust     Average trust           High trust

  Source: Word Bank Financial Capability Surveys



                  FIGURE 5: SELF-REPORTED BARRIERS TO ACCOUNT OWNERSHIP

                                                      23%
              Too far away                            23%
                                              14%
                                                                                                                   81%
         Not enough money                                                                                69%
                                                                                                                       82%
                                                                      36%
             Too expensive                                26%
                                                                        39%
                                                                31%
   Lack of documentation                            20%
                                                           27%
                                                16%
                  Don't trust             11%
                                                    21%
                            0.0%      10.0%   20.0%       30.0%   40.0%       50.0%       60.0%   70.0%        80.0%    90.0%

                                        SSA     Lower middle income               Zimbabwe

  Source: Global Findex, 2011
            ANNEX 2: List of Overall Recommendations
      (This is a high level summary list of all recommendations resulting from the
  Zimbabwe CPFL review (i.e. not just the High Priority recommendations contained in
            Volume I). See Volume II for details of these recommendations.

                    TABLE 7: LIST OF OVERALL RECOMMENDATIONS
                                                                         RESPONSIBI
SECTOR                         RECOMMENDATION                                            TERM*
                                                                              LITY
                                  Institutional Arrangements
            Develop consumer / investor protection specific RBZ, IPEC,
            supervisory arrangements, tools and capacity focusing on SECZ, ZSE,          ST
            highest risk activities.                                     SME Ministry
                                                                         RBZ, IPEC,
            Establish coordination and consultation arrangements
                                                                         SECZ, ZSE,
            between key consumer protection regulators and develop                       ST
 Cross-                                                                  SME Ministry,
            MoUs.
 cutting                                                                 POTRAZ
            Strengthen consumer organizations (especially CCZ)
                                                                         MoF             LT
            through funding and capacity building.
            Develop MoU between RBZ and DPC and increase public
                                                                         DPC, RBZ        LT
            awareness of deposit insurance.
            Establish coordination and consultation arrangements on CTC, RBZ,
                                                                                         LT
            competition issues.                                          POTRAZ, MoIC
            Expand CTC financial sector research resources.              MoF, CTC        LT
            Join regional and international supervisory organization
Insurance                                                                IPEC            MT
            (CISNA and IOPS)
   and
            Increase consumer representation on IPEC Advisory
 Pensions                                                                IPEC            MT
            Committee
                              Legal and Regulatory Framework
            Develop a comprehensive financial consumer protection
            law covering e.g. disclosures, sales practices, responsible MoF, RBZ,
            lending, product suitability, insurance contracts, staff and IPEC, SECZ,
                                                                                         LT
            intermediary training, restrictions on rights,      account ZSE, SME
            handling, data protection, cooling off periods, advertising, Ministry
            customer records and dispute resolution.
            Clarify application of Consumer Protection Bill to financial
                                                                         MoF, MoIC       LT
            services.
            Finalize credit bureau licensing and operational rules,
 Cross-     develop public awareness campaign and consider MoF, RBZ,
                                                                                         LT
 cutting    providing access to a central database of registered SME Ministry
            national IDs.
            Develop licensing and operational rules for debt
                                                                         MoF, RBZ        LT
            collectors.
            Develop rules re foreclosures.                               MoF, RBZ        LT
            Review rules concerning notice of bankruptcy proceedings
                                                                         MoF, RBZ        LT
            and related insolvency issues.
            Develop overarching data privacy law.                        MoF             LT
            Clarify consumer protection mandate and consider MoF, RBZ,
                                                                                         LT
            financial inclusion mandate for key regulators.              IPEC
                                                                                                     RESPONSIBI
     SECTOR                                 RECOMMENDATION                                                                   TERM*
                                                                                                        LITY
                    Make compliance with consumer protection laws a
                                                                                                     MoF, RBZ               LT
      Banks         responsibility of directors of banks.
                    Develop rules for winding up of banks.                                           MoF, RBZ               LT
                    Develop consumer protection laws for digital financial
      Digital
                    services e.g. re safeguarding e-wallet funds, disclosures,                       MoF, RBZ,
     Financial                                                                                                              ST
                    security, limitations of liability, data protection and                          IPEC, POTRAZ
     Services
                    unauthorized transactions.
                                                                                                     MoF, RBZ,
      NBCIs         Clarify scope of application of MFA.                                                                    MT
                                                                                                     SME Ministry
                    Clarify continued application of Moneylending and Rates
      NBCIs                                                                                          MoF, RBZ               LT
                    of Interest Act and the Pawnbrokers Act.
                    Finalize draft market conduct rules, including for the
                    establishment of a carefully considered Policy Protection                        MoF, IPEC              ST
 Insurance          Fund.
                    Consider establishing a nominal defendant scheme for
                                                                                                     MoF, IPEC              LT
                    uninsured motor vehicle accidents.
                    Ensure that Government Inquiry on Pensions and
 Insurance          Insurance Conversions is conducted in a transparent and
    and             independent manner, with clear conclusions and                                   MoF                    ST
  Pensions          recommendations which are made and acted on in a
                    reasonable timeframe.
 Insurance          Develop rules for the licensing, education and supervision
                                                                                                     MoF, SECZ,
    and             of bank employees selling insurance and securities                                                      ST
                                                                                                     IPEC
 Securities         products (e.g. unit trusts).
                    Finalize draft investor protection rules and market conduct                      MoF, SECZ,
                                                                                                                            ST
                    rules for brokers.                                                               ZSE
                    Enhance enforcement powers of SECZ.                                              MoF, SECZ              MT
 Securities
                    Develop       licensing    and     minimum     competency
                    requirements for all persons providing investment                                MoF, SECZ              MT
                    services.
                    Harmonize investor protection laws.                                              MoF, SECZ              LT
                    Develop standardized training requirements for pension
     Pensions                                                                                        MoF, IPEC              ST
                    fund trustees and intermediaries.
                    Ensure Pension and Provident Fund Bill meets
                    international best practice and covers issues such as
     Pensions                                                                                        IPEC/MoF               MT
                    disclosures, cross selling, confidentiality and dispute
                    resolution.96
                                   Transparency and Consumer Disclosure
                    Require Key Facts Statements for common credit,                                  MoF, RBA and
                                                                                                                            MT
     Cross-         insurance and pensions products.                                                 IPEC
     cutting        Consumer test new disclosures as they are developed.                             MoF, RBA and
                                                                                                                            ST - LT
                                                                                                     IPEC




96
  International Good Practices refer to the World Bank Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (World Bank, 2012), which this
diagnostic is based upon, and also more detailed, pension specific standards which have been issued by the OECD as part of the Core
Principles of Occupational Pension Regulation - http://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/private-pensions/33619987.pdf
                                                                           RESPONSIBI
 SECTOR                         RECOMMENDATION                                             TERM*
                                                                              LITY
            Develop comprehensive product disclosure requirements
            for fees, charges, interest rates, terms and conditions,
                                                                           MoF, RBZ        ST
  Banking   total cost of credit, advertising, mandatory risk warnings
and Digital and for notice of changes.
  Financial Provide clear loan pre-payment and account closure
                                                                           MoF, RBZ        MT
  Services  rights, subject only to reasonable fees.
            Publish comparative interest rates, fees and charges.          RBZ             MT
            Require periodic statements of account.                        MoF, RBZ        MT
            Develop comprehensive disclosure requirements for policy
            holders including as to key policy terms, premiums,            MoF, IPEC       ST
            exclusions and risks.
 Insurance Require insurance intermediaries to disclose commissions,
                                                                           MoF, IPEC       MT
            status and any conflict of interest.
            Require banks to disclose that they do not guarantee           MoF, IPEC,
                                                                                           MT
            insurance products they distribute.                            RBZ
            Ensure new investor protection rules include specific
            disclosure requirements, including as to disclosures by
 Securities                                                                SECZ            ST
            investment advisers, uniform Key Facts Statements,
            contract notes and statements.
 Securities Develop disclosure and operational rules for unit trusts.      SECZ            MT
 Securities Require securities industry participants to display license.   SECZ            MT
            Develop specific requirements on disclosures to members
  Pensions  of pension funds, including on choice of retirement            IPEC            MT
            income products and on payouts.
                                       Business Conduct
                                                                             Industry
               Encourage development of industry codes of conduct for associations,
               banks, NBCIs, securities and insurance industries, building MoF, RBZ,       LT
               on existing law / codes.                                      IPEC, SECZ,
                                                                             ZSE
               Develop rules to limit unreasonable bundling and tying of MoF, RBZ,
                                                                                           MT
               credit and insurance products.                                IPEC
               Encourage media coverage of CPFL issues.                      MoF, RBZ,
  Cross-                                                                     IPEC, SECZ,
                                                                                           MT
  cutting                                                                    ZSE, SME
                                                                             Ministry
               Publish consumer friendly information on a quarterly basis
                                                                             RBZ, IPEC,
               about the financial position of key financial institutions to               MT
                                                                             SECZ
               facilitate comparisons.
               Take action on unfair and abusive debt-collection RBZ, law
                                                                                           MT
               practices.                                                    enforcement
               Require all credit providers to be subject to responsible
               lending standards, whilst taking into account MFA
                                                                             RBZ           MT
               requirements and warn guarantors about consequences
               of default.
  Digital      Monitor current inquiry into mobile phone based
 Financial     payments services by the CTC.                                 RBZ, CTC      ST
 Services
                                                                                          RESPONSIBI
  SECTOR                                 RECOMMENDATION                                                  TERM*
                                                                                              LITY
   NBCIs           Enforce rules relating to abusive collection practices.                RBZ            ST
                   Make available continuous professional development
                                                                                          IIZ, IPEC
 Insurance         courses for brokers and agents.
                   Require a customer needs assessment.                                   MoF, IPEC      MT
                   Ensure new investor protection rules include specific rules
 Securities                                                                               SECZ           ST
                   re payments on account closures and customer records.
 Securities        Include conflicts rules in new fund protection rules.                  SECZ           MT
                   Take action to recover non-remitted, employee
                                                                                          IPEC           ST
                   contributions from plan sponsors.
                   Develop separate custodian arrangements for pension
                                                                                          IPEC           ST
                   assets.
 Pensions
                   Provide guidance on choice of investment portfolio for
                                                                                          IPEC           MT
                   defined contribution pension fund members.
                   Provide guidance on form and content of annual benefit
                                                                                          IPEC           MT
                   fund statements.
                                      Dispute Resolution Mechanisms
                   Develop standard requirements for complaints handling                  MoF, RBZ,
                   by financial institutions and require complaints statistics            SECZ, IPEC,    ST
                   to be reported to regulator.                                           SME Ministry
                   Establish within financial sector regulators a dedicated               MoF, RBZ,
   Cross-
                   unit to consider consumer complaints and analyze and                   SECZ, IPEC,    MT
   cutting
                   publish complaints statistics.                                         SME Ministry
                   Consider development of a single financial services
                                                                                          MoF, RBZ,
                   ombudsman or equivalent scheme which provides an
                                                                                          SECZ, IPEC,    LT
                   independent, transparent, free dispute resolution service
                                                                                          SME Ministry
                   for consumers and which can make binding decisions.
                   Include a consumer representative on MFA disciplinary
   NBCIs                                                                                  RBZ            MT
                   committee
                                       Financial Literacy/Capability
                   Establish a public, private sector and NGO National
                                                                                          MoF            ST
                   Financial Education Coordinating body chaired by MoF.
                   Conduct a national financial capability survey (potentially
                   by adding questions to proposed FinScope Consumer                      MoF            ST
                   Survey 2014).
                                                                                          MoF, and wide
                                                                                          range of public
   Cross-
                                                                                          / private
   cutting         Develop a National Financial Literacy Strategy.                                        MT
                                                                                          sector / not
                                                                                          for profit
                                                                                          stakeholders
                                                                                          Ministry of
                                                                                          Primary and
                   Provide school-based financial education programs                      Secondary       LT
                                                                                          Education,
                                                                                          MoF

ST: Short-term (say 1 year); MT: Medium-Term (say 2 years); LT: Long-Term (say 3 years)
