                          REPORT


ANALYTICAL REVIEW OF THE CURRENT SITUATION RELATED TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF EVIDENCE BASED CLINICAL GUIDELINES IN RUSSIA




                                                              1
TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE ......................................................................................................................................................................2
ABBREVIATIONS........................................................................................................................................................3
ABBREVIATIONS........................................................................................................................................................3
INTRODUCTION..........................................................................................................................................................4
DETAILED ASSESSMENT..........................................................................................................................................9
SUMMARY OF RESULTS .........................................................................................................................................12
INTERPRETATION ....................................................................................................................................................23
DISCUSSION ..............................................................................................................................................................32
CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................................................34
APPENDIX 1. ..............................................................................................................................................................38
APPEDNIX 2 ...............................................................................................................................................................94




                                                                                                                                                                             1
PREFACE

One of the major challenges currently facing the Russian Federation is health care quality
improvement. In order to assure the quality of health care, providers, consumers, policy makers,
and others need to have an accessible, reliable indicators that they can use to flag the potential
problems or successes.

Clinical guidelines are viewed as useful tools for making care more consistent and efficient, way
to close the gap between clinical practice and scientific evidence. Clinical guidelines have their
origin in issues faced by most healthcare systems : rising health care costs, variation in services
delivery, the intrinsic desire of healthcare practitioners to offer and patients to receive the best
possible care. Clinical guidelines help the clinicians, patients and decision makers to make
appropriate use of the best information available. Given that, clinical guidelines become well
measurable indicators moving the health system from solely intuitive to that taking explicit
account of relevant evidence.

Within Russia, there is a growing interest to the development of guidelines but the areas covered
and methods used do not always meet international requirements.

The report highlights a number of issues such as state of art with regard to clinical guidelines,
quality of clinical guidelines developed in Russia, areas of healthcare covered.

The report is based on interviews with key donors throughout the Russian Federation together
with discussions with experts in the field of evidence based medicine, literature review and
internet search. It includes three-steps research study. Two appendixes give an overview of
current situation with clinical guidelines in Russia and demonstrates the results of the assessment
with the Cluzeau Instrument.
ABBREVIATIONS


DFID - Department for International Development in Great Britain

EBM – Evidence Based Medicine

ERB – European Regional Bureau

HCA – Health Care Authorities

ISEBMS - Interregional Society of EBM Specialists.

NWHRP – North West Health Reforms Project

OSI – Open Society Institute

RF – Russian Federation

STD – Sexually Transmitted Diseases

USAID – United State Agency for International Development

WHO – World Health Organization




                                                                   3
INTRODUCTION

Concept of Evidence Based Medicine

Evidence Based Medicine, a term that didn’t exist a decade ago, has captured the imagination of
clinicians and health policy makers. We now have journals exclusively devoted to EBM,
databases on systematic reviews (like the Cochrane Collaboration), workshops, courses and
books on EBM. In 1980th –90th clinicians who introduced the concept of EBM (primarily
representatives of McMaster University) argued for health care and clinical decisions to be made
on the basis of strong evidence generated by well done controlled trials and research studies.
They felt that this approach was better than traditional decision-making approaches which they
saw as being far more open to bias and error.

EBM arose out of the need to make well-informed decisions in a setting of limited resources.
How can one get the best deal for given limited resources? It became obvious that those who
need to make decisions should evaluate the benefits and risks of competing options on the basis
of the best available evidence (which can be reproduced and described) rather than on an
unsystematic or haphazard evaluation.

An extended definition of EBM is: “Evidence-based medicine is the conscientious, explicit and
rational use of the best available evidence in making decisions about any individual clinical case”
[David L. Sackett, William MC Rosenberg, JA Muir Gray, R. Brian Haynes, W. Scott
Richardson [BMJ 1996; 312: 71-2].

The practice of Evidence Based Medicine means integrating individual clinical expertise with the
best available external evidence from systematic research”

[Sackett DL, Straus S, Richardson S, Rosenberg W, Haynes RB. Evidence-based Medicine: how
to practice and teach EBM, ed 2. London: Churchill Livingston, 2000].

All expert recommendations should be based on a systematic appraisal of the best evidence
available. Good evidence is usually derived from strong epidemiological study designs (like a
randomized controlled clinical trial). Evidence derived from poorly done observational study
designs is weak and therefore not very useful in decision making.

Clinical guidelines, defined as “systematically developed statements to assist both practitioner
and patient decision in specific circumstances”, have become an increasingly familiar part of
clinical care [M.Eccles, J.Mason. How to develop cost-conscious guidelines. Health Technology
Assessment 2001, 5[16]].




                                                                                           5
Background

Why EBM is needed in Russia

One of the major challenges facing the Russian Federation is improvement of medical care
quality, which was rather low until recent days. The term “Evidence-Based Medicine” became
known among professionals only few years ago and generally there seems to be poor
understanding of what its real meaning. There is a rise of interest to the development of
guidelines but methods used to develop guidelines do not always meet international requirements
and irrational medical practice still remains very common in Russia.

There are some reasons for that:

   •   Historical factors related to the isolation of the Russian health system and pharmacy from
       the international practices.

   •   Factors of the transition economical period related to the necessity of adaptation to the
       free market model. One of the problem here might be a distortion of the centralized drug
       supply system.

   •   Factors related to the pharmaceutical policy, that lie to inability of drug reimbursement
       system (from economical point of view). In some of the regions physicians have limited
       access to the up-to-date medical literature. In part as a result of that, health institutions
       largely depend on the often outdated protocols provided by the Ministry of Health.
       Medical associations don’t enforce ethical standards and medical school lecturers
       routinely take cash in exchange of promoting specific drug sand the term is used more
       frequently by advertisers than physicians [V.Vlasov]. Most of the physicians find it
       difficult to read international publications because of the language barriers. They draw
       information from the Russian journals that very often do not comply with International
       standards.

   •   Principles of EBM, epidemiology and biostatistics are often neglected areas of
       undergraduate and postgraduate medical education. Very few centers in Russia offer
       training in these disciplines.
       The EBM approach to health care practice is one in which the clinician is aware of the
evidence that bears on their clinical practice, and the strength of that evidence. The EBM
movement is aimed at helping health care practitioners, patients and policy makers to make
decisions based on the best evidence available.

       The number of new scientific insights that emerge every year is overwhelming. But at the
same time it is important to keep in mind that “health interventions are not free, people are not
infinitely rich and the budgets of health care are limited. For every dollar’s worth of health care
that is consumed, a dollar will be paid. While these payments can be laundered, disguised or
hidden, they will not go away” [Eddy DM. A manual for assessing health practices and designing
practice policies: the explicit approach. Philadelphia: American College of physicians, 1992].
Given that, the Evidence Based approach is very important, especially for the Russian health
system struggling to survive with very limited resources.

The implementation of evidence based principles will also support the planned restructuring of
the health care system by showing what can be done in ambulatory care and what can be shifted
from tertiary to secondary and from secondary to primary care level.

Policy of health care quality improvement in the Russian Federation

       Over the last 7 years the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation has undertaken a
number of steps to design a system of standardization in healthcare with the emphasis on the
development of evidence-based clinical protocols. In this framework a National laboratory for
standardization was set up.

       The National Healthcare Program “Quality Management in Healthcare for 2004-2007”
was approved by the Collegiums of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation in March
2003. One of the major goals of the Russian national healthcare policy is to improve quality and
efficiency of health care. The priorities of this policy are: development and implementation of a
unified strategy to improve quality of services in health care according to the internationally
accepted standards, development of strategies and tools for quality management in health care,
development of standards, licensing, accreditation, certification and attestation in healthcare,
insurance of effective cooperation between regulatory bodies at all levels, funds of compulsory
medical insurance, medical insurance companies, health care facilities and other institutions and
organizations in order to secure continuous quality improvement of health products and services,


                                                                                                 7
transition to efficient and safe technologies in healthcare with due regard to their cost-effectiveness,
increasing motivation of health workers for the continuous quality improvement (this includes both
improvement of education in the field of quality management in healthcare and introduction of the
dependence of payment for the services provided on their quality ).

       Development of clinical protocols based on selected clinical technologies with the proved
effectiveness and efficiency will be one of the major achievements of the program. Effectiveness
of this strategy is proven by the experience accumulated in Great Britain, the United States, the
Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, Australia, Canada, Germany and other countries. This seems to be
providing a good framework for improvement of quality of health care in Russia.




                                                                                                      8
DETAILED ASSESSMENT

The aim of this project is to conduct a situation analysis of existing clinical guidelines in Russia,
supplemented by a quality analysis so as to be able to recommend an effective strategy of
improving quality of health care by evidence based clinical practice.

Methodology

The study was conducted in three steps: key informants were interviewed, existing guidelines
were collected and analyzed with the consecutive quality assessment.

STEP 1. Obtain information on activities of various organizations aimed at developing
clinical guidelines

The research team identified primary key informants followed by snowball sampling of
secondary interviewees, carried out until saturation. The sample was not intended to be
representative to any population; rather, individuals were selected on the basis of their
involvement in the developing of clinical guidelines in Russia. Three broad audiences were
interviewed: donor agencies, non-governmental organizations involved in developing evidence
based practices, professional associations and scientific societies.

Key informant interviews were questioned in an in-depth format by phone or face-to-face. All
the interviews were carried out in January 2003 – April 2003. The information was collected
through the    interviews concerning activities of various organizations aimed at developing
clinical guidelines, guidelines themselves, information about partners and other organizations
involved in Evidence based medicine promotion in Russia.

STEP 2. Search the literature and web-sites
Structured review of the literature was performed in order to identify clinical guidelines available
in Russia. Fifty names of the Russian journals [see Appendix 3] for the period from 1996 until
present time have been reviewed [see Appendix 1]. The information from the articles was
abstracted in two stages. At the first stage, each of the identified articles was evaluated for the
presence of complete description of clinical guideline, clinical rational, and strengths and
weaknesses. At the second stage each clinical guideline was analyzed according to the framework
developed.
The framework was developed to classify the guidelines into three groups: original guidelines,
translated international guidelines and developed in Russia, but in the frames of international
projects [see Appendix1]. Descriptive information was collected about every guideline. This
included type of the guidelines (standard, recommendation, protocol, etc), level of evidence the
guideline was based on, type of organization developing it, source of funding, means of
dissemination, etc. The guidelines were also sorted according to clinical subject or issue, or
disease. In cases of duplication the guidelines were compared. List of the guidelines collected see
in the Appendix 1.

Guidelines developed by Russian research institutes based on studies of weak design or having
no evidence in international literature were mainly excluded as opinion based.

The same scheme of review was applied for the Internet search.

Federal clinical standards, created by different leading central clinical institutes and leading
scientists under umbrella of Semashko Public Health Research Institute were not included in the
analysis as they are almost not used.

STEP 3. Quality assessment

The standardized instrument used to assess the guidelines was the Cluzeau instrument. This
instrument was selected after systematic search of the literature, which revealed that it was the
best guideline appraisal instrument available. Although limited, there are data showing that the
Instrument has acceptable reliability and there is preliminary evidence of criterion validity.
[Cluzeau FA, Littlejohns P, Grimshaw JM, Feder G, Moran SE. Development and application of
a generic methodology to assess the quality of clinical guidelines. Int J Qual Health Care
1999;11:21-8.]

The purpose of this instrument is to encourage the systematic development of clinical guidelines
and to provide a structured and transparent approach to their appraisal. It can be used by
independent appraisers to assess existing guidelines or by guideline developers as an aide
memoir. The instrument contains 37 questions addressing different aspects of guideline
development. It is divided into three dimensions. Dimension one: rigour of development
(questions 1-20) assesses the process of development including responsibility for the guidelines,
composition of development group, identification and interpretation of evidence, formulation of
recommendations, link between evidence and main recommendations, peer review and updating.

                                                                                                10
Dimension two: Context and content (questions 21-32) assesses the aims and objectives of the
guidelines, the target group, circumstances for applying the recommendations, presentation and
the format of the guideline and the estimated outcomes benefits, harms and costs. Dimension
three: application (questions 33 to 37) addresses the implementation and dissemination strategies
and monitoring.

Ten clinical guidelines from each of the group of the guidelines collected (original guidelines,
translated international guidelines and developed in Russia in the frames of international projects)
[see Appendix1] were selected randomly to be assessed by the Cluzeau Instrument [see Appendix
2]. Although not formally part of the appraisal instrument, we also included a global assessment
of guidelines that Cluzeau and associates have used previously (Cluzeau FA, Littlejohns P,
Grimshaw JM, Feder G, Moran SE. Development and application of a generic methodology to
assess the quality of clinical guidelines. Int J Qual Health Care 1999;11:21-8.)

The three summary scores of guidelines quality: rigour of development [dimension 1], context
and content [dimension 2] and application [dimension 3] were calculated by summing the values
for each item constituting each dimension. A “Yes” response was assigned a value of 1, and all
other responses were given a value of 0. A dimension quality score was then expressed as a
percentage of the maximum possible score out of 100% for each dimension in order to compare
scores across three dimensions, as done by Cluzeau and associates.

All the materials, the report and samples of clinical practice guidelines will be made available on
the World Bank Internet site specifically tailored for this purpose [www.cgr.mednet.ru].
Additionally there are links between files with clinical practice guidelines and URL, where these
documents were originally located in Internet.




                                                                                                 11
SUMMARY OF RESULTS

Results of the quality assessment

We identified 147 clinical practical guidelines that met our inclusion criteria. 22% of included
guidelines were developed by national institutions and organizations, 14% were developed in
collaboration with international partners and 64% were translated international guidelines . In all,
39 of guidelines were published and 22.% reported receiving sponsorship. The most common
health conditions addressed by the guidelines were CVD 14 %, Lung diseases 11.%, maternal
and child health 11.%.

Thirty clinical guidelines from three groups (original guidelines, translated international
guidelines and developed in Russia but in the frames of international projects) [see Appendix1]
were assessed with the use of Cluzeau Instrument [see Appendix 2]. The quality of the guidelines
varied significantly by developer, degree of international partners participation and sponsorship.

Tables 1-3 present the proportion of the guidelines that met each of the 37 quality criteria in the
appraisal instrument.
Table 1. Proportion of clinical guidelines developed under international support that met
quality criteria.


Criterion                                     Score   Criterion                                             Score
Dimention 1: Rigour of guideline
development                                           Dimention 2: Contex and content

Is the agency responsible for the
development of the guidelines clearly                 Are the reasons for the developing the guidelines
identified?                                   90      clearly stated?                                       60
Was external funding or other support                 Are the objectives of the guidelines clearly
received for developing the guidelines?       90      defined?                                              90
If external funding or support was
received, is there evidence that the
potential biases of the funding body                  Is there a satisfactory description of the patients
(ies) were taken into account?                0       to which the guidelines are meant to apply?           90
Is there a description of the individuals
(e.g. professionals, interest groups-                 Is there a description of the circumstances
including patients) who were involved                 (clinical or non clinical) in which exceptions
in the guidelines development group?          90      might be made in using the guidelines?                80

                                                      Is there an explicit statement of how the patient's
If so, did the group contain                          preferences should be taken into account in
representatives of all key disciplines?       70      applying the guidelines?                              30
Is there a description of the sources of
information used to select the evidence               Do the guidelines describe the condition to be
on which the recommendations are                      detected, treated, or prevented in unambiguous
based?                                        40      terms?                                                100
                                                      Are the different possible options for
If so, are the sources of information                 management of the condition clearly stated in the
adequate?                                     40      guidelines?                                           70
Is there a description of the method(s)
used to interpret and assess the strength
of the evidence?                              2       Are the recommendations clearly presented?            100
                                                      Is there an adequate description of the health
If so, is(are) the method(s) for rating the           benefits that are likely to be gained from the
evidence satisfactory?                        0       recommended management?                               50

Is there a description of the methods                 Is there an adequate description of the potential
used       to       formulate     the                 harms or risks that may occur as a result of the
recommendations?                              50      recommended management?                               0
                                                      Is there an estimate of the costs or expenditures
                                                      likely to incur from the recommended
If so, are the methods satisfactory?          0       management?                                           10
Is there an indication of how the views               Are the recommendations supported by the
of interested parties not on the panel                estimated benefits, harms and costs of the
were taken into account?                      0       intervention?                                         10
Is there an explicit link between the
major recommendations and level of
supporting evidence?                        0   Dimension 3: Application
Were the guideline          independently
reviewed        prior        to     their       Does the guideline document suggest possible
publication/release?                        0   methods for dissemination and implementation?      70
If so, is explicit information given
about methods and how comments were             Does the guideline document specify criteria for
addressed?                                  0   monitoring compliance?                             100
                                                Does the guideline document identify clear
Were the guideline piloted?                 0   standards or targets?                              100
If the guidelines were piloted, is
explicit information given about the            Does the guideline document define measurable
methods used and the results adopted?       0   outcomes that can be monitored?                    0
                                                Does the guideline document identify key
Is there a mention of         a date for        elements which need to be considered by
reviewing the guidelines?                   0   guideline groups?                                  80
Is the body responsible for the
reviewing and  updating clearly
identified?                                 0
Overall, have the potential biases of
guideline development been adequately
dealt with?                                 0




                                                                                                         14
Table 2. Proportion of Russian clinical guidelines that met quality criteria.


Criterion                                                   Score   Criterion                                    Score
Dimention 1: Rigour of guideline development                        Dimention 2: Contex and content


 Is the agency responsible for the development of the               Are the reasons for the developing the
guidelines clearly identified?                              80      guidelines clearly stated?                   90

Was external funding or other support received for                  Are the objectives of the guidelines
developing the guidelines?                                  0       clearly defined?                             70

If external funding or support was received, is there               Is there a satisfactory description of the
evidence that the potential biases of the funding body              patients to which the guidelines are
(ies) were taken into account?                              0       meant to apply?                              100
                                                                    Is there a description of the
Is there a description of the individuals (e.g.                     circumstances (clinical or non clinical)
professionals, interest groups-including patients) who              in which exceptions might be made in
were involved in the guidelines development group?          70      using the guidelines?                        90
                                                                    Is there an explicit statement of how
                                                                    the patient's preferences should be
If so, did the group contain representatives of all key             taken into account in applying the
disciplines?                                                60      guidelines?                                  20
Is there a description of the sources of information                Do the guidelines describe the
used to select the evidence on which the                            condition to be detected, treated, or
recommendations are based?                                  80      prevented in unambiguous terms?              100
                                                                    Are the different possible options for
                                                                    management of the condition clearly
If so, are the sources of information adequate?             60      stated in the guidelines?                    100

Is there a description of the method(s) used to interpret           Are the recommendations           clearly
and assess the strength of the evidence?                    0       presented?                                   80
                                                                    Is there an adequate description of the
                                                                    health benefits that are likely to be
If so, is(are) the method(s) for rating the evidence                gained    from    the    recommended
satisfactory?                                               0       management?                                  30
                                                                    Is there an adequate description of the
                                                                    potential harms or risks that may occur
Is there a description of the methods used to formulate             as a result of the recommended
the recommendations?                                        10      management?                                  0
                                                                    Is there an estimate of the costs or
                                                                    expenditures likely to incur from the
If so, are the methods satisfactory?                        10      recommended management?                      10
                                                                    Are the recommendations supported by
Is there an indication of how the views of interested               the estimated benefits, harms and costs
parties not on the panel were taken into account?           0       of the intervention?                         10
Is there an explicit link between the major
recommendations and level of supporting evidence?         0   Dimension 3: Application
                                                              Does the guideline document suggest
Were the guideline independently reviewed prior to            possible methods for dissemination and
their publication/release?                                0   implementation?                          0

If so, is explicit information given about methods and        Does the guideline document specify
how comments were addressed?                              0   criteria for monitoring compliance?      60

                                                              Does the guideline document identify
Were the guideline piloted?                               0   clear standards or targets?              60
                                                              Does the guideline document define
If the guidelines were piloted, is explicit information       measurable outcomes that can be
given about the methods used and the results adopted?     0   monitored?                               0
                                                              Does the guideline document identify
Is there a mention of      a date for reviewing the           key elements which need to be
guidelines?                                               0   considered by guideline groups?          80
Is the body responsible for the reviewing and updating
clearly identified?                                       0
Overall, have the potential biases of guideline
development been adequately dealt with?                   0




                                                                                                            16
Table 3. Proportion of translated clinical guidelines that met quality criteria.


Criterion                                                   Score   Criterion                                      Score
Dimention 1: Rigour of guideline development                        Dimention 2: Contex and content


 Is the agency responsible for the development of the               Are the reasons for the developing the
guidelines clearly identified?                              90      guidelines clearly stated?                     70
Was external funding or other support received for                  Are the objectives of the guidelines
developing the guidelines?                                  0       clearly defined?                               60

If external funding or support was received, is there               Is there a satisfactory description of the
evidence that the potential biases of the funding body              patients to which the guidelines are meant
(ies) were taken into account?                              0       to apply?                                      80
                                                                    Is there a description of the circumstances
Is there a description of the individuals (e.g.                     (clinical or non clinical) in which
professionals, interest groups-including patients) who              exceptions might be made in using the
were involved in the guidelines development group?          30      guidelines?                                    80

                                                                    Is there an explicit statement of how the
If so, did the group contain representatives of all key             patient's preferences should be taken into
disciplines?                                                10      account in applying the guidelines?            0

Is there a description of the sources of information                Do the guidelines describe the condition
used to select the evidence on which the                            to be detected, treated, or prevented in
recommendations are based?                                  70      unambiguous terms?                             100
                                                                    Are the different possible options for
                                                                    management of the condition clearly
If so, are the sources of information adequate?             50      stated in the guidelines?                      100
Is there a description of the method(s) used to interpret           Are the       recommendations       clearly
and assess the strength of the evidence?                    30      presented?                                     100

                                                                    Is there an adequate description of the
If so, is(are) the method(s) for rating the evidence                health benefits that are likely to be gained
satisfactory?                                               20      from the recommended management?               30
                                                                    Is there an adequate description of the
                                                                    potential harms or risks that may occur as
Is there a description of the methods used to formulate             a    result   of     the     recommended
the recommendations?                                        50      management?                                    10
                                                                    Is there an estimate of the costs or
                                                                    expenditures likely to incur from the
If so, are the methods satisfactory?                        40      recommended management?                        20
                                                                    Are the recommendations supported by
Is there an indication of how the views of interested               the estimated benefits, harms and costs of
parties not on the panel were taken into account?           0       the intervention?                              20
Is there an explicit link between the major
recommendations and level of supporting evidence?           10      Dimension 3: Application
                                                               Does the guideline document suggest
Were the guideline independently reviewed prior to             possible methods for dissemination and
their publication/release?                                80   implementation?                            0
If so, is explicit information given about methods and         Does the guideline document specify
how comments were addressed?                              0    criteria for monitoring compliance?        70
                                                               Does the guideline document identify
Were the guideline piloted?                               0    clear standards or targets?                90
                                                               Does the guideline document define
If the guidelines were piloted, is explicit information        measurable outcomes that can be
given about the methods used and the results adopted?     0    monitored?                                 0
                                                               Does the guideline document identify key
Is there a mention of      a date for reviewing the            elements which need to be considered by
guidelines?                                               0    guideline groups?                          0
Is the body responsible for the reviewing and updating
clearly identified?                                       0
Overall, have the potential biases of guideline
development been adequately dealt with?                   0




                                                                                                          18
Figures 1-3 show the distribution of the guidelines developed under international collaboration
by dimension quality score.
Dimension 1. Rigour of development                                    Dimension 3. Application

     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
                                                        No. of CPGs
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
          <10   20_29    40_49     60_69     80_89



     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
      4                                              No. of CPGs
      3
      2
      1
      0
          <10   20_29   40_49    60_69     80_89



Dimension 2. Context and content

     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
                                                     No. of CPGs
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
          <10   20_29   40_49    60_69     80_89




Figure 1. Frequency distribution of guidelines developed under international support by
dimension quality score (% of criteria met in each dimension), determined using the Appraisal
Instrument for Clinical Guidelines.
Dimension 1. Rigour of development                                   Dimension 3. Application



     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
                                                       No. of CPGs
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
           <10   20_29    40_49     60_69    80_89



      10
       9
       8
       7
       6
       5
       4                                               No. of CPGs
       3
       2
       1
       0
           <10    20_29    40_49    60_69    80_89



Dimension 2. Content and context.

     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
                                                     No. of CPGs
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
          <10    20_29    40_49    60_69    80_89




Figure 2. Frequency distribution of Russian guidelines by dimension quality score (% of criteria
met in each dimension), determined using the Appraisal Instrument for Clinical Guidelines.
Dimension 1. Rigour of development                                           Dimension 3.
Application



    10
     9
     8
     7
     6
     5
                                            No. of CPGs
     4
     3
     2
     1
     0
         <10   20_29 40_49 60_69 80_89



    10
     9
     8
     7
     6
     5
     4                                     No. of CPGs
     3
     2
     1
     0
         <10   20_29 40_49 60_69 80_89


Dimension 2. Content and context

    10
     9
     8
     7
     6
     5
                                          No. of CPGs
     4
     3
     2
     1
     0
         <10   20_29 40_49 60_69 80_89


Figure 3. Frequency distribution of translated guidelines by dimension quality score (% of
criteria met in each dimension), determined using the Appraisal Instrument for Clinical
Guidelines.
Out of all clinical guidelines developed with international support (see Figure1), 80% of the
guidelines met 20 - 40% of the rigour of guideline development criteria; for the rest the results
were lower. In the section devoted to the assessment of guideline context and content 30% of the
guidelines met 50-60% criteria. The results of guideline application assessment were higher, 60%
of studied guidelines met 80 % of criteria.

Out of all clinical guidelines developed in Russian Institutions [see Figure 2], 50% of the
guidelines met 20 - 30% of the rigour of guideline development criteria. In the section devoted to
the assessment of guideline context and content, 40% met 50 - 60% of criteria . The results of
guideline application assessment showed that about 60% of studied guidelines met 50 - 60% of
criteria.

Out of all translated clinical guidelines (see Figure 3), 50% of the studied guidelines met 10 - 20
% of criteria of the rigour of clinical guidelines development; 60 % met 50 - 60% of criteria
assessing context and content of clinical guidelines and about 70% met 50 - 60% of guideline
application criteria.




                                                                                                 22
INTERPRETATION

Rigour of guideline development varied significantly among the three groups of guidelines with
highest score 30 - 40% for 30% of the guidelines developed with international support.

The quality of the guidelines in terms of their context and content was considerably high for all
groups of guidelines: 80% of translated clinical guidelines and developed with international
support have met half or more of the criteria in this dimension and 70% of Russian clinical
guidelines have reached the same result.

The score for application of the guidelines was high for all groups :100% of guidelines developed
under international support, 70% of Russian guidelines and 70% of translated guidelines have
met half or more of the criteria in this dimension.

The findings suggest that the quality of the guidelines varied by group of the guidelines. The
overall quality (for all three dimensions) was higher for the guidelines developed with
international support.

The important caveat about the results is that the guideline appraisal instrument actually assesses
the quality of the reporting of the guideline development process rather than actual quality of the
process. Despite that we assessed the quality of clinical guidelines on the basis of only the written
and published materials. It is based on the assumption that practitioners and policy makers
wishing to make a decision about the particular guideline would probably not have any additional
information besides published. Another limitation is the sample size. We have assessed the
quality of only 30 guidelines out of collected, they were selected randomly .
Role of organizations acting in the field of EBM in Russia

The analysis has identified organizations acting in the filed of Quality and Effectiveness
Improvement on the bases of EBM and EEA in Russia:

    • The Department for Standardization in HealthCare under the Moscow Medical Academy is
    authorized by the MoH to develop the framework for standards and guidelines development
    and review of existing and newly developed guidelines [http://zdrav.net/lab_about.html].

Department of Standardization in Health maintains a close cooperation with the Ministry of
Health and participates in developing departmental and extra departmental normative, legal and
backbone documents. This Department supervised development of sectoral documents related to
the Law of the Russian Federation on Product and Service Certification. Federal level of the
work of the Department and its methodological activity have affected development of the system
of quality management in the Russian healthcare andestablishment of the institution of officers
responsible for quality in the subjects of the Russian Federation. Near 90 clinical protocols are
being developed under supervision and methodological assurance of Department of
Standardization in Health

•       Interregional Public Organization “Pharmaco-Economic Research Society” – Russian
Branch of ISPOR, established in 1999 [http://www.rspor.ru]. The Interregional Public
Organization “Pharmaco-Economic Research Society” is currently engaged in the following
activities: pharmaco-economic research; organization ofdomestic conferences and congresses;
lectures and master classes in pharmaco-economics, standardization, formulary, evidence-based
medicine.

    • Federal Methodological Center for Quality Assurance under the Central Public Health
Research Institute, MoH [www.healthquality.ru;] works with regions to develop EB clinical-
organizational guidelines on the bases of Quality Improvement Methodology.

    • Under intergovernmental cooperation between Russia and the US, Great Britain and the
European Union the EBM Center was organized in the Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy.

    • In April, 2003 MoH established Federal Center for Licensing, Accreditation and
Standardization.
   • Professional Societies have developed clinical recommendations in relevant clinical fields.

   • Russian office of European Regional Bureau, World Health Organization.

Upon establishment of the Russian Branch in 1999 WHO accelerated its efforts to promote
evidence-based guidelines in Russia, including cooperation with sponsors. The following
programs are under a large-scale implementation: Breast feeding, Early putting to breast,
Rooming-in, Neonatal resuscitation, Reproductive health.

These programs result in comprehensive changes in the system of health care delivery in
maternity hospitals and antenatal care and are called “Child friendly hospital”. It was those
programs that became the basis for USAID WIN project and WHO Health Reform project; WIN
project, in particular, elevated the set of the documents of the programs to the format of a clinical
practice guideline.

   • Many scientists, medical professionals, institutes are involved in the development of clinical
   guidelines on the federal level and in regions.

   • International agencies, donors and institutes support in some way the development of EBM
   and guidelines based on scientific evidence in Russia: USAID, DFID, TACIS (Europe Union
   Program), OSI, Council of the Baltic Sea States and others.

   • Russian cities set up resource centers to provide methodological support and free-of-charge
   access to evidence-based data. The Open Society Institute [www.osi.ru] has also contributed
   to the development of this area, i.e. series of projects and grants to provide free access to
   Internet resources primarily to the institutes of higher education and to develop clinical
   practice protocols [www.osi.ru/web/homepage.nsf].

USAID

1) ZdravReform Project

USAID large comprehensive ZdravReform Project implemented in 6 subjects of the Russian
Federation over the period from 1992 to 1996 was the first to make most valuable contribution to
the EBM dissemination in Russia. The Project covered a wide range of areas:




                                                                                                   25
1. Economic and Demographic data analysis 2. Payment Systems 3. Financial Management 4.
Organization and Management 5. Primary Care 6. Public Health 7.Policy & Legislation 8.
Quality Assurance 9. Information Systems 10. Pharmacy Sector 11. Training and Development

Upon Project 7 clinical protocols and 22 clinical and practice guidelines have been developed.
Project experts promoted the ideas of EBM throughout the period of the Project implementation
and wrote a book about EBM clinical guidelines implementation in Russia and other problems
titled “Manual for Clinical Quality Improvement for the Transformation of the Russian Health
Care System”. The developed clinical protocols remained unknown and non-disseminated in
Russia. Their electronic format may partially account for remaining unclaimed.

2) American International Health Alliance

AIHA partnerships made a great contribution to the development of Evidence-based medicine in
Russia.

The Russian partners are provided with the required literature, access to WEB-resources; they are
trained to work with original sources both written and electronic ones. To master the acquired
skills the Russian partners prepare analytical reviews of standard practices to answer crucial
clinical questions and upload them on the AIHA WEB-site [www.aiha.com ].

As a result, the Russian participants of the partnerships started to create gradually           an
environment favoring evidence-based clinical decisions and development of culture and skills of
Internet search for the best available information. Understanding of the principles of the clinical
etiology makes the users “choosy” with respect to the information available on the Internet.

Results of the partnerships work executed as clinical practice guidelines are uploaded on the
AIHA      WEB-portal      Infonet     “Eurasian     Health”     in    a    multilingual    library.
[http://www.eurasiahealth.org/russian/library/results.cfm].

Follow up activities of the AIHA partnerships include development of the local communities in
line with the democratic principles of public health promotion and human well-being. The
communities should be built around the Russian partners participated in adapting clinical practice
guidelines to the Russian health care system and acquired knowledge and skills to improve health
care system according to EBM data. Expansion beyond the health care system will help to




                                                                                                26
develop a cross-sectoral and public cooperative coalition consisting of different national and
public institutions with an aim to improve public health.

3) Healthy Russia 2020

USAID is soliciting applications from non-commercial, non-governmental organizations to
implement Healthy Russia 2020, a new $25 million, five-year health communication activity, that
will promote healthy behavior, encourage adoption of practices proven effective under USAID
health program, and advocate for broad participation to reverse declining health indicators.
Activity outputs will include forming an alliance of health services providers into a sustainable
health advocacy NGO, creating a Healthy Russia 2020 web portal, conducting mass media and
communication campaigns, and creating a health communication and delivery infrastructure
through technical assistance and capacity building. The Healthy Russia 2020 activity forms a
cornerstone of USAID’s health strategy 2001-2005.

Healthy Russia 2020 will contribute to these specific health outcomes: 1) a healthier lifestyle for
young Russians, 2) reduced HIV/AIDS/STI infections, 3) improved control of TB, including
Multi-Drug-Resistant infections, and 4) improved women and infants health. This activity will
draw upon USAID and other projects as sources for proven health interventions and technologies
and work closely with them in developing advocacy and dissemination strategies. Healthy Russia
2020’s primary contribution will be health communication expertise and activities.

4) Quality Assurance Project - Russia

Within the project framework the 4 clinical-organizational guidelines were developed. The
guidelines are available on www.healthquality.ru both in Russian and English. The development
methods are based on the methodology for Improving systems of health care delivery, adapted
within the project framework to Russian health system. The American counterparts shared their
know-how of quality management technology with their Russian counterparts The guidelines are
evidence-based, while in respect to the guideline for Pregnancy induced hypertension cost
effectiveness has been proven.

The Project has initiated its second phase. 32 regions of the Russian Federation expressed their
willingness to participate. Program to coordinate participation of EBM specialists and experts in
teams to develop clinical guidelines both in the center and regions is shaped based on the survey
analysis of participants. It is planned to conduct a number of trainings in EBM and knowledge

                                                                                                27
management for the project participants. In framework of this Project CPHRI developed WEB-
communicator for exchange of information with territories.

Department For International Development

www.dfid.gov.uk; www.britemb.msk.ru

DFID became an active player in the Russian Healthcare in early 90s. It actively operates at the
federal level and in a number of territories, i.e. Samara, Kemerovo and Sverdlov Oblasts; besides
those activities it has developed a mechanism of small project implementation Russia-wide. With
regard to that area DFID maintains a close cooperation with the basic multilateral organizations
including WHO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and World
Bank. The main avenues of work to support the healthcare include systemic changes, population
coverage with medical care, diseases control primarily socially sound diseases, i.e. TB, STDs and
AIDS, and reproductive health improvement. In many cases the approach used by DFID
consisted of the following components: first comes implementation of pilot projects then goes
large-scale dissemination of success stories. Good example of deliverables: Prevention of
infectious diseases among injection drug users. Ekaterinburg, 2002, Methodological
recommendations

In the TB control area DFID actively coordinates its activities with anti-TB activities developed
under the World Bank with the aim to ensure their complementarities. DFID also collaborates
with WHO to find economic ways to curb the TB spread.

Follow up activities - DFID

In close cooperation with the World Bank DFID takes part in the disbursement of the projected
loan for TB and HIV/AIDS control in Russia. DFID assistance includes support of health
education, diagnostic, preventive and treatment activities as well as work on TB and HIV/AIDS
spread modeling.

Current bilateral projects in Russia include:

            ♦   Development of TB prevention and treatment system [in addition to the activities
    projected by the World Bank] primarily in Kemerovo and Samara;

            ♦   Children mental institutions reforms in Sverdlovsk;



                                                                                              28
TACIS

1) North West Health Replication Project

TACIS NWHR Project is aimed at assessing the value of different international projects
implemented in Russia [primarily, TACIS itself] related to health reforms, and introducing their
positive results into the subjects of the Russian Federation in the Northwest. The project has
conducted a considerable research, and donors and Russian partners were surveyed.          A great
library with materials in hard and electronic copies has been created.

Only 16 out of 600 basic documents collected can be referred to as guidelines. The project was
not aimed at assessing the guidelines collected; therefore, there is no indication of the level of
their evidence. The project is about to finalize the Web-portal [www.zdravinform.ru] with the
library of the documents collected. As decided by the Ministry of Health, this Internet resource is
to be transferred to the Central Public Health Research Institute with the Ministry of Health for
further administration and replenishment. Besides, the project is developing methods for
assessing completed and on-going international projects and also transfers them to the Institute.
As decided by the Ministry of Health, in future Central Public Healthcare Research Institute will
evaluate international projects in terms of their know-how and results applicability to the Russian
healthcare at the request from the Ministry of Health and other parties concerned. This generates
hopes that clinical guidelines as the project deliverables will be also evaluated in terms of their
evidence and effectiveness.

One of the important deliverable is Evaluation of Interventions in the Health Care Sector - A
Toolkit for Researchers.

The major aim of this toolkit is to provide researchers with the necessary concepts, approaches,
methods and issues related to evaluation of health reform interventions of any kind. The toolkit
can also be used as a teaching aid to strengthen capacities for evaluation. Besides, this manual
will enable decision makers in the sphere of health policy formulation, including heads of health
care authorities [HCA] and health care facilities at the federal and regional levels, to better
understand evaluation and how to interpret the findings.

2) Primary Health Care Development




                                                                                                29
The aim of the Project – strengthening Primary Care, redesigning Scope of Authority for GP/
Family doctor, including development of 10 CGs for GP/ Family doctor.

Task Force for Communicable Disease Control in the Baltic Sea Region

http://www.baltichealth.org/balticproject/projects.php

There are a lot of grants in the framework of Task Force for Communicable Disease Control in
the Baltic Sea Region. They deal with STD, HIV/AIDS, TB and Primary Care for these diseases.
Among deliverables of some grants mentioned should be CGs.

Interregional Society of EBM Specialists

EBM knowledge has been diffused into the Russian regions where independent groups were
developed under medical schools that provide education, training and EBM promotion. In
December 2002 those groups consolidated into Interregional Society of EBM Specialists.
Situation with EBM dissemination in Russia can be visualized through answers to the first
questionnaire given by representatives of the Regional branches of Interregional Society of EBM
Specialists [ISEBMS].

ISEBMS overall activities include:

            ♦   Participate in development of Clinical Guidelines, which develop under umbrella
    of Professional Associations.

            ♦   Development of Internet forum [ http://www.osdm.org], the web-site was
    launched in April.

            ♦   Preparation of quarterly bulletin, the first copy will be issued in early April.

            ♦   The first ISEBMS conference “EBM Development in Russia: rules of regions”
    was held on April 11, 2003 in the framework of the regular congress “Man and Drugs” with
    more than 800 attendees.

            ♦   Development of an EBM training course subject to the Health Ministry approval.

            ♦   Information about regional branches is outlined in the Attachment.

            ♦   ISEBMS are the member of “AGREE” - an international collaboration of researchers and policy
    makers who seek to improve the quality and effectiveness of clinical practice guidelines by establishing a
    shared framework for their development, reporting and assessment. [http://www.agreecollaboration.org].



                                                                                                           30
    ISEBMS officially translated AGREE Appraisal Instruments into Russian and it possible to download this
    document [http://www.agreecollaboration.org/pdf/Russia.pdf]




Department of Standardization
Federal Standards for Rational Drug Use

Third edition of the Federal Guidelines for Rational Drug Use is available on the web-site of the
All-Russia Public Fund “Human Health”. Its structure allows for “falling down” into relevant
subsections and open them http://www.medlife.ru/formular/index.htm .

Federal standard is one of the standards developed at the federal level used as a tool for
calculating the costs of basic health care package .

Web-site www.antibiotic.ru [www.iacmac.ru] is designed to cover the problems of drug
resistance in Russia, clinical and molecular microbiology, treatment and prevention of infectious
diseases. This job was supported by USAID and US Pharmacopoeia.

The mentioned above Federal Center for Quality Assurance in Healthcare under the Central
Public Health Research Institute aims to support methodologically development of clinical and
organizational guidelines at the regional level, prepare materials for relevant trainings, organize
and conduct scientific conferences, workshops and symposiums on quality improvement of
health care delivery systems.




                                                                                                       31
DISCUSSION

The current study was designed to conduct a situation analysis of existing clinical guidelines in
Russia, supplemented by a quality analysis of the guidelines collected.

The results of our study show that within Russia, there is a growing interest to the development
of guidelines. Over the last decade Russia has experienced several waves of introduction of
clinical standards to healthcare:

       Federal clinical standards [ca. 800], created by different leading central clinical institutes
and leading scientists under umbrella of Semashko Public Health Research Institute. At the
current moment they are not used by health care practitioners.

       Clinical protocols are currently being developed under supervision and with the
methodological support of the Department of Standardization in Health.

       Clinical guidelines, developed by professional Associations/Research Institutes

       Clinical guidelines developed in the frames of international projects conducted in Russia

       Clinical guidelines translated from English language.

As a result of that, clinical guidelines became available via internet and Russian health care
journals. But after collecting data, it has become clear to us that understanding of what clinical
guideline is and what is the “evidence” differs. For instance, some of the interviewed informants
developed recommendations on the basis of “experience” of heads of institutions or facilities. Out
of 56 applications submitted to Open Society Institute in 2002 for a grant competition on
developing clinical recommendations only 5 had a description of using international studies as a
basis. The rest were based either on one center research or on opinions of some distinguished
physicians.

The results of the guidelines assessment performed with the use of Cluzeau Instrument
demonstrate that quality of the guidelines vary significantly by developer, degree of international
partnerships and sponsorship. Methods of clinical guidelines development in Russia still remain
basically opinion based. Methods that take explicit account of relevant evidence are used very
rarely. Translated clinical guidelines and developed in the framework of international projects did
appear to have higher quality in terms of content and context of clinical guidelines. However,
there seems to be consensus that a simple translation of evidence is not sufficient and most
recommendations translated can not be used straight away and need to be adapted to the local
realities, including health system and legal framework.

There is no big variety in guideline application by developer. Despite guideline application
appeared to be medium (more than half of the guidelines have met 50-60% of criteria assessing
guideline application) interviews with key informants revealed some problems related to
guidelines implementation. Guidelines developed by professional associations are often not
disseminated outside the organization, which developed them. For instance, translation of
international standards on pregnancy and childbirth – ECPC, funded by donors was kept in the
international department of a research institute and not disseminated. Even standards developed
by the Ministry of Health are not often accessible to the target audiences or only few copies are
available.

Another part of problem related to the clinical guidelines implementation is the resistance of
physicians. This point of view is shared by a number of key informants and was related to a gap
between what physicians need and what is really available to them. So, in some case it’s a
problem of adaptation. In many cases, however, there seems to be an issue of resistance related to
the strict hierarchy within health facilities and the view of senior doctors as the ones possessing
experience and hence the knowledge about best ways to treat.

Another issue relates to the lack of good methods to control sources of funding. It is generally
accepted that many of the small trials in Russia are funded by pharmaceutical companies. Given
the low level of state funding and low salaries of researchers it is plausible to preclude that there
is a real danger of some of the studies being biased.

Most of guidelines in Russia have tended to focus on issues of clinical effectiveness and have not
explicitly considered broader issues, particularly cost. There has been no widely accepted
successful way of incorporating economic considerations into guidelines. There is little practical
and theoretical experience to incorporate the cost issues into clinical guideline. In the US it has
been recommended that every set of clinical guidelines should include information on the cost
implications of the alternative preventive, diagnostic and management strategies for each clinical
situation. The stated rational was that this information would help potential users to evaluate
better the potential consequences of different practices.




                                                                                                  33
  CONCLUSION

1)    There is no unified understanding of terms, i.e. what is standard, protocol and what are
clinical guidelines.

2)    There are many types of documents falling into the broad category of recommendations for
clinical procedures developed by various research institutes in Russia but most of them not based
on robust evidence

3)    The word “guideline” is used in many publications and/or practice advice but that many of
the publications or guidelines are not based on robust and state of the art obtained evidence from
research done in accordance with internationally accepted standards for EBM; the double blind
cross over clinical trial with statistically sufficient numbers of patients being the gold standard.

4)    There is no comprehensive strategy/plan for clinical guidelines development with clear
priorities and definition/designation of clear organizational and institutional roles and
responsibilities at the national, regional, and local levels.

5)    Another part of the problem is related to the clinical guidelines implementation. Most of
recommendations developed by different institutions are not disseminated wider then the group
included in pilot. Another part of problem related to the clinical guidelines implementation is the
resistance of physicians. This point of view is shared by a number of key informants and was
related to a gap between what physicians need and what is really available to them. So, in some
case it’s a problem of adaptation. In many cases, however, there seems to be an issue of resistance
related to the strict hierarchy within health facilities and the view of senior doctors as the ones
possessing experience and hence the knowledge about best ways to treat.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Suggestions that emerged as a result of analysis for important next steps included (but are not
limited to)

1)     It would be good to strive for a common understanding and acceptance of terms, i.e. what
is a standard and what are clinical guidelines and what are the requirements for guidelines to be
internationally acceptable in the (scientific) medical community. It seems to be crucial for
physicians to understand why they need clinical guidelines, how to use them in an appropriate way

2)     It would be good need for medical students and clinicians in Russia to get trained in EBM
and the underlying methods like clinical epidemiology and statistics.

3)     Russia could greatly contribute in the international effort to the further develop EBM and
CPG’s and therefore cooperation with and integration in the international networks of EBM and
CG developers would be very useful for all parties. In order to achive this it may be useful to
review the accessibility of international studies and CPG’s to the Russian health professionals at
different levels, including practicing/ teaching and researching, physicians

4)     Develop and articulate a comprehensive strategy/plan for clinical guidelines development
with clear priorities and definition/designation of clear organizational and institutional roles and
responsibilities at the national, regional, and local levels. Such a strategy and implementation plan
should also include the resources needed (and if they are not there how to obtain them)

5)     It is important to continue the development of the National CPGs for leading health
diseases and syndromes that primary care physicians routinely face in their clinical practice and
that could have a big impact on health outcomes and efficiency in health care delivery are
mitigating the heavy disease burden for society.

6)     Pursue the enabling environment by providing equipment, training and auxiliary staff,
necessary for the implementation of the CPG’s, as well as the right (financial and other) incentives
for professionals to apply CPG’s in a sensible way and use actors that generally are known to
influence doctor behavior (like peers and well respected clinicians/scientists/teachers) . Contracts
between the medical institutions and the doctors could include references to the use of CPG’s, to
the need for adequate documenting of diagnosis/treatment in patients records, as well as to the
possibility of external review. Professional associations could act as peer groups and promote the
adoption of CPG’s, A system of (re-) licensing of professionals in combination with mandatory
continuous medical education could enhance the uptake of new CPG’s. Accreditation systems
could play a role in changing practices and the organization of care in a more systematic way. A
more competitive environment for health care facilities (i.e. competing for market share and
money in relation to the appropriate application of CPG’s) in Russia could also help in improving
quality of services and the uptake of CPG’s.

7)      Consider the review of the current process of dissemination of CPG’s and uptake of
CPG’s

8)      To collaborate in a systematic way with the regional opinion leaders and decision makers
in the field of EBM/CPG’s as they are responsible for implementation within the entire territory of
the subjects of the Russian Federation

9)      Medical schools should incorporate EBM/CPG’s into all clinical curricula and issues
related to resource utilization should be included in retraining courses for practicing physicians

10)     Since the question of resources is of particular relevance to the health sector today, it is
important to develop a strategy of clinical guidelines development which focuses          not only on
clinical effectiveness, but also on economical aspects and the use of resources in general. Medico-
economic standards were developed about ten years ago. The started process of re-working these
medico-economic standards on the basis of EBM seems to be the right approach.




                                                                                                     36
REFERENCES
1. David L. Sackett, William MC Rosenberg, JA Muir Gray, R. Brian Haynes, W. Scott
Richardson. What it is and what it is not. BMJ 1996; 312: 71-2.
2. Sackett DL, Straus S, Richardson S, Rosenberg W, Haynes RB. Evidence-based Medicine:
how to practice and teach EBM, ed 2. London: Churchill Livingston; 2000
3. M.Eccles, J.Mason. How to develop cost-conscious guidelines. Journal of Health Technology
Assessment 2001, 5(16)
4. Eddy DM. A manual for assessing health practices and designing practice policies: the
explicit approach. Philadelphia. American College of physicians, 1992
5. Cluzeau A, Littlejohns P, Grimshaw JM, Feder G, Moran SE. Development and application
of a generic methodology to assess the quality of clinical guidelines. Int J Qual Health Care
1999,11:21-8
6. .www.cgr.mednet.ru
7. http://zdrav.net/lab_about.html
8. .http://www.rspor.ru
9. .www.healthquality.ru
10. .www.osi.ru
11. www.osi.ru/web/homepage.nsf
12. www.aiha.com
13. http://www.eurasiahealth.org/russian/library/results.cfm
14. www.healthquality.ru
15. . www.dfid.gov.uk
16. . www.britemb.msk.ru
17. . www.zdravinform.ru
18. . http://www.baltichealth.org/balticproject/projects.php
19. . http://www.osdm.org
20. . http://www.agreecollaboration.org
21. http://www.agreecollaboration.org/pdf/Russia.pdf
22. . http://www.medlife.ru/formular/index.htm
23. . www.iacmac.ru
    APPENDIX 1.
                                                 Table 1. Russian Clinical Guidelines developed under collaboration with international partners.

    For Analytical Review on Current Situation Related to Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines Development in
    Russia


N       Guideline    Guideline      Field:               Bases of evidence or      Description of           Methods of           Monitoring/evalu    Description of the       Source    Comments
u       type as      full title     clinical –           title of original         methods of used to       dissemination and    ation of use of     individuals3 involved in of        (Language,
m       defined by                  treatment            recommendation,           interpret and assess     implementation2      guideline and its   the guidelines           funding   Level,
b       authors 1                   prevention           source, and degree of     the strengths of the                          effectiveness       development group                  Other
e                                   diagnostic           adaptation                evidence /or                                                                                         comm.)
r                                   organizational                                 adaptation for
                                                                                   guidelines
        “Prikaz”     On             Clinical – treatment, Consensus of The High No information            is Hard copies of the Pilot studies in No information is            Governm Russian
                     improveme      prevention,           Level Working Group   available.                   document have been Orel,      Ivanovo, available                 ent of the
1                    nt        of   diagnostic,                                                              sent      to   each Novosibirsk                                  RF and
                     antitubercul   and organizational                                                       administrative                                                   internatio
                     ar service                                                                              territory       and                                              nal
                     in       the                                                                            published in MoH                                                 partners
                     Russian                                                                                 periodicals                                                      (WHO,
                     Federation                                                                                                                                               USAID,
                                                                                                                                                                              DFID)
        Guideline    Practical     Clinical – treatment, Consensus of working No information              is Though partners in No information is Editors – L.Stracthunsky,   USAID,    Russian
                     guideline     prevention            group.               available.                     other        USAID available         Y.Belousov, S. Kozlov.      US
2                    on       anti                                                                           projects, full text is                                           Pharmac
                     infectious                                                                              available at the                                                 opoeia
                     chemothera                                                                              Internet
                     py



    1
      Recommendations, standards, protocols, algorithms
    2
      Publications in journals or on websites – with URL
    3
      For example, professionals, interest groups including patients or organizations




                                                                                                                                                                                                  38
N       Guideline      Guideline       Field:                 Bases of evidence or         Description of             Methods of              Monitoring/evalu       Description of the       Source          Comments
u       type as        full title      clinical –             title of original            methods of used to         dissemination and       ation of use of        individuals3 involved in of              (Language,
m       defined by                     treatment              recommendation,              interpret and assess       implementation2         guideline and its      the guidelines           funding         Level,
b       authors 1                      prevention             source, and degree of        the strengths of the                               effectiveness          development group                        Other
e                                      diagnostic             adaptation                   evidence /or                                                                                                       comm.)
r                                      organizational                                      adaptation for
                                                                                           guidelines
        Guideline      A guide to      Clinical            – Translation        from No information               is Though partners in Pilot studies in             M. Enkin et al., Mac          Swedish English
                       effective       prevention,           English language -      available                       USAID       WIN- regions.                       Master University.            East-
                       care       in   diagnostic,                                                                   project                                                                       European Russian
                       pregnancy       treatment                                                                                        (Perm, Murmansk,             Editor of translation –       Committ
                       and                                                                                                              Petrozavodsk                 A.V. Mikhailov                ee     on
                       childbirth                                                                                                       Archangelsk, SPb)                                          Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                   care
        Clinical  Guideline            Clinical            – Based on Reports about No information                is Through different Pilot studies                 O.Kuznetsova and              SPb city
        recommend on diabetes          prevention,           CRTs                   available                        international                                   colleagues, SPb Medical       program
        ation     mellitus             diagnostic,                                                                   projects,                                       Academy of Post-              “Family
                  managemen            treatment                                                                     conferences                                     Diploma Education             medicine
                  t by GP                                                                                                                                                                          ”
        Practical      Sexually        Clinical            – Recommendation    of Translation                   and Through different Pilot projects in the O. Kuznetsova et al., SPb              Baltic
        guideline      transmitted     prevention,           CDC, WHO, adopted    adaptation                        international     regions               Medical Academy of                     Sea
                       diseases in     diagnostic,                                                                  projects,                               Post-Graduate Education                Council
                       general         treatment                                                                    conferences                                                                    Project
                       practice.

        Clinical and   Guideline       Clinical – treatment, Description               in Quality Improvement Published and                   Quarterly              MoH, Center of          USAID            Russian
        Organizatio    on     post-    prevention,           “Methods”                    (QI) methodology4                                   monitoring of          obstetrics, gynecology
        nal            abortive        diagnostic,                                                            disseminated at                 indicators, Cost-      and perinatology, RAMS,
        Guideline      care            and organizational                                                     WIN final                       effectiveness          WIN project
                                                                                                              conference                      analysis
                                                                                                              (Moscow, May
                                                                                                              2003)




    4
        Quality Improvement methodology was developed in Quality Assurance Project – USAID. One of the basic principle of this methodology – use evidence base materials for chosen of clinical technology.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        39
N   Guideline      Guideline     Field:               Bases of evidence or      Description of         Methods of              Monitoring/evalu     Description of the       Source       Comments
u   type as        full title    clinical –           title of original         methods of used to     dissemination and       ation of use of      individuals3 involved in of           (Language,
m   defined by                   treatment            recommendation,           interpret and assess   implementation2         guideline and its    the guidelines           funding      Level,
b   authors 1                    prevention           source, and degree of     the strengths of the                           effectiveness        development group                     Other
e                                diagnostic           adaptation                evidence /or                                                                                              comm.)
r                                organizational                                 adaptation for
                                                                                guidelines
    Clinical and Guideline Clinical      and Description                      in QI-methodology        Published      and Quarterly                 MoH, WIN project              USAID   Russian
    Organizatio on Breast Organizational     “Methods                                                  disseminated     at monitoring          of
    nal          Feeding                                                                               WIN           final indicators
    Guideline                                                                                          conference   (May
                                                                                                       19-20,       2003,
                                                                                                       Moscow)
    Clinical and   Improving     Clinical – treatment, Description            in QI-methodology        Published on paper Monthly              Health Care Department of USAID            Russian,
    Organizatio    the system    prevention,           “Methods”                                       and available at      monitoring    of Tula Oblast Administration                  English
    nal            of care for   diagnostic,                                                                                 indicators, Cost- Central Public Health
    Guideline      patients      and Organizational                                                    http://www.healthqu effectiveness
                                                                                                                                               Research Institute, MoH, RF
                   suffering                                                                           ality.ru/english/flow analysis
                   from                                                                                charts/index.html                       Quality Assurance Project,
                                                                                                                                                    University Research Co.,
                   arterial                                                                                                                         LLC/Center For Human
                   hypertensio                                                                                                                      Services, Bethesda, USA
                   n                                                                                   http://www.healthqu
                                                                                                       ality.ru/flowcharts/i
                                                                                                       ndex.html
    Clinical and Improving Clinical – treatment, Description                  in QI-methodology        Published on paper Monthly              Tver Oblast Health Care            USAID   Russian,
    organization the system diagnostic,          “Methods”                                             and available at      monitoring    of Department                                  English
    al Guideline of    health and Organizational                                                                             indicators, Cost- Central Public Health
                 care      for                                                                         http://www.healthqu effectiveness
                                                                                                                                               Research Institute, Ministry
                 women                                                                                 ality.ru/english/flow analysis
                                                                                                                                               of Health of the Russian
                 suffering                                                                             charts/index.html                       Federation
                 from                                                                                                                               Quality Assurance Project -
                 Pregnancy-                                                                                                                         University Research Co.,
                 Induced                                                                               http://www.healthqu
                                                                                                                                                    LLC/
                 Hypertensi                                                                            ality.ru/flowcharts/i
                 on                                                                                    ndex.html                                    Center for Human Services,
                                                                                                                                                    Bethesda, USA




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
N   Guideline    Guideline    Field:               Bases of evidence or      Description of         Methods of              Monitoring/evalu    Description of the       Source        Comments
u   type as      full title   clinical –           title of original         methods of used to     dissemination and       ation of use of     individuals3 involved in of            (Language,
m   defined by                treatment            recommendation,           interpret and assess   implementation2         guideline and its   the guidelines           funding       Level,
b   authors 1                 prevention           source, and degree of     the strengths of the                           effectiveness       development group                      Other
e                             diagnostic           adaptation                evidence /or                                                                                              comm.)
r                             organizational                                 adaptation for
                                                                             guidelines
    Clinical and (Re)        Clinical – treatment, Description             in QI-methodology        Published          and Monthly              Tver Oblast Health Care        USAID   Russian,
    organization designing   diagnostic,           “Methods”                                        available at           monitoring       of Department                              English
    al Guideline the system and organizational                                                                             indicators           Central Public Health
                 of care for                                                                        http://www.healthqu
                                                                                                                                                Research Institute of
                 neonates                                                                           ality.ru/english/flow
                 suffering                                                                          charts/index.html                           The MoH, RF
                 from                                                                                                                           Quality Assurance Project -
                 respiratory                                                                                                                    University Research Co.,
                 distress                                                                           http://www.healthqu                         LLC/
                 syndrome                                                                           ality.ru/flowcharts/i
                                                                                                                                                Center for Human Services,
                                                                                                    ndex.html
                                                                                                                                                Bethesda, MD, USA

    Guideline    “Medical     Clinical – treatment, Description            in QI-methodology        Published,    to be Pilot study             Health Care Department of      USAID   Russian,
                 care         diagnostic,           “Methods”                                       disseminated yet                            Tula Oblast Administration             English
                 provided by and Organizational                                                                                                 Public Health Research
                 primary                                                                                                                        Institute, MoH
                 care
                 physicians                                                                                                                     Quality Assurance Project -
                                                                                                                                                University Research Co.,
                 for patients                                                                                                                   LLC/Center For Human
                 with                                                                                                                           Services, Bethesda, USA
                 depression
                 (mild and                                                                                                                      American Psychiatric
                 moderate                                                                                                                       Institute for Research and
                                                                                                                                                Education, American
                 depressive                                                                                                                     Psychiatric Association,
                 episodes)”                                                                                                                     Washington, DC, USA
                 guideline
                                                                                                                                                National Institute of Mental
                                                                                                                                                Health, Bethesda, USA
                                                                                                                                                US Agency for Health Care
                                                                                                                                                Policy And Research




                                                                                                                                                                                                  41
N   Guideline    Guideline      Field:               Bases of evidence or       Description of         Methods of          Monitoring/evalu     Description of the       Source    Comments
u   type as      full title     clinical –           title of original          methods of used to     dissemination and   ation of use of      individuals3 involved in of        (Language,
m   defined by                  treatment            recommendation,            interpret and assess   implementation2     guideline and its    the guidelines           funding   Level,
b   authors 1                   prevention           source, and degree of      the strengths of the                       effectiveness        development group                  Other
e                               diagnostic           adaptation                 evidence /or                                                                                       comm.)
r                               organizational                                  adaptation for
                                                                                guidelines
    Clinical and Guideline      Clinical – treatment, Description            in QI-methodology         To be published     Annual monitoring    Health Care Department Of USAID    Russian
    organization on             diagnostic,           “Methods”                                                            provided by pilot    Samara             Oblast
    al Guideline prevention     prevention                                                                                 studies in Samara,   Administration
                 and early      and organizational                                                                         Cost-effectiveness   Samara Medical University          Guideline is
    DRAFT        detection of                                                                                              analysis                                                developed as
                 breast                                                                                                                         Public Health Research
                                                                                                                                                Institute, MoH, RF                 a result of
                 cancer    at                                                                                                                                                      several
                 primary                                                                                                                        Quality Assurance Project -        projects
                 care                                                                                                                           University Research Co.,           activities.
                                                                                                                                                LLC/Center For Human
                                                                                                                                                Services, Bethesda, USA
                                                                                                                                                American       International
                                                                                                                                                Medical Alliance

    Clinical and Guideline      Clinical – treatment, Description            in QI- methodology        To be published.    Annual monitoring    Health Care Department USAID       Russian
    organization on             diagnostic,           “Methods”,                                                           provided by pilot    of    Samara    Oblast
    al guideline bronchial      prevention                                                                                 studies in Samara,   Administration,                    Guideline is
                 asthma         and organizational                                                                         Cost-effectiveness                                      developed as
    DRAFT        managemen                                                                                                 analysis             Samara             Medical         a result of
                 t at primary                                                                                                                   University                         several
                 health care                                                                                                                                                       projects
                                                                                                                                                Public Health Research             activities
                                                                                                                                                Institute, MoH, RF
                                                                                                                                                Quality       Assurance
                                                                                                                                                Project - University
                                                                                                                                                Research            Co.,
                                                                                                                                                LLC/Center For Human
                                                                                                                                                Services, Bethesda, MD,
                                                                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                                                                American International
                                                                                                                                                Medical Alliance




                                                                                                                                                                                             42
N   Guideline    Guideline      Field:               Bases of evidence or      Description of         Methods of          Monitoring/evalu     Description of the       Source    Comments
u   type as      full title     clinical –           title of original         methods of used to     dissemination and   ation of use of      individuals3 involved in of        (Language,
m   defined by                  treatment            recommendation,           interpret and assess   implementation2     guideline and its    the guidelines           funding   Level,
b   authors 1                   prevention           source, and degree of     the strengths of the                       effectiveness        development group                  Other
e                               diagnostic           adaptation                evidence /or                                                                                       comm.)
r                               organizational                                 adaptation for
                                                                               guidelines
    Clinical and Clinical       Clinical – treatment, Description            in QI-methodology        To be published.    Annual monitoring    Health Care Department USAID       Russian
    organization guideline      diagnostic,           “Methods”.                                                          provided by pilot    Of    Samara    Oblast
    al Guideline on             prevention                                                                                studies in Samara,   Administration                     Guideline is
                 prevention     and Organizational                                                                        Cost-effectiveness                                      developed as
    DRAFT        of coronary                                                                                              analysis             Samara             Medical         a result of
                 heart                                                                                                                         University                         several
                 disease                                                                                                                                                          projects
                                                                                                                                               Public Health Research             activities
                 complicatio                                                                                                                   Institute, MoH, RF
                 ns        in
                 general                                                                                                                       Quality       Assurance
                 practice                                                                                                                      Project - University
                                                                                                                                               Research            Co.,
                                                                                                                                               LLC/Center For Human
                                                                                                                                               Services, Bethesda, MD,
                                                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                                               American International
                                                                                                                                               Medical Alliance
    Clinical and Clinical       Clinical – treatment, Description            in QI-methodology        To be published.    Annually             Health Care Department Of USAID    Russian
    organization guideline      diagnostic,           “Methods”.                                                          monitoring           Samara             Oblast
    al Guideline on             prevention                                                                                provided by pilot    Administration                     Guideline is
                 prevention     and organizational                                                                        studies in Samara,                                      developed as
                                                                                                                                               Samara Medical University
    DRAFT        of diabetes                                                                                              Cost-effectiveness                                      a result of
                 complicatio                                                                                              analysis             Public Health Research             several
                                                                                                                                               Institute, MoH, RF                 projects
                 ns        in
                 general                                                                                                                       Quality Assurance Project -
                                                                                                                                                                                  activities
                 practice                                                                                                                      University Research Co.,
                                                                                                                                               LLC/Center For Human
                                                                                                                                               Services, Bethesda, MD,
                                                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                                               American       International
                                                                                                                                               Medical Alliance




                                                                                                                                                                                            43
N   Guideline    Guideline      Field:           Bases of evidence or    Description of         Methods of          Monitoring/evalu    Description of the       Source    Comments
u   type as      full title     clinical –       title of original       methods of used to     dissemination and   ation of use of     individuals3 involved in of        (Language,
m   defined by                  treatment        recommendation,         interpret and assess   implementation2     guideline and its   the guidelines           funding   Level,
b   authors 1                   prevention       source, and degree of   the strengths of the                       effectiveness       development group                  Other
e                               diagnostic       adaptation              evidence /or                                                                                      comm.)
r                               organizational                           adaptation for
                                                                         guidelines
    Clinical     Abortion                                                                                           No information                              OSI
    protocol     protocol                                                                                           available
    Clinical     Protocol for                                                                                       No information                              OSI
    protocol     follow-up                                                                                          available
                 on patients
                 with
                 irritable
                 bowel
                 syndrome
    Clinical  Clinical                                                                                              No information                              OSI
    recommend recommend                                                                                             available
    ation     ation    for
              GP       on
              arterial
              hypertensio
              n
    Clinical  Clinical                                                                                              No information                              OSI
    recommend recommend                                                                                             available
    ation     ation    for
              GP       on
              clamidiosis
    Clinical  Clinical                                                                                              No information                              OSI
    recommend recommend                                                                                             available
    ation     ation     for
              GP        for
              urinary
              tract
              infection




                                                                                                                                                                                  44
N   Guideline    Guideline    Field:                Bases of evidence or    Description of         Methods of          Monitoring/evalu    Description of the       Source    Comments
u   type as      full title   clinical –            title of original       methods of used to     dissemination and   ation of use of     individuals3 involved in of        (Language,
m   defined by                treatment             recommendation,         interpret and assess   implementation2     guideline and its   the guidelines           funding   Level,
b   authors 1                 prevention            source, and degree of   the strengths of the                       effectiveness       development group                  Other
e                             diagnostic            adaptation              evidence /or                                                                                      comm.)
r                             organizational                                adaptation for
                                                                            guidelines
    Clinical     Clinical   Clinical – treatment,   Adaptation “UCLA        Adaptation in the      Published and        No information     Russana Uzbashan et al.   AIHA     English,
    guideline    guideline  prevention,             Chest Pain and Unstable framework of US-       disseminate at the   available                                             Russian
                 “Chest     diagnostic              Angina” Patient         Armenia partnership    conference “10
                 Pain” for                          Management Guideline                           Years of Health
                 primary                            and others                                     System Transition in
                 care                                                                              Central and Eastern
                 physicians                                                                        Europe Eurasia”,
                                                                                                   June, 2003
    Clinical     Protocol   Clinical           – Adaptation “Peptic         Adaptation in the      Published and      No information       Marta Lebedeva, MD, AIHA           English,
    protocol     for        treatment,           ulcer Diseases”            framework of US-       disseminate at the available            Department of Internal             Russian
                 Diagnostic diagnostic           University of              Ukraine partnership    conference “10                          Medicine, Donetsk
                 s      and                      Michigan health                                   Years of Health                         City, Ukraine
                 Treatment                       system, Ontario                                   System Transition
                 of Peptic                       guideline for peptic                              in Central and
                 Ulcer in                        ulcer diseases, and                               Eastern Europe
                 Adults                          others                                            Eurasia”, June,
                                                                                                   2003




                                                                                                                                                                                         45
Table 2. Clinical guidelines published in the Russian Journals (review of 50 names of the Russian Journals from 1996 until
now)



Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments             on Methods               of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods              of dissemination       and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development         /or implementation          guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation          for                         effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                        guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                         Other
                                                                                                                                                         comm.)
Recomme Pregnancy,      Clinical –           Guidelines of    No data is   Randomized control Published in journals: No data is        Guidelines of     Russian
ndation diagnosis       treatment,           WHO/Internationa available    trial                                     available         WHO/Internationa
                                                                                              Clinical
        and             prevention,          l Hypertension                                                                            l Hypertension
                                                                                              pharmacology and
        treatment of    diagnostic,          Society, 1999                                                                             Society, 1999
                                                                                              therapeutics, 2000 (3)
        hypertension    and organizational   Experts of                                                                                Experts of
        in the RF                            International                                     Russian Medical                         International
                                             Hypertension                                      Journal, 2000 (8)                       Hypertension
                                             Society.                                                                                  Society, Russian
                                                                                               Cardiology, 2000
                                                                                                                                       Society of
                                                                                               (11)                                    cardiologists and
                                                                                                                                       Interregional
                                                                                                                                       Council of
                                                                                                                                       coronary heart
                                                                                                                                       diseases
Guideline Guideline        Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments                on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title      treatment,        or title of original funding methods                 of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by                 prevention,       recommendation,              development            /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                    diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation             for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                           organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                          guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                              Other
                                                                                                                                                              comm.)
Standard    Standards of Clinical         –   Guidelines     for No data is No data is available. Published in journal: No     data         is No data is         Russian,
            heart attach treatment,           Cardiopulmonary available                                                 available              available          English
                                                                                                  Russian        Family
            management prevention,            Resuscitation and
                                                                                                  Doctor, 1997 (1)
                         diagnostic,          Emergency
                         and organizational   Cardiac      Care:
                                              Recommendations
                                              of    the    1992
                                              National
                                              Conference// J. of
                                              A. Med. Assoc. –
                                              1992. - Vol. 16. –
                                              P. 2135-2302
Guidelines Guidelines      Clinical         – No      data       is No data is No data is available   Published in journal:Clinical            Miasnikov State Russian,
           of      heart   treatment,         available             available                                              effectiveness       Scientific Institute English
                                                                                                      Consilium    medicum
           failure         diagnostic,                                                                                     analysis, Cost-     of     Cardiology,
                                                                                                      1999, (3)
           treatment       and organizational                                                                              effectiveness       National Congress
                                                                                                                           analysis            “Person         and
                                                                                                                                               Drugs”


Standards   Standards of Clinical        and No      data        is No data is No data is available   Published in journal:   No     data   is А. Sdvizkov Head Russian
            out-patient  treatment           available.             available                                                 available        oncologist of
                                                                                                      Moscow        medical
            medical care                                                                                                                       Moscow; M.
                                              Authors opinion.                                        journal, 1998 (5)
            for                                                                                                                                Lichinicer,
            oncological                                                                                                                        professor, RAMS
            patients                                                                                                                           V. Borisov,
                                                                                                                                               Deputy Head
                                                                                                                                               doctor, Moscow
                                                                                                                                               Oncological
                                                                                                                                               dispancer
                                                                                                                                               M.Biahov Deputy
                                                                                                                                               Head doctor

                                                                                                                                                            47
Guideline Guideline         Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments             on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title       treatment,        or title of original funding methods              of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by                  prevention,       recommendation,              development         /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                     diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation          for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                            organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                       guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                            Other
                                                                                                                                                            comm.)
Guidelines Recommend        Clinical – primary   K. Pokhis, V. No data is No data is available      Published in journal:   No     data   is K. Pokhis,      V. Russian
           ations      of   prevention,          Medvedev          available                                                available        Medvedev.
                                                                                                    Russian       Family
           association      secondary            Recommendations                                                                             Putersburg
                                                                                                    Doctor 1999 (3)
           of     several   prevention.          of association of                                                                           Medical
           European                              several European                                                                            Academy,        of
           medical                               medical societies                                                                           postgraduate
           societies on                          on       coronary                                                                           aducation.
           coronary                              disease
           disease                               prevention.
           prevention.
Guidelines Recommend Clinical               – No      data     is No data is No data is available   Published in journal:   No     data   is P. Grigorev , Russian
           ations    on treatment,            available           available                                                 available        Chief
                                                                                                    Moscow        Medical
           treatment     diagnostic.                                                                                                         astroenterologyst,
                                                                                                    Journal, 2001 (2)
           patients with                                                                                                                     MoH
           obesity .
                                                                                                                                            A. Yakovenko
                                                                                                                                            Russian State
                                                                                                                                            Medical
                                                                                                                                            University .
Guidelines Dispanseriza Clinical            – No      data     is No data is No data is available   Published in journal:   No     data   is P. Grigorev, Chief Russian
           tion        of treatment,          available           available                                                 available        astroenterologyst,
                                                                                                    Moscow        Medical
           patients with diagnostic.                                                                                                         MoH
                                                                                                    Journal, 2001 (5-6)
           digestive
                                                                                                                                            Russian State
           tract disease
                                                                                                                                            Medical
                                                                                                                                            University
                                                                                                                                            A. Yakovenko




                                                                                                                                                            48
Guideline Guideline       Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments          on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title     treatment,        or title of original funding methods           of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by                prevention,       recommendation,              development      /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                   diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation       for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                          organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                    guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                       Other
                                                                                                                                                       comm.)
Guidelines Using       of Clinical       – Original          No data is Randomized control Published in journal Effectiveness of       K. Gurevich, I.   Russian
           antibiotics to treatment,                         available  trials. Meta-analysis.                    treatment.           Maev, Department
                                                                                               Quality of Medical
           treat          diagnostic.                                                                              Effectiveness of    of physiology ,
                                                                                               Care 2001 (2)
           helicobacter                                                                                           drugs.               Moscow State
           pillory                                                                                                                     Medical Institute
           infectious
Guidelines Advantages Clinical           – Original          No data is Randomized control Published in journal Effectiveness of N. Feldsherova,        Russian
           of using long treatment,                          available  trials,     double                      treatment.       Saint-Petersburg
                                                                                            Quality of Medical
           acting        prevention.                                    blinded.   Placebo                                       State medical
                                                                                            Care 2001 (2)
           inhaled β2-                                                  controlled clinical                                      Academy
           agonist    to                                                trials.
           manage
           night attack
           of bronchial
           asthma

Algorithm Algorithms Clinical            – Original          No data is No data is available   Published in journal    No     data   is G. Melnichenko, Russian
s         of diagnosis treatment,                            available                                                 available        Sechenov
                                                                                               Russian       Medical
          and          prevention.                                                                                                      Moscow Medical
                                                                                               Journal, 2002 (17)
          treatment of                                                                                                                  Academy
          thyroid
          diseases




                                                                                                                                                   49
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments            on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods             of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development        /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation         for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                      guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                       Other
                                                                                                                                                       comm.)
Guidelines Treatment of Clinical       – Original          No data is No data is available     Published in journal    No     data   is N. Mihaylova,     Russian
           sleep        treatment.                         available                                                   available        RAMS , scientific
                                                                                               Russian       Medical
           disorders                                                                                                                    Center of Mental
                                                                                               Journal, 2003 (2)
                                                                                                                                        Health .




Guidelines Clinical       Clinical     – Original          No data is   No data is available   Published in journal    No     data   is S. Yakovlev, I. Russian
           recommenda treatment.                           available                                                   available        Derevyanko,
                                                                                               Russian       Medical
           tions       of                                                                                                               Sechenov
                                                                                               Journal, 2003 (2)
           antibiotics                                                                                                                  Moscow Medical
           therapy to                                                                                                                   Academy
           treat urinary
           tract
           infectious


Algorithm Algorithms Clinical          – Original          No data is   No data is available   Published in journal    No     data   is L.    Dvoretskiy, Russian
s         of    anemia treatment,                          available                                                   available        Sechenov
                                                                                               Russian       Medical
          treatment    diagnostic.                                                                                                      Moscow Medical
                                                                                               Journal, 2003 (2)
                                                                                                                                        Academy




                                                                                                                                                    50
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments           on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods            of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development       /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation        for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                     guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                      Other
                                                                                                                                                      comm.)
Algorithm Algorithm of Clinical        – Original           No data is No data is available   Published in journal:   No     data   is Donetckij     State Russian
s         multiple     diagnostic.                          available                                                 available        Medical
                                                                                              International medical
          sclerosis                                                                                                                    University.
                                                                                              journal 1998 (4)
          diagnosis.




Algorithm Algorithm of Clinical        – Original           No data is No data is available   Published in journal:   No     data   is E.    Dyaktereva, Russian
s         bioactive     treatment.                          available                                                 available        Russian Medical
                                                                                              International medical
          nutriceutics                                                                                                                 Academy        of
                                                                                              journal 1998 (6)
          and                                                                                                                          postgreduated
          parapharmac                                                                                                                  education,
          eutics in the                                                                                                                Moscow
          practice of
          family
          doctor.

Recomme National        Clinical       – Based           on No data is No data is available   http://www.cardiosite No     data     is Experts of the Russian
ndations recommenda     treatment,       International       available                        .ru/medical/recom-    available          Russian Scientific
         tions     on   prevention,      standards      and                                   artgip.asp                               Society         of
         prevention,    diagnostic       Report of WHO-                                                                                Cardiologists    -
         diagnostics                     experts on Arterial                                                                           Almazov et al.
         and                             Hypertension
         treatment of
         arterial
         hypertension




                                                                                                                                                     51
Guideline Guideline        Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments                on Methods               of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title      treatment,        or title of original funding methods                 of dissemination       and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by                 prevention,       recommendation,              development            /or implementation          guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                    diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation             for                         effectiveness     developing      ge,
                           organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                           guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                               Other
                                                                                                                                                               comm.)
Guidelines Guidelines  Organizational        European Society Uploaded      No data is available      http://nld.unibel.by/g   No     data   is Members of the Russian
           on Contrast and Diagnostic        of     Urogenital by                                     uidelines                available        Contrast   Media
           Media                             Radiology.        authority of                                                                     Safety Committee
                                                               ESUR                                                                             of the European
                                                                                                                                                Society       of
                                                                                                                                                Urogenital
                                                                                                                                                Radiology
                                                                                                                                                (ESUR).


Standards/ Diagnostics Treatment,            Developed       by No data is No data is available       Medical        Library No   data       is Science Editor - Russian
protocol   and          Organizational       Russian Academy available                                http://www.medlinks. available            A.     Chuchalin, .
           treatment of and Diagnostic       of Sciences on the                                       ru/sections/sec3.htm                      RAMS
           nonspecific                       bases           of
           lung                              international
           diseases in                       programs      and
           adults                            guidelines



Clinical      Clinical       Treatment,      Report of the        Uploaded     No data is available   http://www.medlinks. No      data      is Report of the
recommen      recommenda Organizational      American             by                                  ru/article.php?sid=29 available           American             Translat
dations/sta   tions     and and Diagnostic   Association     of   authority of                        0                                         Association     of   ion from
ndards        standards to                   DM Committee         Russian                                                                       DM Committee         English
              treat patients                 on diagnostics and   Medical                                                                       on diagnostics and   languag
              with                           treatments of DM.    Journal                                                                       treatments of DM     e
              diabetes                       Original Language
              mellitus                       - English




                                                                                                                                                             52
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments          on Methods             of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods           of dissemination     and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development      /or implementation        guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation       for                       effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                   guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                    Other
                                                                                                                                                    comm.)
Clinical Clinical       Diagnostic   and Consensus      of No data is No data is available   http://thyronet.rusme No    data     is E, Kasatkina et al. Russian
recommen Recommend Treatment             experts.          available                         dserv.com/th_spec/re available          Russian
dations  ations of the                                                                       comend.htm                              Association     of
         Russian                                                                                                                     Endocrinologists
         Association
         of
         Endocrinolo
         gists to Treat
         Autoimmune
         Thyroiditis
         in Children

Methodol   Clamidiosis: Diagnostic   and Consensus      of No data is No data is available   News of Infectology No        data   is Prof Serov et al Russian
ogical     clinical      Treatment       experts.          available                         and       Parasitology available        Center        for
recommen   presentations                                                                     http://www.infectolog                   obstetrics,
dations    , diagnostics                                                                     y.spb.ru/RUK/Clamy                      gynecology and
           and                                                                               dia/CONTENTS.asp                        perinatology,
           treatment                                                                                                                 RAMS




Clinical Clinical      Diagnostic    and Consensus      of No data is No data is available   Russian       Medical No     data    is Sechenov MMA, Russian
recommen recommenda Treatment            experts   without available                         Journal               available         scientific
dations  tions      on                   EB-references                                       http://www.rmj.ru/rm                    Research Institute
         antibacterial                                                                       j/t11/n2/94.htm                         of Urology, MOH,
         treatment of                                                                                                                RF
         urinary tract
                                                                                                                                    S.      Yakovlev,
         infections
                                                                                                                                    I.Derevianko,
                                                                                                                                    Sechenov MMA



                                                                                                                                                  53
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments           on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods            of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development       /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation        for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                     guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                      Other
                                                                                                                                                      comm.)
Clinical Clinical     Diagnostic     and Consensus       of No data is No data is available   http://www.rhinology No     data    is A.Lopatin, et al. Russian
recommen Recommend Treatment             experts.           available                         .ru/crar.htm         available         Members of the
dations  ations    on                                                                                                                Expert Panel
         diagnostics
         and
         treatment of
         allergic
         rhinitis


Clinical Recommend Diagnostic        and Consensus       of No data is No data is available   http://cito.medcity.ru/ No data     is Department      of Russian
recommen ations     on Treatment         specialists from available                           Recommend/Koma/ available              clinical
dations  comas                           Moscow       State                                                                          pharmacology and
         treatment.                      Medical                                                                                     internal diseases,
                                         University,                                                                                 Moscow       State
                                         Scientific Society                                                                          Medical
                                         of Acute Medical                                                                            University,
                                         Care                                                                                        Scientific Society
                                                                                                                                     of Acute Medical
                                                                                                                                     Care
Algorithm Algorithms Prevention,         Developed      by No data is No data is available    http://www.osp.ru/do No     data    is Developed      by Russian
s         to diagnose, Diagnostic    and Federal Center of available                          ctore/1998/02/07.htm available         Federal Center of
          treat     and Treatment        diabetes,  MoH,                                                                             diabetes,  MoH,
          prevent                        RF                                                                                          RF
          diabetic foot                                                                       Published           at
                                                                                                                                    A.Ohklobystin,
                                                                                              “Attending
                                                                                                                                    V.Ivashkin,
                                                                                              physician”, 1998(2)
                                                                                                                                    Sechenov MMA




                                                                                                                                                  54
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments          on Methods              of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods           of dissemination      and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development      /or implementation         guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation       for                        effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                    guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                     Other
                                                                                                                                                     comm.)
Algorithm Algorithm     Diagnostic   and Consensus      of No data is No data is available   http://www.nedug.ru/ No        data   is A.Ohklobystin,        Russian
s         for           Treatment        experts   without available                         lib/lit/therap/01oct/th available        V.Ivashkin,
          managing                       EB-references                                       erap15/therap.htm                        Sechenov MMA
          patients with
          acute     and
          chronic
          pancreatitis



Recomme Recommend Diagnostic         and Consensus      of No data is No data is available   http://www.cardiosite No      data    is Russian Society of Russian
ndations ations     to Treatment         experts.          available                         .ru/medical/recom-     available         cardiologists
         treat acute                                                                         ostcorsin-contents.asp
         coronary
         syndrome
         without
         steadily high
         ST segment
         on ECG

Clinical Clinical      Prevention,       Consensus      of No data is No data is available   http://www.medlife.r   No     data    is A. Chuchalin          Russian
         recommenda Diagnostic       and experts.          available                         u/pulmo/copd.HTM       available         Academician
recommen
         tions      on Treatment                                                                                                      RAMS. Head,
dations
         chronic                                                                                                                      Research institute
         obstructive                                                                                                                  of pulmonology.
         lung disease
                                                                                                                                      N. Hmelkova
                                                                                                                                      Pulmonology
                                                                                                                                      Research Institute,
                                                                                                                                      MoH




                                                                                                                                                    55
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments           on Methods            of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods            of dissemination    and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development       /or implementation       guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation        for                      effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                   guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                    Other
                                                                                                                                                    comm.)
Physicians Stroke       Prevention        Resuscitation and No data is No data is available   On      Web-site of No     data    is U. Varakin, Head, Russian
concept - prevention                      Intensive      care available                       Institute        of available         Laboratory     of
article                                   Institute,    MoH                                   Neurology, RAMS                       epidemiology and
                                          Center for stroke                                                                         prevention     of
                                                                                              http://www.neurology                  brain circulation
                                                                                              .ru/ldvarak.htm                       diseases of the
                                                                                                                                    Institute      of
                                                                                                                                    Neurology,
                                                                                                                                    RAMS. Research
                                                                                                                                    center of stroke
                                                                                                                                    research, MoH RF

Physicians Intensive    Prevention,       Resuscitation and No data is No data is available   http://www.neurology No     data   is N.Vereshchagin     Russian
conspect - therapy of Diagnostic      and Intensive      care available                       .ru/ldpirad.htm      available        Head, Institute of
article    acute        Treatment         Institute,    MOH                                                                         Neurology
           disorders of                   Center for stroke                                                                         RAMS,       Head,
           brain                                                                                                                    Research center of
           circulation                                                                                                              stroke research,
                                                                                                                                    MoH, RF
                                                                                                                                   M.Piradov.
                                                                                                                                   Deputy director
                                                                                                                                   on          science,
                                                                                                                                   Institute         of
                                                                                                                                   Neurology,
                                                                                                                                   RAMS. Head of
                                                                                                                                   the     dept.     of
                                                                                                                                   resuscitation and
                                                                                                                                   intensive therapy.




                                                                                                                                                  56
Guideline Guideline        Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments                on Methods            of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title      treatment,        or title of original funding methods                 of dissemination    and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by                 prevention,       recommendation,              development            /or implementation       guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                    diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation             for                      effectiveness     developing      ge,
                           organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                        guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                            Other
                                                                                                                                                            comm.)
Methodol    Diagnostic    Diagnostic        and Neurology          No data is No data is available    http://www.neurology No     data   is Institute       of Russian
ogical      principles    Treatment             Institute, MoH     available                          .ru/metodich.htm     available        Neurology,
                                                                                                                                                               Approv
recommen    and                                                                                                                             RAMS.
                                                                                                                                                               ed   by
dations     treatment of
                                                                                                                                                               MOH
            patients with
            acute
            disorders of
            brain
            circulation

Physicians Stroke          Rehabilitation       No      data     is No data is No data is available   http://www.neurology No     data   is A. Kadykov, N. Russian
conspect - rehabilitatio                        available           available                         .ru/ldkad.htm        available        Shahparonova
article    n
                                                                                                                                           Neurology
                                                                                                                                           Institute, MoH




Physicians Guillain-       Rehabilitation       No      data     is No data is No data is available   http://www.neurology No     data   is M.          Piradov Russian
conspect - Barre                                available           available                         .ru/ldpir_i.htm      available        Deputy director
article    syndrome                                                                                                                         on          science
                                                                                                                                            Institute        of
                                                                                                                                            Neurology,
                                                                                                                                            RAMS. Head of
                                                                                                                                            the     dept.    of
                                                                                                                                            resuscitation and
                                                                                                                                            intensive therapy.
                                                                                                                                            Neurology
                                                                                                                                            Institute, MOH



                                                                                                                                                         57
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments         on Methods            of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods          of dissemination    and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development     /or implementation       guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation      for                      effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                                 guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                  Other
                                                                                                                                                  comm.)
Clinical Clinical       Treatment         No      data   is No data is Results of abroad http://www.rosoncow No       data    is I. Dedov et al. Russian
recommen Recommend                        available         available  trails            eb.ru/treatment/04.ht available         Russian
dations  ations of the                                                                   m                                       Association   of
         Russian                                                                                                                 endocrinology
         Association
         of
         Endocrinolo
         gists to Treat
         Autoimmune
         Thyroiditis
         in Adults
Clinical   Disbacteriosi Diagnostic   and No      data   is Governmen Consensus of the                          No     data   is Russian
protocol   s             treatment        available         t of the RF Working    group                        available
                                                                        headed        by
                                                                        P.Vorobiev




Clinical   Heart        Prevention,       No      data   is Governmen Consensus of the                          No     data   is Russian
Protocol   Failure      diagnoses     and available         t of the RF Working    group                        available
                        treatment                                       headed        by
                                                                        P.Vorobiev




                                                                                                                                            58
Guideline Guideline     Field (clinical – Bases of evidence Source of Comments       on Methods            of Monitoring/evalu Authors      and Comme
type    as full title   treatment,        or title of original funding methods        of dissemination    and ation of use of organizations     nts
defined by              prevention,       recommendation,              development   /or implementation       guideline and its involved     in (Langua
authors                 diagnostic,       source, and degree           adaptation    for                      effectiveness     developing      ge,
                        organizational)   of adaptation                guidelines                                               guideline       Level,
                                                                                                                                                Other
                                                                                                                                                comm.)
Clinical   Bedsore’s    Prevention       No      data   is Governmen Consensus of the                         No     data   is Russian
protocol   prevention                    available         t of the RF Working    group                       available
                                                                       headed        by
                                                                       P.Vorobiev




Clinical   Honoree      Diagnosis    and No      data   is Governmen Consensus of the                         No     data   is Russian
protocol                treatment        available         t of the RF Working    group                       available
                                                                       headed        by
                                                                       P.Vorobiev




                                                                                                                                          59
Table 3. Clinical guidelines translated from English language (published in the Russian Journals, web-sites)



Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical    Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                 of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,       of               original    methods       of dissemination     and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,        recommendation, source,      development      implementation        guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,        and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                         effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                  for guidelines                                           guideline                comm.)
                         )
Official Recommendati Treatment             GoldHirsch A., Glick         Results of       http://thyronet.rusme No data is      S. Tulandin Chief No data is
recommen ons of the                         G.H., Gelber R.D.,           abroad trails    dserv.com/th_spec/re available        of Blohin’s        available
dations  seventh                            Coates A.S., Senn H.J.                        comend1.htm                           Russian
         Conference on                                                                                                          Oncological
         Adjuvant                                                                                                               Scientific Center,
         therapy of                                                                                                             RAMS. Meeting
         breast cancer                                                                                                          Highlights:
         (St.Hallen,                                                                                                            International
         Switzerland,                                                                                                           Consensus Panel
         February 2001                                                                                                          on the Treatment
         year                                                                                                                   of Primary Breast
                                                                                                                                Cancer. J Clin
                                                                                                                                Oncol 19: 3817-
                                                                                                                                3827, 2001.
Guidelines Global strategy   Clinical –    Global Initiative for         Randomized       http://www.nedug.ru/ No data is       12 pharmaceutical No data is
           for asthma        treatment,    Asthma - translation          control trials   lib/lit/therap/01nov/th available     companies         available
           management        prevention,                                                  erap507/therap.htm
                                                                                                                                Russian society
           and prevention    diagnostic,
                                                                                                                                Pulmonologists.
                             and
           GINA                                                                                                                 National Heart,
                             Organizationa
                                                                                                                                Lung, and Blood
                             l
                                                                                                                                Institute, WHO
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical      Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                  of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,         of               original    methods       of dissemination      and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,          recommendation, source,      development      implementation         guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,          and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                          effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                    for guidelines                                            guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guideline   Guidelines for Clinical –         Ann Intern Med 1996;         Randomized        Published in journal:   Cost-effectiveness A. Garber, W.     No data is
            using serum     screening         124:515-517                  control trials,                           analysis           Browner, S.       available
                                                                                             International Journal
            cholesterol,    tests                                          meta-analysis                                                Hulley
                                                                                             of Medical Practice,
            high-density
                                                                                             1997 (1)
            lipoprotein
            cholesterol,
            and
            triglyceride
            levels as
            screening tests
            for preventing
            coronary
            hearth disease
            in adults
Standard    Standard of        Clinical-     No data is available          No data is        Published in journal:   Weekly            Soll A. ,JAMA,     No data is
            diagnosis and      diagnosis,                                  available                                 monitoring of     1996 (275), p.622- available
                                                                                             Quality of Medical
            treatment of       treatment.                                                                            treatment         629
                                                                                             Care, 1998 (4)
            gastrointestinal   Organizationa
            tract diseases     l


Practical Practical            Clinical -     Developed by clinic of       No data is        Published in journal:   No data is        Clinic of          No data is
guidelines guidelines for      treatment      California university,       available                                 available         California         available
                                                                                             Quality of Medical
           treatment and                      San Francisco.                                                                           university, San
                                                                                             Care, 1997(3)
           prevention of                                                                                                               Francisco.
           peptic ulcer.




                                                                                                                                                                 61
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical     Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                 of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,        of               original    methods       of dissemination     and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,         recommendation, source,      development      implementation        guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,         and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                         effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                   for guidelines                                           guideline                comm.)
                          )
 Recomme Recommendati Clinical –              Developed by the             No data is      Published in journal    No data is     Standards          No data is
 ndation on of          treatment,            Standard committee of        available                               available      Committee of       available
                                                                                           Quality of Medical
         diagnostic and diagnostic.           American thyreologysts                                                              American
                                                                                           Care1996 (2)
         treatment of                         association                                                                         thyreologysts
         hyper- and                                                                                                               association
         hypothyroidis
                                                                                                                                  E.Indeykin, PhD,
         m
                                                                                                                                  Moscow

1Guideline   Clinical         Clinical –      1.Clinical practice          No data is      Published in journal:    No data is    E.V.Frolova St. No data is
             recommendati     treatment,      guidelines for the           available                               available      Petersburg      available
                                                                                           Russian Family
             on of medical    diagnostic,     management of diabetes                                                              Medical Academy
                                                                                           Doctor, 2001 (1)
             care for         and             in Canada 1998                                                                      of Postgraduate
             patients with    Organizationa                                                                                       Education
                                              2.A desktop Guide to
             diabetes, type   l
                                              type 2 diabetes mellitus.
             II
                                              European Diabetes
                                              Policy Group 1998-1999
                                              3.Clinical guidelines for
                                              the management of
                                              diabetes in East London.




                                                                                                                                                            62
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical    Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,       of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,        recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,        and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                  for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                          )
2Guideline   Modern          Clinical-       1993 Guidelines for the No data is           Published in journal:   No data is    V.Gorin,         No data is
             treatment of    treatment.      management of mild        available                                  available     G.Arabidze       available
                                                                                          International medical
             hypertension:   Organizationa   hypertension:
                                                                                          journal 1998 (2)
             expectations    l               memorandum from
             and reality.                    World Health
                                             Organization/Internation
                                             al Society of
                                             Hypertension meeting.
                                             Guidelines Sub-
                                             Committee.
                                             //J.Hypertens. -1993.Vol.
                                             11. -P.905-918


3Guideline   Guideline of    Clinical –      The British Guidelines       No data is      Published in journal:   No data is    B.Higins MD,     No data is Translatio
             bronchial       treatment,      on Asthma Managment.         available                               available     Newcustle-on-    available n from
                                                                                          Physician, 1999(8)
             asthma          Organizationa   1995 Review and                                                                    Tine                        English
             treatment       l               Position Statement//                                                                                           language
                                             Thorax 1997; 52 (suppl
                                             1): 1-20.
                                             North of England
                                             Asthma Guideline
                                             Development Project.
                                             Summary version of
                                             evidence based guideline
                                             for the primary care
                                             management of asthma
                                             in adults// B.M.J. 1996;
                                             312:762-766




                                                                                                                                                        63
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical     Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                   of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,        of               original    methods       of dissemination       and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,         recommendation, source,      development      implementation          guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,         and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                           effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                   for guidelines                                             guideline                comm.)
                          )
4Guideline   Guideline of    Clinical,        No data is available         No data is       Published in journal:   No data is      V.Cannedy, BM      No data is Translatio
             Chronic         treatment                                     available                                available       R. Yanks, MD       available n from
                                                                                            The Practitioner,
             sinusitis                                                                                                              Hospital of West              English
                                                                                            1999 (2-3)
             treatment                                                                                                              Suffolk                       language




5Clinical    Screening for   Clinical –       1.D. Eddy How to think       Prospective      Published in journal:   No data is      M.Gelfand          No data is Russian
 guideline   thyroid         treatment,       about screening. In:         clinical and                             available                          available
                                                                                            International Journal                                                 Translatio
             diseases.       diagnostic,      Eddy D., ed. Common          epidemiologica
                                                                                            of Medical Practice,                                                  n from
                             prevention       Screening Tests.             l studies.
                                                                                            1999 (11)                                                             English
                             and              Philadelphia: American       Randomized
                                                                                                                                                                  language
                             organizational   Coll Physicians; 1991:1-     control trials
                                              21
                                              2.American College of
                                              Physicians. Guideline:
                                              screening for thyroid
                                              disease. In: Eddy D., ed.
                                              Common Screening
                                              Tests. Philadelphia:
                                              American Coll
                                              Physicians; 1991:179-
                                              201
                                              3.Helfand M., Crapo
                                              L.M. Screening for
                                              thyroid disease. Ann
                                              Intern Med 1990;
                                              112:840-9



                                                                                                                                                             64
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                  of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination      and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation         guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                          effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                            guideline                comm.)
                          )
6Guidelines Hepatitis C     Clinical –      No data is available         No data is        Published in journal: No data is         National Health      No data is Translatio
            treatment       treatment,                                   available         Clinical               available         Institute, USA       available n from
                            prevention,                                                    pharmacology and                                                         English
                            diagnostic                                                     therapeutics, 2003 (1)                                                   language




7Guidelines Global          Prevention      No data is available         No data is        Published in journal:    No data is      National Institute   No data is Translatio
            initiative on   Diagnostic                                   available                                  available       of Heart, Lungs      available n from
                                                                                           Clinical
            chronic         and                                                                                                     and Blood, WHO                  English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            obstructive     Treatment                                                                                                                               language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 2001 (5)
            lung disease.




8Guidelines Guidelines of Organizationa Warren J., Abrutyn E.,           Randomized        Published in journal:    Clinical        American society     No data is Translatio
            antimicrobial l and         Heble J. et al. Guidelines       control trials,                            effectiveness   of infection         available n from
                                                                                           Clinical
            therapy of     Diagnostic   for antimicrobial                double                                                     diseases                        English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            bacterial                   treatment of                     blinded, meta-                                                                             language
                                                                                           therapeutic, 2000 (2)
            cystitis and                uncomplicated acute              analysis
            pyelonephritis              bacterial cystitis and
            among women                 acute pyelonephritis in
                                        women. Clin. Inf. Dis.,
                                        1999,29,745-758




                                                                                                                                                               65
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                  of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination      and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation         guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                          effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                            guideline                comm.)
                          )
9Guidelines Guidelines for   Clinical –     Feinberg W.M., Albers        Randomized        Published in journal:   Clinical           Stroke Council of No data is Translatio
            the              treatment,     G.W., Barnett H.J.M.,        control trials,                           effectiveness of   the American       available n from
                                                                                           International Journal
            management       prevention,    Biller J., Caplan L.R.,      prospective                               surgery methods.   Heart Association.           English
                                                                                           of Medical Practice
            of transient     diagnostic     Carter L.P., et al.          and case-                                                                                 language
                                                                                           2000 (8)                Clinical
            ischemic                        Guidelines for the           control studies
                                                                                                                   effectiveness of
            attacks                         management of transient
                                                                                                                   treatment.
                                            ischemic attacks: from
                                            the Ad Hoc Committee
                                            on Guidelines for the
                                            Management of
                                            Transient Ischemic
                                            Attacks of the Stroke
                                            Council of the American
                                            Heart Association. AHA
                                            medical/ scientific
                                            statement: special report.
                                            Circulation 1994; 89:
                                            2950-65
1Guidelines WHO-             Organizationa 1999 WHO-ISH                  Randomized        Published in journal:   No data is         1999 WHO-ISH       No data is Russian
            International    l, treatment, guidelines for the            control trials                            available          guidelines for the available and
                                                                                           Consilium medicum
            Society of       prevention    management of                                                                              management of                 translation
                                                                                           2000 vol.2 (3)
            Hypertension                   hypertension                                                                               hypertension                  from
            guidelines for                                                                                                                                          English
                                                                                                                                      B.Sidorenko et al.
            management                                                                                                                                              language
                                                                                                                                      President
            of
                                                                                                                                      Administration
            hypertension,
                                                                                                                                      Medical Center,
            1999
                                                                                                                                      RF
                                                                                                                                      .




                                                                                                                                                                66
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                  of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination      and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation         guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                          effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                            guideline                comm.)
                          )
1Guidelines Diagnostic,      Clinical –     Rimola A. et al.             Randomized        Published in journal:    Clinical           Rimola A.,         No data is Translatio
            treatment and    treatment,     International Ascites        control trials,                            effectiveness of   Guadalupe G.,      available n from
                                                                                           Clinical
            prevention of    prevention,    Club. Diagnostic,            prospective                                antibacterial      Navasa M.,                    English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            spontaneous      diagnostic     treatment and prevention     cohort studies,                            treatment          Piddock L., Planas            language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 2000 (2)
            bacterial                       of spontaneous bacterial     meta-analysis                                                 R., Bernard B.,
            peritonitis.                    peritonitis: a consensus                                                                   Inadomi J. and the
                                            document. J.                                                                               International
                                            Hepatology, 2000 (32)                                                                      Ascites Club.
                                            142-153

1Guidelines Guidelines of Clinical –        No data is available         No data is        Published in journal:    Clinical           Department of     No data is Translatio
            HIV treatment treatment,                                     available                                  effectiveness      Health USA,       available n from
                                                                                           Clinical
            for adults and diagnostic                                                                                                  Genry Kaiser                 English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            youths.                                                                                                                    Foundation                   language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 1999 (5)




1Guidelines Guidelines for   Clinical –     Am. J. Cardiol, 1999,83      Randomized        Published in journal:    No data is         Advisory Council No data is Translati
            treatment of     treatment,     (2A), 1-38                   control trials                             available          To Improve       available on from
                                                                                           Clinical
            heart failure    prevention,                                                                                               Outcomes                    English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
                             diagnostic                                                                                                Nationwide in               language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 1999 (4)
                                                                                                                                       Heart Failure




                                                                                                                                                                67
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                  of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination      and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation         guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                          effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                            guideline                comm.)
                          )
1Guidelines Guidelines for   Treatment      No data is available         No data is        Published in journal:    No data is         VI Report of Joint No data is Translati
            diagnosis and                                                available                                  available          Committee on       available on from
                                                                                           Clinical
            treatment of                                                                                                               Prevention,                   English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            arterial                                                                                                                   Diagnosis and                 language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 1999 (3)
            hypertension                                                                                                               Treatment of
                                                                                                                                       arterial
                                                                                                                                       hypertension
                                                                                                                                       National Healthy
                                                                                                                                       Institute USA
1Guidelines World Health     Treatment      Guidelines                   Randomized        Published in journal:    No data is          World Health      No data is Translatio
            Organization                    Subcommittee. 1999           control trials                             available          Organization –     available n from
                                                                                           Clinical
            and –                           World Health                                                                               International                 English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            International                   Organization –                                                                             Society of                    language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 1999 (3)
            Society of                      International Society of                                                                   Hypertension
            Hypertension                    Hypertension guidelines
            Guidelines for                  for the management of
            management                      hypertension. J.
            of                              Hypertension, 1999,
            hypertension.                   17(2), 151-183
1Guidelines Guidelines for   Diagnostic     Original publication –       Meta-analysis     Published in journal:    Clinical           American College No data is Translati
            management       and            JACC, 1999, 33(7),           randomized                                 effectiveness of   of cardiologists/ available on from
                                                                                           Clinical
            of patients      Treatment      2092-2197                    control trials,                            treatment          American                    English
                                                                                           pharmacology and
            with stable                                                  prospective                                                   association of              language
                                                                                           therapeutics, 1999 (6)
            stenocardia                                                  studies.                                                      heart.
            (1999).




                                                                                                                                                                68
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                 of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination     and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation        guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                         effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                           guideline                comm.)
                          )
1Guidelines Diagnosis and Diagnostic        Diagnosis and Treatment      Randomized       Published in journal:   Effectiveness of   American Society No data is Translati
            Treatment of  and               of Idiopathic                and non-                                 treatment and      of Hematology.   available on from
                                                                                          International Journal
            Idiopathic    Treatment         Thrombocytopenic             randomized                               diagnostic based                               English
                                                                                          of Medical Practice
            Thrombocytop                    Purpura:                     trials.                                  on outcomes                                    language
                                                                                          1997 (6)
            enic Purpura:                   Recommendations of the
            Recommendati                    American Society of
            ons of the                      Hematology. Ann Intern
            American                        Med 1997; 126: 319-326
            Society of
            Hematology.
1Clinical   Early            Clinical-      C.M. Coley et al.            Prospective      Published in journal:   Effectiveness of   C.M. Coley, M.J. No data is Translati
 guidelines Detection of     diagnostic     Clinical guidelines: Part    and                                      diagnosis          Barry, C. Fleming, available on from
                                                                                          International Journal
            Prostate                        II. Early Detection of       retrospective                                               M.C. Fahs, A.G.              English
                                                                                          of Medical Practice     Cost-effectiveness
            Cancer. Part II:                Prostate Cancer. Part II:    studies, meta-                                              Mulley.                      language
                                                                                          1998 (2)                analysis
            Estimating the                  Estimating the Risks,        analysis,
            Risks,                          Benefits, and Costs. Ann     randomized
            Benefits, and                   Intern Med 1997;             control trial.
            Costs.                          126:468-479
                                                                         Cost-
                                                                         effectiveness
                                                                         analysis


1Clinical   Clinical        Diagnostic      Helfand M., Redfern C.,      Prospective      Published in journal: Cost-effectiveness Helfand M.,       No data is   Translatio
 guidelines guideline, part                 Sox H.C. Clinical            clinical and                           analysis           Redfern C.C., Sox available    n from
                                                                                          International Journal
            1. Screening                    guideline, part 1.           epidemiologica                                            H.C. Department                English
                                                                                          of Medical Practice   Quality of life
            for thyroid                     Screening for thyroid        l studies                                                 of Medicine (111-              language
                                                                                          1999 (11)             assessment,
            disease.                        disease. . Ann Intern        Randomized                                                P), Portland
                                                                                                                effectiveness of
                                            Med 1998; 129: 141-3         trials.          http://www.acponlin                      Veterans Affairs
                                                                                                                treatment
                                                                                          e.org                                    Medical Center,
                                                                                                                                   USA.




                                                                                                                                                            69
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title     Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original      methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,        development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation       /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                   for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                          )
2Guidelines Modern          Clinical –      Based on the joined 2001 Randomized            Published in journal:   Effectiveness of   American College No data is      Translatio
            approaches of   treatment,      consensus guidelines of control trials                                 treatment based    of Cardiology,   available       n from
                                                                                           Russian Journal of
            auricular       prevention,     the American College of                                                on outcomes        American Heart                   English
                                                                                           Cardiology, 2003 (3)
            fibrillation    diagnostic      Cardiology, American                                                                      Association,                     language
            treatment.                      Heart Association and                                                                     European Society                 and
                                            the European Society of                                                                   of cardiology.                   Russian.
                                            cardiology.
                                                                                                                                      Preobrazhensky
                                                                                                                                      D. et al. President
                                                                                                                                      Administration
                                                                                                                                      Medical Center.
2Algorithm Algorithms for Clinical –        Ballock R. et al.:     No data is              Published in journal:   No data is         Ballock R.            No data is Translatio
 s         treatment of   treatment,        Guidelines for the     available                                       available          Chesnut R.,           available n from
                                                                                           Consilium medicum
           severe head    diagnostic.       management of severe                                                                      Clitton G. et al.                English
                                                                                           1999 (2)
           trauma, active                   head injury. Brain                                                                                                         language
           period.                          Trauma foundation. New
                                            York, 1996
                                            Ballock R. Chesnut R.,
                                            Clitton G. et al. The
                                            integration of brein-
                                            specific treatment into
                                            initial resuscitation of the
                                            severe head injury
                                            patient: guidelines for
                                            the management of
                                            severe head injury. J.
                                            Neurotrauma 1996;
                                            13:653-9




                                                                                                                                                                  70
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                          )
2Guidelines Expert panel      Clinical –    Executive summary of         Epidemiologic Published in journal:      Effectiveness of   National          No data is    Translatio
            on detection,     treatment,    the third Report of the      al studies,                              treatment. Cost-   Cholesterol       available     n from
                                                                                       Clinical
            evaluation, and   primary       National Cholesterol         case-control                             effectiveness      education                       English
                                                                                       pharmacology and
            treatment of      prevention,   education program            studies.                                 analysis.          program. National               language
                                                                                       therapeutics, 2002 (3)
            high blood        diagnostic    (NCEP). Expert panel on                                                                  Health Institute,
            cholesterol in                  detection, evaluation,                       International medical                       USA
            adults.                         and treatment of high                        journal 2003 (1)
                                            blood cholesterol in
                                            adults. JAMA, 2001;
                                            285: 2486-2497
2Guidelines Guidelines for    Clinical –    1998 Guidelines for          No data is      Published in journal:    Effectiveness of   Centers for          No data is Translatio
            Treatment of      treatment.    Treatment of Sexually        available                                treatment.         Disease Control      available n from
                                                                                         Clinical
            Sexually                        Transmitted diseases.                                                                    and Prevention,                 English
                                                                                         pharmacology and
            Transmitted                     MM WR, 1998 (47), 1-                                                                     USA                             language
                                                                                         therapeutics, 1999 (2)
            diseases                        118




2Guidelines Guidelines for    Clinical –    Expert Panel Report 2.       No data is      Published in journal:    No data is         National Institute   No data is Translatio
            the diagnosis     treatment,    Guidelines for the           available                                available          of Heart, Lungs      available n from
                                                                                         Clinical
            and               prevention.   diagnosis and                                                                            and Blood, USA                  English
                                                                                         pharmacology and
            management                      management of asthma.                                                                                                    language
                                                                                         therapeutics, 1998 (4)
            of bronchial                    NIH Publication, July
            asthma.                         1997: 97-4051




                                                                                                                                                                71
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical    Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                   of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,       of               original    methods       of dissemination       and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,        recommendation, source,      development      implementation          guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,        and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                           effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                  for guidelines                                             guideline                comm.)
                         )
2Guidelines Contemporary Clinical –         Contemporary                 Retrospective      Published in journal:   Effectiveness of   American College No data is     Translatio
            Approaches to treatment,        Approaches to Diagnosis      Analyses of                                drugs              of               available      n from
                                                                                            Cardiology 2002 (6)
            Diagnosis and prevention.       and Management of            randomized                                                    Cardiology/Ameri                English
            Management                      Chronic Heart Failure        control trials.                                               can Heart                       language
            of Chronic                      (Summary of the              Randomized                                                    Association.
            Heart Failure.                  American College of          control trials.
                                                                                                                                       B. Sidorenko, D.
                                            Cardiology/American          Placebo
                                                                                                                                       Preobrazhenskij,
                                            Heart Association            controlised
                                                                                                                                       Presidential
                                            Guidelines).                 clinical trials.
                                                                                                                                       Medical Center of
                                                                                                                                       Russia Central
                                                                                                                                       Clinical Hospital,
                                                                                                                                       Moscow, Russia
2Recomme Corona virus       Clinical –      Information News             No data is         Published in paper      No data is         Russian Academy No data is
 ndations SARS – agent      treatment,      Release. Corona virus        available                                  available          of Medical          available
          causes atypical   prevention,     SARS – agent causes                                                                        Sciences.
          pneumonia         diagnostic,     Atypical Pneumonia.                                                                        Northern-Western
                            and             Recommendations of                                                                         Division. Institute
                            Organizationa   WHO and CDC                                                                                of Influenza
                            l                                                                                                          RAMN. Institute
                                                                                                                                       of Epidemiology.
                                                                                                                                       Ministry of Public
                                                                                                                                       Health.
                                                                                                                                       WHO, CDC




                                                                                                                                                                 72
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                   of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination       and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation          guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                           effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                 for guidelines                                             guideline                comm.)
                          )
2Recomme Effects of       Clinical –        No data is available         Randomized         Published in journal   No data is       No data is        No data is Translatio
 ndations. medications    treatment.                                     control trials,                           available        available         available n from
                                                                                            Quality of Medical
           from different                                                double                                                                                  English
                                                                                            Care 2002 (1)
           pharmacologic                                                 blinded.                                                                                language
           al groups to                                                  Placebo
           the heart                                                     controlled
           rhythm.                                                       clinical trials.



2Guideline   Practical       Clinical –     Based on different EBM- No                      Selling of book        No data is       Editor – acad.    No          Translatio
             guideline for   prevention,    sources and international information                                  available        RAMS I.N.         informatio n and
             PG              diagnostic,    recommendation            available                                                     Denisov           n available adaptation
                             treatment




2Practical   Clinical –      Based on      No information available Selling of book No data is available           Editor – acad.   Translation and   No          Translatio
 guideline   prevention,     different                                                                             RAMC I.N.        adaptation        informatio n from
 for PG      diagnostic,     EBM-sources                                                                           Denisov                            n available English
             treatment       and                                                                                                                                  language
                             international
                             recommendati
                             on




                                                                                                                                                             73
 Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical       Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                 of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
 type    as title         – treatment,          of               original    methods       of dissemination     and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
 defined by               prevention,           recommendation, source,      development      implementation        guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
 authors                  diagnostic,           and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                         effectiveness     developing               Other
                          organizational                                     for guidelines                                           guideline                comm.)
                          )
3Guidelines    Making the    Organizationa The Royal College of              No data is      http://nld.unibel.by/g   No data is    The Royal            No data is   Russian
 for           Best Use of a l and         Radiologists, London.             available       uidelines                available     College of           available
                                                                                                                                                                      English
 Doctors,      Department of Diagnostic                                                                                             Radiologists,
                                                                                                                                                                      http://euro
 4th edition   Clinical                                                                                                             London
                                                                                                                                                                      pa.eu.int
               Radiology




3Guidelines Contrast-       Organizationa European Society of      No data is                http://nld.unibel.by/g   No data is    S.K. Morcos et al.   Uploaded     Translatio
            media-induced l and           Urogenital Radiology.    available                 uidelines                available     Contrast Media       by           n from
            nephrotoxicity: Diagnostic    Translation from English                                                                  Safety Committee     authority    English
            a consensus                   language                                                                                  of the European      of ESUR      language
            report.                                                                                                                 Society of
                                                                                                                                    Urogenital
                                                                                                                                    Radiology
                                                                                                                                    (ESUR).


3Clinical      Clinical         Treatment,      Report of the American       No data is      http://www.medlinks. No data is        Report of the        Uploaded     Translatio
 recommen      recommendati     Organizationa   Association of               available       ru/article.php?sid=29 available        American             by           n from
 dations/sta   ons and          l and           Committee on                                 0                                      Association of       authority    English
 ndards        standards to     Diagnostic      diagnostics and                                                                     DM Committee         of Russian   language
               treat patients                   treatments of DM.                                                                   on diagnostics and   Medical
               with diabetes                    Original Language -                                                                 treatments of DM     Journal
               mellitus                         English




                                                                                                                                                                74
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical    Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,       of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,        recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,        and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                  for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Global strategy   Clinical –    Global Initiative for         Results of      http://www.nedug.ru/ No data is       Society of          No data is Translatio
           of asthma         treatment,    Asthma - translation          abroad trails   lib/lit/therap/01nov/th available     Russian-            available n from
           management        prevention,                                                 erap507/therap.htm                    Pulmonologists.                English
           and prevention    diagnostic,                                                                                       National Heart,                language
                             and                                                                                               Lung, and Blood
                             Organizationa                                                                                     Institute: Claude
                             l                                                                                                 Lenfant. WHO:
                                                                                                                               Nikolai Khaltaev


Guidelines 1998              Treatment      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is          AIHA        Russian
           Guidelines for                                                available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           treatment of                                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           sexually                                                                      pid=3540
           transmitted
           diseases




Guidelines Acute             Diagnosis and No data is available          No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is          AIHA        Russian
           Pneumonia.        treatment in                                available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Clinical          primary care                                                =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Protocols for     and in                                                      pid=3540
           Primary and       hospital
           Hospital Care




                                                                                                                                                          75
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Basic Infection Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Ackerman P.,        AIHA        English,
           Control         prevention,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Brachman M., et                 Russian
           Manual (2nd     diagnostic.                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     al.
           edition)                                                                     pid=3540
                                                                                                                              Детский
                                                                                                                              госпиталь и
                                                                                                                              клиника, г
                                                                                                                              Миннеаполис,
                                                                                                                              штат Миннесота
                                                                                                                              Brachman and
                                                                                                                              Associates Госуд.
                                                                                                                              Медиц.академия
                                                                                                                              имю Мечникова
                                                                                                                              снкт-Пет


Guidelines Bronchial       Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Hajiyev K.,        AIHA         English,
           Asthma:         treatment,                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Eyubova A., et al.              Russian
           Clinical        prevention,                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Practice        diagnostic.                                                  pid=3540
           Guideline for
           General
           Practitioners




                                                                                                                                                         76
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Cervical         Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Shikhashvili M.,     AIHA        English,
           Screening:       prevention,                                 available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Gemazashvili E.,                 Russian
           Clinical         diagnostic                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     et al.
           Practice                                                                     pid=3540
                                                                                                                              members of the
           Guidelines for
                                                                                                                              Georgian Primary
           Family
                                                                                                                              Care Team
           Physicians



Guidelines Chest Pain:    Clinical –       No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Yuzbashyan R.,     AIHA          English,
           Clinical       treatment,                                    available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Grigoryan L.A., et               Russian
           Practice       diagnostic.                                                   =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     al.
           Guideline for                                                                pid=3540
                                                                                                                              members of the
           Primary Health
                                                                                                                              Armenia Clinical
           Care
                                                                                                                              Practice Guideline
           Physicians
                                                                                                                              expert group.


Guidelines Clinical         Organizationa No data is available          No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is           AIHA        Russian
           Criteria for     l                                           available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Nursing Care:                                                                =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Thoracotomy                                                                  pid=3540
           with Chest
           Tubes




                                                                                                                                                          77
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Clinical      Organizationa No data is available             No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Balchevsky V.,      AIHA        English,
           Practice      l                                              available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Kairys S., et al.               Russian
           Guidelines                                                                   =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           (CPG) Process                                                                pid=3540
           Manual




Guidelines Epidural        Organizationa No data is available           No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is          AIHA        Russian
           Analgesia:      l                                            available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           How to Make                                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           it Safe and                                                                  pid=3540
           Effective




Guidelines Guidelines for Organizationa No data is available            No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is          AIHA        Russian
           Hand washing l                                               available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           and Hospital                                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Environmental                                                                pid=3540
           Control




                                                                                                                                                         78
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                 of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination     and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation        guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                         effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                           guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Guidelines for   Prevention     MMWR 1999; 48 (No.           Randomized        http://www.eurasiahe No data is         US Public Health AIHA         Russian
           Prevention of                   RR-10) Medical Journal       control trials,   alth.org/index.jsp?sid available        Service (USPHS)
           Surgical                        of Australian, 1997          Series studies    =1&id=3542&lid=0&                       and Infectious
           Wound                           AIDS 2000 Jul                                  pid=3540                                Disease Society of
           Infections                      28;14(11):1563-1569                                                                    America (IDSA)
                                           Ann Trop Paediatr 1997
                                                                                                                                  [MMWR
                                           Jun; 17(2):121-6 Pediatr
                                                                                                                                  1999;48(No. RR-
                                           Infect Dis J 1999
                                                                                                                                  10)]
                                           Feb;18(2):147-52


Guidelines Guidelines for   Clinical –     No data is available         No data is        http://www.eurasiahe No data is         Julia Garner,     AIHA        English,
           the Use of       treatment.                                  available         alth.org/index.jsp?sid available        Centers for                   Russian
           Antiretroviral                                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                       Disease Control
           Agents in                                                                      pid=3540                                (Atlanta, GA),
           HIV-Infected                                                                                                           1985
           Adults and
           Adolescents.
           Regulations
           for the Use of
           Antiretroviral
           Therapy in
           HIV Pregnant
           Women.
Guidelines Guidelines for   Clinical –     No data is available         No data is        http://www.eurasiahe therapy risk for   No data is        AIHA        Russian
           the Use of       treatment.                                  available         alth.org/index.jsp?sid fetus and        available
           Antiretroviral                                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0& newborn.
           Agents in                                                                      pid=3540
           Pediatric HIV
           Infection




                                                                                                                                                           79
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Guidelines for Clinical –       Working Group on        Meta-analysis, http://www.eurasiahe No data is             The Working         National     English,
           the Use of     treatment,       Antiretroviral Therapy: Cohort studies alth.org/index.jsp?sid available            Group on            Institutes   Russian
           Antiretroviral diagnostic.      National Pediatric HIV                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                           Antiretroviral      of Health
           Drugs in                        Resource Center.                       pid=3540                                    Therapy and
           Pregnant                        Antiretroviral therapy                                                             Medical
           Women                           and medical management                                                             Management of
           Infected with                   of the human                                                                       HIV-Infected
           HIV-1 for                       immunodeficiency virus-                                                            Children
           Maternal                        infected child. Pediatr                                                            convened by the
           Health and for                  Infect Dis, 1993. Jun;                                                             National Pediatric
           Reducing                        12(6):513-22.                                                                      and Family HIV
           Perinatal                                                                                                          Resource Center
           Transmission                                                                                                       (NPHRC),The
                                                                                                                              Health Resources
                                                                                                                              and Services
                                                                                                                              Administration
                                                                                                                              (HRSA), and The
                                                                                                                              National Institutes
                                                                                                                              of Health (NIH).
Guidelines Guidelines on   Organizationa No data is available           No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is          AIHA         English,
           infection       l                                            available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available                        Russian
           control                                                                      =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           organization                                                                 pid=3540
           and practices




                                                                                                                                                          80
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Hypertensive     Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       US Department of AIHA        Russian
           Disorders of     treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Healthcare and
           Pregnancy        diagnostic.                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Social Services
                                                                                        pid=3540                              and CDC




Guidelines Instructions     Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       AIHA        English,
           and Manuals      treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available                    Russian
           for Nurses on    prevention,                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Preparation of   diagnostic.                                                 pid=3540
           Milk and Milk
           Formulas




Guidelines Instructions on Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       AIHA        Russian
           Infection       prevention.                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Prevention in                                                                =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Case of                                                                      pid=3540
           Ophthalmologi
           cal Operations




                                                                                                                                                      81
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Neonatal      Clinical –        No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       Children's Russian
           Hydronephrosi prevention.                                    available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available        Hospital
           s                                                                            =1&id=3542&lid=0&                                      No. 4
                                                                                        pid=3540




Guidelines New Data on Clinical –          No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Richard Bellah   AIHA        Russian
           the Prevention diagnostic.                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available
           of Mother-to-                                                                =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Child                                                                        pid=3540
           Transmission
           of HIV and
           their Policy
           Implications.
           Conclusions
           and
           recommendati
           ons
Guidelines Performance      Clinical –     WHO Technical                No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       WHO              No data is Russian
           Standards for    prevention.    Consultation                 available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available                       available
           Antimicrobial                                                                =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Disk                                                                         pid=3540
           Susceptibility
           Tests;
           Approved
           Standard —
           Seventh
           Edition


                                                                                                                                                      82
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Practical       Clinical –      National Commmittee          No data is      http://www.eurasiahe Treatment        No data is       AIHA        Russian
           Guide for       treatment.      for Clinical Laboratory      available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid affectivity    available
           Feeding                         Standards (NCCLS).                           =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Infants Born to                 ISBN 1-56238-393-0.                          pid=3540
           HIV-Positive                    www.nccls.org.
           Women




Guidelines Practical      Clinical –       No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       N.L. Aryaev, MD, AIHA        English,
           Guide on       prevention,                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      PhD; N.V.                    Russian
           Counseling for diagnostic.                                                   =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Kotova, MD; E.A.
           Prevention of                                                                pid=3540                              Starets, MD; ed.
           Mother-To-                                                                                                         V. Zaporozhan,
           Child HIV                                                                                                          MD, PhD.
           Transmission



Guidelines Practical        Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       N.N. Nizova, MD, AIHA        English,
           Guide on         prevention.                                 available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      PhD; S.P.                    Russian
           Sexually                                                                     =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Posokhova, MD;
           Transmitted                                                                  pid=3540                              ed. V.
           Infections and                                                                                                     Zaporozhan, MD,
           HIV                                                                                                                PhD.
           Prevention




                                                                                                                                                      83
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Practical       Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       N.N. Nizova, MD, AIHA        English,
           Guide on        prevention.                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      PhD; S.P.                    Russian
           Treatment of                                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Posokhova, MD;
           Sexually                                                                     pid=3540                              ed. V.
           Transmitted                                                                                                        Zaporozhan, MD,
           Infections in                                                                                                      PhD.
           HIV-Positive
           Pregnant
           Women

Guidelines Practice        Clinical –      WHO, UNAIDS                  No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       N.N. Nizova, MD, AIHA        English,
           Guidelines:     treatment.                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      PhD; S.P.                    Russian
                                           US Centers for Disease
           Introduction to                                                              =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Posokhova, MD;
                                           Control and Prevention
           Acute                                                                        pid=3540                              ed. V.
                                           (CDC),
           Gastroenteritis                                                                                                    Zaporozhan, MD,
           among young                     “1998 Guidelines for                                                               PhD.
           children                        Treatment of Sexually
                                           Transmitted
                                           Diseases,”Morbidity and
                                           Mortality Weekly
                                           Report, 47,
                                           1-118 (1998).




                                                                                                                                                      84
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Prenatal Care    Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       From Dushanbe-   AIHA        Russian
           for Normal       treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Boulder
           Pregnancy        prevention,                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     partnership
                            diagnostic.                                                 pid=3540




Guidelines Protocol for     Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       AIHA        Russian
           Diagnosis and    treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Treatment of     prevention,                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Chronic          diagnostic.                                                 pid=3540
           Bronchitis




Guidelines Safety and       Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       AIHA        Russian
           Toxicity of      treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Individual       diagnostic.                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Antiretroviral                                                               pid=3540
           Agents in
           Pregnancy




                                                                                                                                                      85
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Standards for   Clinical –      Wade N, Unadkat J,        No data is         http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       No data is English,
           Operating       prevention,     Huang S, et al.           available          alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available        available Russian
           Room Nurses     diagnostic.     Pharmacokinetics and                         =1&id=3542&lid=0&
                                           safety of d4T and 3TC in                     pid=3540
                                           HIV-infected pregnant
                                           women and their infants
                                           (PACTG 332). 10th
                                           Conference on
                                           Retroviruses and
                                           Opportunistic Infections.
                                           Boston, MA. February
                                           10-14, 2003. (Abstract
                                           886).


Guidelines Standards for   Organizationa No data is available           No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is       AIHA        Russian
           Pediatric       l                                            available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Nurses                                                                       =1&id=3542&lid=0&
                                                                                        pid=3540




                                                                                                                                                      86
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Subarachnoid    Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is          AIHA        Russian
           Analgesia for   prevention.                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           Cesarean                                                                     =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Section                                                                      pid=3540
           (general
           principles)




Guidelines Temporary       Clinical –   No data is available            No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Gutche B.           AIHA        Russian
           Standards for treatment and                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available
           Diagnosis and organizational                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Treatment in                                                                 pid=3540
           Emergency
           Medical
           Services of the
           Republic of
           Uzbekistan

Guidelines USPHS/IDSA Clinical –           No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       National            National  Russian
           Guidelines for treatment,                                    available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Republican Center   Republica
           the Prevention diagnostic.                                                   =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     for Emergency       n Center
           of                                                                           pid=3540                              Medical Care        for
           Opportunistic                                                                                                                          Emergenc
           Infections in                                                                                                                          y Medical
           Persons                                                                                                                                Care
           Infected with
           Human
           Immunodeficie
           ncy Virus
           (HIV)



                                                                                                                                                         87
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines USPHS/IDSA Clinical –           U.S. Public Health      No data is           http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is        AIHA        Russian
           Recommendati prevention.        Service (USPHS) and     available            alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available
           ons on                          Infectious Diseases                          =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Opportunistic                   Society of America                           pid=3540
           Infections                      (IDSA). MMWR 1999;
           Prevention                      48 (№ RR-10); 89 pages.
           among HIV
           Infected
           Persons
           Infected with
           Human
           Immunodeficie
           ncy Virus
           (HIV)
Guidelines WHO Global      Clinical –      USPHS/IDSA [MMWR No data is                  http://www.eurasiahe No data is       No data is        No data is Russian
           Strategy on     treatment,      1999; 48 (No.RR-10) 71 available             alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      available         available
           Antimicrobial   prevention,     p.                                           =1&id=3542&lid=0&
                                                                                                                              Служба
           Resistance      diagnostic.                                                  pid=3540
                                                                                                                              здравоохранения
                                                                                                                              США
                                                                                                                              и
                                                                                                                              Американское
                                                                                                                              общество
                                                                                                                              инфекционистов




                                                                                                                                                       88
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Acute            Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       World Health      AIHA        Russian
           Pneumonia.       treatment.                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Organization
           Guidelines for                                                               =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     (WHO)
           Diagnosis and                                                                pid=3540
           Treatment in
           Children's
           Hospitals



Guidelines Clinical         Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Ryzhikova G.      AIHA        Russian
           Guidelines for   treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available
           Management       prevention,                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           of Acute         diagnostic.                                                 pid=3540
           Bronchitis in
           Children in
           Primary Care
           Setting


Guidelines Practice         Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Ryzhikova G.,     AIHA        Russian
           Guidelines for   treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Svatkovskaya O.
           Primary and      prevention,                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Hospital Care    diagnostic.                                                 pid=3540
           of Asthma
           Diagnosis and
           Treatment in
           Adults




                                                                                                                                                       89
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Practice         Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Burdasov A.,       Korsakov    Russian
           Guidelines for   treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Fomitskaya V.,     Central
           Primary and      diagnostic.                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Artemenko L., et   District
           Hospital Care                                                                pid=3540                              al.                Hospital
           on
                                                                                                                              protocols from
           Hypertension
                                                                                                                              Dubna and
           Diagnosis and
                                                                                                                              Samara
           Treatment in
           Adults

Guidelines Protocol for     Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Burdasov A.,       AIHA        Russian
           Diagnosis and    treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Fomitskaya V.,
           Treatment of     diagnostic.                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&                     Artemenko L., et
           Bronchial                                                                    pid=3540                              al.
           Asthma in
                                                                                                                              Dubna and Tula
           Adults




Guidelines Protocol for     Clinical –     No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Donetsk City       AIHA        Russian
           Diagnosis and    treatment,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Hospital #25
           Treatment of     diagnostic.                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Chronic                                                                      pid=3540
           Cholecystitis




                                                                                                                                                        90
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Protocol for    Diagnosis and No data is available           No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Donetsk City     AIHA        Russian
           Diagnosis and   Treatment                                    available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Hospital #25
           Treatment of                                                                 =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Chronic                                                                      pid=3540
           Hepatitis




Guidelines Protocol for    Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Donetsk City     AIHA        Russian
           Diagnosis and   treatment,                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Hospital #25
           Treatment of    diagnostic.                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Chronic                                                                      pid=3540
           Pancreatitis




Guidelines Protocol for    Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Donetsk City     AIHA        Russian
           Diagnosis and treatment,                                     available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Hospital #25
           Treatment of    diagnostic.                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Peptic and                                                                   pid=3540
           Duodenum
           Ulcer in Adults




                                                                                                                                                      91
Guideline Guideline full Field (clinical   Bases of evidence or title   Comments on Methods                of Monitoring/evalua Authors    and Source of Comments
type    as title         – treatment,      of               original    methods       of dissemination    and tion of use of organizations     funding   (Language
defined by               prevention,       recommendation, source,      development      implementation       guideline and its involved    in           ,   Level,
authors                  diagnostic,       and degree of adaptation     /or adaptation                        effectiveness     developing               Other
                         organizational                                 for guidelines                                          guideline                comm.)
                         )
Guidelines Protocol for    Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Donetsk City     AIHA         Russian
           Diagnosis and   treatment,                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Hospital #25
           Treatment of    diagnostic.                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Pneumonia                                                                    pid=3540




Guidelines Standards for   Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Donetsk City     AIHA         Russian
           Mammology       treatment,                                   available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      Hospital #25
           Screening in    diagnostic.                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Primary Care                                                                 pid=3540




Guidelines WHO Global      Clinical –      No data is available         No data is      http://www.eurasiahe No data is       Samara outpatient AIHA        Russian
           Strategy on     prevention,                                  available       alth.org/index.jsp?sid available      clinic #15.
           Antimicrobial   diagnostic.                                                  =1&id=3542&lid=0&
           Resistance                                                                   pid=3540




                                                                                                                                                       92
93
APPEDNIX 2
                                                                                                                   TABLE 1
                                                                                    Clinical     Protocol     “Medical       (Re)desig    Improving   Global      Guidelines     Clinical    Imp    Guideli   Total
                                                                                    and          for          care           ning the     system of   strategy    for      the   guidelin    rovi   ne on
                                                                                    Organizati   Diagnosti    provided       system of    care for    for         treatment      e      on   ng     Breast
                                                                                    onal         cs     and   by primary     care for     women       asthma      of             preventi    the    Feeding
                                                                                    Guideline    Treatment    care           neonates     suffering   manage      infectious     on     of   syst
                                                                                    on post-     of Peptic    physicians     suffering    from        ment and    disease.       diabetes    em
                                                                                    abortive     Ulcer in     for patients   from         Pregnancy   preventio                  complica    of
                                                                                    care         Adults       with           respirator   -Induced    n                          tions in    care
                                                                                                              depression”    y distress   Hypertens                              general     for
                                                                                                              guideline      syndrome     ion                                    practice    pati
                                                                                                                                                                                             ents
                                                                                                                                                                                             suff
                                                                                                                                                                                             erin
                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                                                                                             fro
                                                                                                                                                                                             m
                                                                                                                                                                                             arte
                                                                                                                                                                                             rial
                                                                                                                                                                                             hyp
                                                                                                                                                                                             erte
                                                                                                                                                                                             nsio
                                                                                                                                                                                             n
                                                       1. Is the agency      Yes    *            *            *              *            *           *           *                          *      *         9
                                                       responsible for the
                                                                             No
                                                       development of
                                                       the guidelines        Not                                                                                                 *                            1
                                                       clearly identified?   sure
                        Responsibility for guideline
imension 1: Rigour of




                                                                             N/A
                                                       2.Was external        Yes    *            *            *              *            *           *           *                          *      *         9
                                                       funding or other
                                                                             No
evelopment




                                                       support received
                        development




                                                       for developing the    Not                                                                                                 *                            1
                                                       guidelines?           sure
                                                                             N/A
                                                       3.   If   external    Yes


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  94
                                 funding or support
                                                       No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *       *   *   9
                                 was received, is
                                 there    evidence     Not
                                 that the potential    sure
                                 biases of the
                                 funding body (ies)    N/A                                *           1
                                 were taken into
                                 account?
                                 4. Is there a         Yes    *       *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   9
                                 description of the
                                 individuals (e.g.     No         *                                   1
                                 professionals,        Not
                                 interest groups-      sure
                                 including
                                 patients)      who    N/A
                                 were involved in
Guideline development group




                                 the      guidelines
                                 development
                                 group?


                                 5. If so, did the     Yes    *   *   *   *   *       *       *       7
                                 group       contain
                                 representatives of    No                                 *           1
                                 all            key    Not                        *               *   2
                                 disciplines?          sure
                                                       N/A
                           and




                                 6. Is there a         Yes    *   *           *                   *   3
                                 description of the
                                                       No                         *   *   *   *       4
interpretation of evidence




                                 sources         of
                                 information used      Not            *   *                           2
                                 to    select   the    sure
                                 evidence        on
                                 which          the    N/A
Identification




                                 recommendations
                                 are based?
                                 7. If so, are the     Yes    *   *           *                   *   4
                                 sources        of
                                                       No
                                                                                                          95
information
                        Not
adequate?
                        sure
                        N/A            *   *       *   *   *   *       6
8. Is there a           Yes                            *   *           2
description of the
method(s) used to       No     *   *   *       *               *       5
interpret       and     Not                *       *               *   3
assess the strength     sure
of the evidence?
                        N/A
9. If so, is(are) the   Yes
method(s)         for
                        No
rating            the
evidence                Not                            *   *           2
satisfactory?           sure
                        N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *           *   *   8
10. Is there a          Yes    *       *   *   *                   *   5
description of the
                        No                                 *   *       2
methods used to
formulate      the      Not        *               *   *               3
recommendations         sure
?
                        N/A

11. If so, are the      Yes
methods
                        No
satisfactory?
                        Not    *       *   *                       *   4
                        sure
                        N/A        *           *   *   *   *   *       6
12. Is there an         Yes
indication of how
                        No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
the    views    of
interested parties      Not
not on the panel        sure


                                                                            96
              were taken into
                                    N/A
              account?
              13. Is there an       Yes
              explicit       link
              between the major     No                         *                   1
              recommendations       Not    *   *   *   *   *       *   *   *   *   9
              and      level   of   sure
              supporting
              evidence?             N/A




              14. Were the          Yes
              guideline
                                    No     *   *   *   *   *       *   *   *       8
              independently
              reviewed prior to     Not                        *               *   2
              their                 sure
              publication/releas
              e?                    N/A




              15. If so, is         Yes
              explicit
              information given     No
              about     methods     Not
              and          how      sure
              comments were
              addressed?            N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10

              16. Were the          Yes
              guideline piloted?
                                    No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
Peer review




                                    Not
                                    sure
                                    N/A
              17.     If     the    Yes


                                                                                        97
                                   guidelines were
                                                          No
                                   piloted, is explicit
                                   information given      Not
                                   about the methods      sure
                                   used and        the
                                   results adopted?       N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10

                                   18. Is there a         Yes
                                   mention of a date
                                   for reviewing the      No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                                   guidelines?            Not
                                                          sure
                                                          N/A
                                   19. Is the body        Yes
                                   responsible for the
                                   reviewing      and     No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
           Updating




                                   updating clearly       Not
                                   identified?            sure
                                                          N/A
           of




                                   20. Overall, have      Yes
                                   the       potential
                                                          No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                                   biases           of
                      assessment




                                   guideline              Not
                                   development been
           development process




                                                          sure
                                   adequately dealt
                                   with?                  N/A
           Overall




                                   21.     Are    the     Yes            *           *   *   *   *   *   6
Dimensio


           Objectives




                                   reasons for the
                                   developing     the     No         *                                   1
n 2:




                                   guidelines clearly     Not    *           *   *                       3
                                   stated?                sure


                                                                                                              98
                               N/A




          22.     Are    the   Yes    *   *       *   *   *   *   *   *   *   9
          objectives of the
                               No
          guidelines clearly
          defined?             Not            *                               1
                               sure
                               N/A

          23. Is there a       Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *       *   *   *   9
          satisfactory
          description of the   No
          patients to which    Not                            *               1
          the guidelines are   sure
          meant to apply?
                               N/A

          24. Is there a       Yes    *   *       *   *   *       *   *   *   8
          description of the
                               No
          circumstances
          (clinical or non     Not            *               *               2
          clinical) in which   sure
          exceptions might
          be made in using     N/A
          the guidelines?
          25. Is there an      Yes                        *       *       *   3
          explicit statement
                               No
          of     how     the
          patient's            Not    *   *   *   *   *       *       *       7
          preferences          sure
          should be taken
          into account in      N/A
Context




          applying       the
          guidelines?



                                                                                  99
                            26.     Do     the    Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                            guidelines
                            describe       the    No
                            condition to be       Not
                            detected, treated,    sure
                            or prevented in
                            unambiguous           N/A
                            terms?




                            27.     Are     the   Yes        *       *   *   *       *   *   *   7
                            different possible
                                                  No
                            options         for
                            management       of   Not    *       *               *               3
                            the      condition    sure
                            clearly stated in
                            the guidelines?       N/A

                            28.      Are the      Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                            recommendations
                                                  No
                            clearly presented?
                                                  Not
Clarity




                                                  sure
                                                  N/A
                            29. Is there an       Yes                        *   *   *   *   *   5
                            adequate
                                                  No         *                                   1
                            description of the
                            health     benefits   Not    *       *   *   *                       4
Likely costs and benefits




                            that are likely to    sure
                            be gained from
                            the recommended       N/A
                            management?
                            30. Is there an       Yes
                            adequate
                            description of the    No     *   *   *   *   *           *   *       7
                            potential harms or    Not                        *   *           *   3
                            risks that may        sure

                                                                                                     100
                                           occur as a result
                                                                N/A
                                           of            the
                                           recommended
                                           management?




                                           31. Is there an      Yes                                *           1
                                           estimate of the
                                           costs         or     No     *   *   *   *   *   *           *   *   8
                                           expenditures         Not                            *               1
                                           likely to incur      sure
                                           from         the
                                           recommended          N/A
                                           management?


                                           32.     Are    the   Yes                                *           1
                                           recommendations
                                                                No     *   *   *   *   *   *           *   *   8
                                           supported by the
                                           estimated            Not                            *               1
                                           benefits,   harms    sure
                                           and costs of the
                                           intervention?        N/A
                                  and




                                           33. Does the         Yes    *   *   *           *   *   *       *   7
                                           guideline
                                                                No                 *   *                       2
                                           document suggest
Dimension 3: Application



                           dissemination




                                           possible methods     Not                                    *       1
                                           for dissemination    sure
                           Guideline




                                           and
                                           implementation?      N/A


                                           34. Does the         Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                           Monitoring




                                           guideline
                                                                No
                                           document specify
                                           criteria     for     Not
                           of




                                           monitoring           sure
                                                                                                                   101
                           compliance?
                                                N/A

                           35. Does the         Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                           guideline
                           document identify    No
                           clear standards or   Not
                           targets?             sure
                                                N/A
                           36. Does the         Yes
                           guideline
                                                No
                           document define
                           measurable           Not    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   10
                           outcomes that can    sure
                           be monitored?
                                                N/A
National Guidelines Only




                           37. Does the         Yes    *       *       *   *   *   *   *   *   8
                           guideline
                                                No         *       *                           2
                           document identify
                           key       elements   Not
                           which need to be     sure
                           considered     by
                           guideline groups?    N/A




                                                                                                   102
                                                                                                                 TABLE 2
                                                                                                             Russian guidelines
                                                                                  Pregnan    Standards   Algorith      Diagnosti    Diagno     Clamidi    Clinical    Algorith     Standar   Nation      Tot
                                                                                  cy,        of out-     m of          c            stics      osis:      Recomm      m for        ds of     al          al
                                                                                  diagnosi   patient     multiple      principles   and        clinical   endations   managing     medica    recom
                                                                                  s and      medical     sclerosis     and          treatme    presenta   on          patients     l care    menda
                                                                                  treatme    care for    diagnosis.    treatment    nt of      tions,     diagnosti   with         in the    tions
                                                                                  nt of      people                    of           nonspec    diagnost   cs and      acute and    cases     on
                                                                                  hyperte    with                      patients     ific       ics and    treatment   chronic      of        preven
                                                                                  nsion in   oncology                  with         lung       treatme    of          pancreatit   heart     tion,
                                                                                  the                                  acute        diseases   nt         allergic    is           attack    diagno
                                                                                  Russian                              disorders    in                    rhinitis                           stics
                                                                                  Federati                             of brain     adults                                                   and
                                                                                  on                                   circulatio                                                            treatm
                                                                                                                       n                                                                     ent of
                                                                                                                                                                                             arterial
                                                                                                                                                                                             hypert
                                                                                                                                                                                             ension
of




                                                        1. Is the agency   Yes    *          *                         *            *          *          *           *                      *           8
             Responsibility for guideline development




                                                        responsible for
                                                                           No                            *                                                                         *                     2
                                                        the
Rigour




                                                        development of     Not
                                                        the guidelines     sure
                                                        clearly
                                                        identified?        N/A
1:




                                                        2. Was external    Yes
                                                        funding or other
evelopment




                                                                           No     *          *           *             *            *          *          *           *            *         *           10
                                                        support
imension




                                                        received     for   Not
                                                        developing the     sure
                                                        guidelines?
                                                                           N/A



                                                                                                                                                                                                        103
                              3.If external       Yes
                              funding or
                                                  No
                              support was
                              received, is        Not
                              there evidence      sure
                              that the
                              potential biases    N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                              of the funding
                              body (ies) were
                              taken into
                              account?
                              4.Is there a        Yes    *   *           *   *   *   *       *    7
                              description of
                                                  No             *   *                   *        3
                              the individuals
                              (e.g.               Not
                              professionals,      sure
                              interest groups-
                              including           N/A
                              patients) who
                              were involved
Guideline development group




                              in the
                              guidelines
                              development
                              group?
                              5. If so, did the   Yes    *   *           *   *       *       *    6
                              group contain
                                                  No
                              representatives
                              of     all   key    Not                            *                1
                              disciplines?        sure
                                                  N/A            *   *                   *        3
         and
interpretatio




                              6.Is there a        Yes    *   *   *           *   *   *   *   *    8
Identificatio




                              description of
                              the sources of      No                 *                            1
                              information         Not                    *                        1
n




                              used to select      sure




                                                                                                 104
the evidence on
                     N/A
which the
recommendatio
ns are based?
7.If so, are the     Yes    *                   *   *   *   *   *    6
sources of
                     No         *                                    1
information
adequate?            Not            *                                1
                     sure
                     N/A                *   *                        2
8. Is there a        Yes
description of
                     No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
the method(s)
used to interpret    Not
and assess the       sure
strength of the
evidence?            N/A

9. If so, is(are)    Yes
the method(s)
                     No
for rating the
evidence             Not
satisfactory?        sure
                     N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
10. Is there a       Yes    *                                        1
description of
                     No         *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    9
the methods
used to              Not
formulate the        sure
recommendatio
ns?                  N/A


11. If so, are the   Yes    *                                        1
methods
satisfactory?        No
                     Not
                     sure

                                                                    105
                                  N/A        *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    9
              12. Is there an     Yes
              indication of
                                  No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
              how the views
              of interested       Not
              parties not on      sure
              the panel were
              taken into          N/A
              account?


              13. Is there an     Yes
              explicit link
                                  No         *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    9
              between the
              major               Not    *                                        1
              recommendatio       sure
              ns and level of
              supporting          N/A
              evidence?


              14. Were the        Yes
              guideline
                                  No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
              independently
              reviewed prior      Not
              to          their   sure
              publication/rele
              ase?                N/A

              15. If so, is       Yes
              explicit
                                  No
              information
              given     about     Not
              methods     and     sure
              how comments
                                  N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
Peer review




              were
              addressed?
              16. Were the        Yes
              guideline
                                  No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                                                                                 106
                     piloted?
                                         Not
                                         sure
                                         N/A
                     17. If the          Yes
                     guidelines were
                     piloted, is         No
                     explicit            Not
                     information         sure
                     given about the
                     methods used        N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                     and the results
                     adopted?
                     18. Is there a      Yes
                     mention of a
                                         No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                     date for
                     reviewing the       Not
                     guidelines?         sure
                                         N/A
                     19. Is the body     Yes
                     responsible for
                                         No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                     the reviewing
                     and updating        Not
     Updating




                     clearly             sure
                     identified?
                                         N/A
     assessment of




                     20.      Overall,   Yes
                     have         the
     development




                                         No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                     potential biases
                     of     guideline    Not
     Overall




                     development         sure
                     been adequately
                     dealt with?         N/A

                     21. Are the         Yes    *   *       *   *   *   *   *   *   *    9
     Obje
     ctive
me
Di




                     reasons for the
     s




                                         No


                                                                                        107
          developing the
                              Not            *                                1
          guidelines
                              sure
          clearly stated?
                              N/A
          22. Are the         Yes    *   *           *   *   *   *       *    7
          objectives     of
          the guidelines      No
          clearly defined?    Not            *   *                   *        3
                              sure
                              N/A
          23. Is there a      Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
          satisfactory
          description of      No
          the patients to     Not
          which the           sure
          guidelines are
          meant to apply?     N/A

          24. Is there a      Yes    *   *   *       *   *   *   *   *   *    9
          description of
          the                 No
          circumstances       Not                *                            1
          (clinical or non    sure
          clinical) in
          which               N/A
          exceptions
          might be made
          in using the
          guidelines?
          25. Is there an     Yes                                    *   *    2
          explicit
          statement of        No         *   *   *   *   *   *   *            7
          how the             Not    *                                        1
          patient's           sure
          preferences
          should be taken     N/A
Context




          into account in
          applying the
          guidelines?
                                                                             108
                            26.   Do the        Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                            guidelines          No
                            describe the
                                                Not
                            condition to
                                                sure
                            be detected,
                            treated,   or       N/A
                            prevented in
                            unambiguous
                            terms?
                            27. Are the         Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                            different
                                                No
                            possible options
                            for management      Not
                            of the condition    sure
                            clearly stated in
                            the guidelines?     N/A

                            28.Are       the    Yes    *   *           *   *   *   *   *   *    8
                            recommendatio
                            ns       clearly    No
                            presented?          Not            *   *                            2
Clarity




                                                sure
                                                N/A
                            29. Is there an     Yes                        *   *           *    3
                            adequate
                            description of      No             *                   *   *        3
                            the health          Not    *   *       *   *                        4
                            benefits that are   sure
Likely costs and benefits




                            likely to be
                            gained from the     N/A
                            recommended
                            management?
                            30. Is there an     Yes
                            adequate
                                                No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                            description of
                            the potential       Not
                            harms or risks      sure
                                                                                               109
                                            that may occur
                                                                 N/A
                                            as a result of the
                                            recommended
                                            management?
                                            31. Is there an      Yes        *                                    1
                                            estimate of the
                                                                 No     *       *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    9
                                            costs or
                                            expenditures         Not
                                            likely to incur      sure
                                            from the
                                            recommended          N/A
                                            management?


                                            32. Are the          Yes        *                                    1
                                            recommendati         No     *       *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    9
                                            ons supported
                                            by the               Not
                                            estimated            sure
                                            benefits,            N/A
                                            harms and
                                            costs of the
                                            intervention?
                                and
Dimension 3: Application




                                            33. Does the         Yes
                                            guideline
                                            document             No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *    10
                           implementation




                                            suggest possible
                           dissemination




                                                                 Not
                                            methods for          sure
                           Guideline




                                            dissemination
                                            and                  N/A
                                            implementation
                                            ?
                           g of
                           Moni




                                            34. Does the         Yes    *                   *   *   *   *   *    6
                           torin




                                            guideline
                                                                 No                 *   *                        2



                                                                                                                110
                           document
                                              Not        *   *                                2
                           specify criteria
                                              sure
                           for monitoring
                           compliance?        N/A


                           35. Does the       Yes    *               *   *       *   *   *    6
                           guideline
                                              No                             *                1
                           document
                           identify clear     Not        *   *   *                            3
                           standards or       sure
                           targets?
                                              N/A
                           36. Does the       Yes
                           guideline          No                     *                        1
                           document
                           define             Not    *   *   *   *       *   *   *   *   *    9
                           measurable         sure
                           outcomes that      N/A
                           can be
                           monitored?
                           37. Does the       Yes    *   *           *   *   *   *   *   *    8
                           guideline
                                              No             *   *                            2
National Guidelines Only




                           document
                           identify   key     Not
                           elements which     sure
                           need to be
                           considered by      N/A
                           guideline
                           groups?




                                                                                             111
                                                                                                     TABLE 3.Clinical guidelines translated from English language

                                                                                                                   Screenin    Guideli    Early         Hepatit   Guideli   Guideli   Global       Modern     Guide    Clinica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 To
                                                                                                                   g for       nes for    Detection     is C      nes for   nes of    initiative   treatme    lines    l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tal
                                                                                                                   thyroid     the        of Prostate   treatm    treatme   HIV       on           nt of      for      guideli
                                                                                                                   diseases.   manage     Cancer.       ent       nt of     treatme   chronic      hyperte    diagn    ne,
                                                                                                                               ment of    Part II:                heart     nt for    obstructi    nsion:     osis     part 1.
                                                                                                                               transien   Estimatin               failure   adults    ve lung      expectat   and      Screen
                                                                                                                               t          g the                                       disease      ions and   treat    ing for
                                                                                                                               ischemi    Risks,                                                   reality    ment     thyroid
                                                                                                                               c          Benefits,                                                           of       disease
                                                                                                                               attacks    and Costs.                                                          arteri   .
                                                                                                                                                                                                              al
                                                                                                                                                                                                              hyper
                                                                                                                                                                                                              tensio
                                                                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                1. Is the agency            Yes    *           *          *             *         *         *         *                       *        *         9
                                                                                responsible for the
                                                                                development of the          No
                                                                                guidelines     clearly
                                                                                                            Not                                                                                    *                             1
Dimension 1: Rigour of Development




                                                                                identified?
                                                                                                            sure
                                     Responsibility for guideline development




                                                                                                            N/A

                                                                                2. Was external funding     Yes
                                                                                or     other    support
                                                                                received for developing     No     *           *          *             *         *         *         *            *          *        *         10
                                                                                the guidelines?
                                                                                                            Not
                                                                                                            sure
                                                                                                            N/A


                                                                                3. If external funding or   Yes
                                                                                support was received, is
                                                                                                            No



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           112
                                                there evidence that the
                                                                            Not
                                                potential biases of the
                                                                            sure
                                                funding body (ies) were
                                                taken into account?         N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10

                                                4. Is there a description   Yes    *       *                           *         3
                                                of the individuals (e.g.
                                                professionals, interest     No         *       *   *   *   *   *   *             7
                                                groups-including
                                                patients) who were          Not
Guideline development group



                                                involved       in     the   sure
                                                guidelines development      N/A
                                                group?
                                                5. If so, did the group     Yes                                        *         1
                                                contain representatives
                                                of all key disciplines?     No

                                                                            Not    *       *                                     2
                                                                            sure
                                                                            N/A        *       *   *   *   *   *   *             7

                                                6. Is there a description   Yes    *   *   *       *           *   *   *         7
Identification and interpretation of evidence




                                                of the sources of
                                                information used to         No                 *       *   *                     3
                                                select the evidence on
                                                which                 the   Not
                                                recommendations are         sure
                                                based?                      N/A

                                                7. If so, are the sources   Yes    *   *   *                   *       *         5
                                                of           information
                                                adequate?                   No

                                                                            Not                    *               *             2
                                                                            sure
                                                                            N/A                *       *   *                     3

                                                8. Is there a description   Yes            *   *                       *         3


                                                                                                                           113
of the method(s) used
                           No     *                   *       *   *             4
to interpret and assess
the strength of the        Not        *           *       *                     3
evidence?                  sure
                           N/A

9. If so, is(are) the      Yes            *                           *         2
method(s) for rating the
evidence satisfactory?     No

                           Not                *                                 1
                           sure
                           N/A    *   *           *   *   *   *   *             7

10.     Is   there   a     Yes    *   *   *       *                   *         5
description    of  the
methods     used    to     No                 *       *       *   *             4
formulate          the
recommendations?           Not                            *                     1
                           sure
                           N/A

11. If so, are the         Yes    *   *   *       *                             4
methods satisfactory?
                           No

                           Not                                        *         1
                           sure
                           N/A                *       *   *   *   *             5

12.     Is    there   an   Yes
indication of how the
views of interested        No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
parties not on the panel
were       taken    into   Not
account?                   sure
                           N/A



                                                                          114
              13. Is there an explicit    Yes        *                                         1
              link between the major
              recommendations and         No                 *   *   *   *   *   *   *         7
              level of supporting
              evidence?                   Not    *       *                                     2
                                          sure
                                          N/A

              14. Were the guideline      Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *       *             8
              independently reviewed
              prior      to       their   No                                 *                 1
              publication/release?
                                          Not                                        *         1
                                          sure
                                          N/A


              15. If so, is explicit      Yes
              information given about
              methods     and    how      No     *   *   *   *           *   *   *             7
              comments           were
              addressed?                  Not                    *   *                         2
                                          sure
                                          N/A                                        *         1

              16. Were the guideline      Yes
              piloted?
                                          No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10

                                          Not
                                          sure
                                          N/A

              17. If the guidelines       Yes
Peer review




              were piloted, is explicit
              information given about     No
              the methods used and
              the results adopted?        Not
                                          sure

                                                                                         115
                                                                 N/A    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10

                                      18. Is there a mention     Yes
                                      of a date for reviewing
                                      the guidelines?            No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10

                                                                 Not
                                                                 sure
                                                                 N/A

                                      19.    Is    the    body   Yes
                                      responsible for the
                                      reviewing and updating     No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
                                      clearly identified?
                Updating




                                                                 Not
                                                                 sure
                                                                 N/A
                of




                                      20. Overall, have the      Yes
                                      potential biases of
                Overall assessment




                                      guideline development      No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
                development process




                                      been adequately dealt
                                      with?                      Not
                                                                 sure
                                                                 N/A
          and
           2:




                                      21. Are the reasons for    Yes    *   *   *   *       *   *           *         7
                                      the developing the
                                      guidelines      clearly    No                                     *             1
Dimension




                                      stated?
                                                                 Not                    *           *                 3
Content
Context

                Objectives




                                                                 sure
                                                                 N/A

                                      22. Are the objectives     Yes    *   *   *   *       *   *                     6


                                                                                                                116
          of the guidelines clearly
                                      No                                     *             1
          defined?
                                      Not                    *           *       *         3
                                      sure
                                      N/A

          23.     Is     there   a    Yes    *   *   *   *   *       *       *   *         8
          satisfactory description
          of the patients to which    No
          the     guidelines   are
          meant to apply?             Not                        *       *                 2
                                      sure
                                      N/A

          24.     Is   there    a     Yes        *   *   *   *   *   *   *       *         8
          description    of   the
          circumstances (clinical     No
          or non clinical) in
          which exceptions might      Not    *                               *             2
          be made in using the        sure
          guidelines?                 N/A

          25. Is there an explicit    Yes
          statement of how the
          patient's   preferences     No                 *                   *   *         3
          should be taken into
                                      Not    *   *   *       *   *   *   *                 7
Context




          account in applying the
          guidelines?                 sure
                                      N/A

          26. Do the guidelines       Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
          describe the condition
          to be detected, treated,    No
          or     prevented      in
          unambiguous terms?          Not
                                      sure
Clarity




                                      N/A

          27. Are the different       Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10

                                                                                     117
                            possible options for
                                                        No
                            management of the
                            condition clearly stated    Not
                            in the guidelines?          sure
                                                        N/A

                            28.          Are     the    Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
                            recommendations
                            clearly presented?          No

                                                        Not
                                                        sure
                                                        N/A

                            29. Is there an adequate    Yes        *   *           *                         3
                            description of the health
                            benefits that are likely    No                                 *                 1
                            to be gained from the
                            recommended                 Not    *           *   *       *       *   *         6
                            management?                 sure
                                                        N/A

                            30. Is there an adequate    Yes            *                                     1
                            description     of   the
                            potential harms or risks    No     *   *       *       *       *                 5
                            that may occur as a
                            result       of      the    Not                    *       *       *   *         4
                            recommended                 sure
                            management?                 N/A
Likely costs and benefits




                            31. Is there an estimate    Yes            *                           *         2
                            of    the     costs   or
                            expenditures likely to      No     *   *       *   *       *   *   *             7
                            incur      from      the
                            recommended                 Not                        *                         1
                            management?                 sure
                                                        N/A

                            32.       Are        the    Yes            *                           *         2

                                                                                                       118
                                                                            recommendations
                                                                                                       No     *   *       *   *   *   *   *   *             8
                                                                            supported     by    the
                                                                            estimated      benefits,   Not
                                                                            harms and costs of the     sure
                                                                            intervention?
                                                                                                       N/A

                                                                      and
                                                                            33. Does the guideline     Yes
                                                                            document        suggest
                                                                            possible methods for       No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
                                                                            dissemination      and
                           dissemination



                                                                            implementation?            Not
                                                                                                       sure
                           Guideline




                                                                                                       N/A



                                                                            34. Does the guideline     Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *                     7
                                                                            document        specify
                                                                            criteria for monitoring    No                                 *                 1
                                                                            compliance?
                                                                                                       Not                                    *   *         2
                                                                                                       sure
                                                                                                       N/A
                           Monitoring of guidelines/ clinical audit
Dimension 3: Application




                                                                            35. Does the guideline     Yes    *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *       *         9
                                                                            document identify clear
                                                                            standards or targets?      No

                                                                                                       Not                                    *             1
                                                                                                       sure
                                                                                                       N/A

                                                                            36.     Does     the       Yes
                                                                            guideline document
                                                                                                       No                     *                             1
                                                                            define   measurable
                                                                            outcomes that can be       Not    *   *   *   *       *   *   *   *   *         9
                                                                            monitored?                 sure


                                                                                                                                                      119
                                               N/A




National Guidelines
                      37. Does the guideline   Yes
                      document identify key
                      elements which need to   No     *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *         10
                      be     considered   by
                      guideline groups?        Not
Only                                           sure
                                               N/A




                                                                                              120
    Table 4. Dimension, quality score of Clinical Guidelines developed under collaboration with
                                      international partners.*

                                              Rigour of          Context and
CG title                                     developmet,%        content,%          Application,%
Clinical and Organizational Guideline
on post-abortive care                                       35                 42                   80
Protocol for Diagnostics            and
Treatment of Peptic Ulcer in Adults                         25                 58                   60
Medical care provided by primary care
physicians for patients with depression”
guideline                                                   25                 33                   80
(Re)designing the system of care for
neonates suffering from respiratory
distress syndrome                                           25                 50                   40
Improving system of care for women
suffering from Pregnancy-Induced
Hypertension                                                35                 50                   60
Global strategy for asthma management
and prevention                                              15                 75                   80
Guidelines for the          treatment   of
uninfection disease                                         25                 42                   80
Clinical guideline on prevention of
diabetes complications    in general
practice                                                    10                 92                   80
Improving the system of care for
patients   suffering from arterial
hypertension                                                20                 67                   60
Guideline on Breast Feeding                                 30                 75                   80

*
    Maximum score is 100.




                                                                                                     121
Table 5. Dimension, quality score of Russian Guidelines.*


                                        Rigour of     Context and
CG title                               development,% content,%           Application,%
Pregnancy,      diagnosis    and
treatment of hypertension in the
Russian Federation                                 35               58                   60
Standards of out-patient medical
care for people with oncology                      20               75                   20
Algorithm of multiple sclerosis
diagnosis.                                          5               25                   0
Diagnostic       principles    and
treatment of patients with acute
disorders of brain circulation                      5               33                   0
Diagnostics and treatment of
nonspecific lung diseases in adults                15               58                   40
Clamidiosis: clinical presentations,
diagnostics and treatment                          25               67                   40
Clinical Recommendations         on
diagnostics and treatment        of
allergic rhinitis                                  20               67                   40
Algorithm for managing patients
with acute and chronic pancreatitis                25               58                   60
Standards of medical care in the
cases of heart attack                              10               58                   40
National recommendations on
prevention,      diagnostics     and
treatment of arterial hypertension                 25               67                   40

*
    Maximum score is 100.




                                                                                              122
Table 6. Dimension, quality score of translated clinical guidelines.



                                        Rigour of      Context and
CG title                                development, % content,%            Application,%

Screening for thyroid diseases                       35                50                   40
Guidelines for the management of
transient ischemic attacks                           35                67                   40
Early Detection of Prostate Cancer.
Part II: Estimating the Risks,
Benefits, and Costs.                                 35                92                   40
Hepatitis C treatment                                15                58                   40
Guidelines for treatment of heart
failure                                              20                50                   40
Guidelines of HIV treatment for
adults                                               10                58                   40
Global     initiative   on   chronic
obstructive lung disease                             10                58                   40
Modern treatment of hypertension:
expectations and reality                             10                33                   20
Guidelines for diagnosis and
treatment of arterial hypertension                   15                33                   0
Clinical guideline, part 1. Screening
for thyroid disease                                  40                58                   20

*
    Maximum score is 100.




                                                                                                 123
 Donor / Projects                              Done                                               Plans
USAID – AIHA           42 adapted, translated clinical guidelines           Adaptation of clinical practice guidelines
USAID – WIN            3 clinical and organization guidelines [COGs]        Finished
USAID –QAP             4 COGs                                               15 COGs – under development [6 – for Primary
                                                                            Care, 9 – for Mother and Child]
                                                                            WEB-communicator
Healthy Russia 2020    New                                                  Dissemination. Priority areas – Mother and
                                                                            Child, HIV/AIDS, TB, STD .
                                                                            Health Portal in Internet
WHO, AIHA, QAP         “Prikaz 372” on resuscitation of newborns            Finished
WHO, USAID – TB, “PRIKAZ” TB                                                Continue to improve “PRIKAZ” TB
Red Cross
WHO, USAID,       SU Practical guidelines on anti infectious chemotherapy   Finished
Pharmacopoeia
OSI                    5 EB CGs                                             10 CGs for Primary Care
TACIS - PHCD           GP/Family doctors – scope of authority               10 CGs for GP/Family doctors
TACIS - NWHRP          Collected CGs, developed by others. Database in Finished
                       Internet www.zdravinform.ru with documents and
                       results of others achievements
DFID                   HIV/AIDS organization protocol                       HIV/AIDS strategy
Task      Force    for Number of projects are currently under way, including development of CGs on HIV/AIDS, TB, STD,
Communicable           Primary Care
Disease Control in the
Baltic Sea Region
CIDA                   The project is currently under way, deals with HIV/AIDS, TB, STD


                                                                                                                           124
