          EU11 REGULAR ECONOMIC REPORT FY14 (P147712)

                                       Concept Note1
1. INTRODUCTION

The Regular Economic Report (RER) covers economic developments, prospects,
and looks at relevant structural issues across the 11 ‘new’ European Union (EU)
member states—Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia. Croatia was incorporated in
June 2012, and formally joined the EU in July 2013. Going forward, the RER will continue
to cover these 11 countries and refer to this group as EU11.
The objective of the EU11 RER is to provide an assessment of recent and projected
macroeconomic and structural developments and contribute to policy dialogue in the
region. The Report is published twice a year and provides a regular flow of macroeconomic
analysis and forecasts on the EU11 countries. In addition to discussing the latest economic
and labor market developments, each report also presents special topic analytical notes on
issues of current policy relevance for the EU11.
The Report is widely disseminated and is a core part of a suite of ECA economic
reports (e.g. the SEE6 and Russia RERs). These are increasingly seen as trademarks of
the World Bank’s analytical presence in the region. They are disseminated through media
launches, print and online, and to special audiences in seminars. The dissemination strategies
are being refined with each version. Annex 1 describes the outcomes and demonstrates the
importance of the RERs, as illustrated by the high number of ‘hits’ and downloads from the
World Bank Group external site and news stories. It confirms the potential role of the RERs
as a platform for policy discussions on economic and structural developments in the EU11.
This concept note presents the proposed framework for the 28th and 29th RERs, to be
launched between December 2013 and June 2014. The next section describes the
particular features of the EU11 RER, collaboration with internal and external partners, and
dissemination strategy. Section 3 presents the team and the budget for the task.




1
 The Concept Note was prepared by Theo Thomas, Ewa Korczyc and Matija Laco under the guidance of
Satu Kahkonen (Sector Manager).


                                                1
2. FEATURES OF THE REPORT

The EU11 RER fills a market niche as a knowledge product with its geographic focus,
unique country coverage, and timely coverage of economic developments and topical
structural issues. It fosters collaboration internally among the team of country economists
and across Bank teams; and externally with governments, other international organizations,
research institutes, and policy analysts. The EU11 RER strives to be a recognized product
for audiences interested in the developments in Central and Eastern Europe as well as for
broader knowledge learning.
                                                            Box 1: Lessons Learned from the RERs
Building on what worked well in the past and the            27 and 28
lessons learnt (see Box 1), the team intends to
strengthen the EU11 RER in three ways: (i) by               Based on feedback the team drew four main
deepening the cross-country analysis not only in the        lessons:
macroeconomic report, but also in the special topic         1. The RER provided useful analysis and
                                                                 there is evidence of broad and strong
analytical piece; (ii) looking for ways to better utilize        demand in the focus countries (see
the report as a collaboration tool within PREM,                  Annex 2). The Team will continue to
across sectors, and with highly specialized inputs               strengthen the performance monitoring
from external partners; and (iii) by delivering well-            and evaluation of each Report to
targeted dissemination events.                                   enhance relevance and impact.
                                                            2. The benchmarking and forecasts of the
                                                                 particular EU11 countries with the rest
The Report will continue to comprise two distinct                of the EU’s performance and in
parts: first, a report on the macroeconomic trends               comparison      to    other    emerging
and outlook; and second, an analytical ‘Special Topic’           economies was well received by the
dealing with an in-depth investigation of a topical              main target audience and journalists.
                                                                 The team will retain this benchmarking.
issue of policy relevance for EU11 (approx. 10              3. EXT suggested that there is still room
pages). In addition, the RERs will draw on relevant              to expand the dissemination of the
Bank analytical work to produce short ‘Spotlights’               Reports. The Team will explore options
(approx. 3 pages)—such as the piece on “Inclusive                for enhancing the dissemination efforts
Growth” in #27—and topical Boxes, e.g. to present                with EXT, seeking to use a range of
                                                                 media and formats (such as eBook,
the Doing Business survey results.                               blogs etc.) to complement the current
                                                                 launch events and formats.
The EU11 Macroeconomic Section                              4. Feedback from staff, other IFIs and
                                                                 journalists expressed a preference for a
The report on the EU11 macroeconomy consists of                  concise report that is presented around
                                                                 a topical theme that connects the EU11,
two parts: (i) an assessment of recent trends and                and links with the Special Topic. This
developments on the macroeconomic front of the                   storyline could help to add value to the
EU11, covering the real sector (including                        Report.
employment), external sector, monetary policy and
the financial sector, fiscal policy; and (ii) the Bank’s
near term economic outlook for the EU11 countries. The macro report also presents short
updates on policy changes related to structural, the business environment, and/or poverty
issues.

The EU11 RER is a unique knowledge resource for governments, businesses and decision
makers and within the Bank and for other stakeholders interested in the recent economic
developments and near term economic outlook of the eleven European countries.



                                                  2
   Geographic focus:     The EU11 RER is the only regional economic report exclusively
    tailored to the EU new member states in Central and Eastern Europe. The EU11
    countries share the same geography; many share similar transition histories; and all have
    EU convergence perspectives. The unique regional perspective of the EU11 RER has
    resonated well with policy makers, economists and investors. Regular regional reports of
    partner organizations such as the IMF, EBRD or EC cover either larger regional
    groupings, focus on individual countries or come less frequently. The EU11 RER
    therefore fills a niche with its particular geographical focus.
   Country coverage:     Four years after the crisis hit in 2008, concerns about the region’s
    recovery are still acute and the demand for objective economic assessments remains
    high. EU11 governments want to know about their country’s performance relative to the
    rest of the EU, investors are eager to find out about emerging vulnerabilities, and
    economists want to learn about policy reforms in other countries. At the same time, a
    number of new EU member states have graduated from the Bank as their living
    standards have converged with those of the EU. As a result, the Bank’s presence in the
    region has been scaled back over the last decade, leaving country offices only in Bulgaria,
    Croatia, Poland, and Romania. This makes it difficult for the Bank to provide in-depth
    macroeconomic assessments on a country-by-country basis. The EU11 RER has
    attempted to fill this gap. Drawing on high quality data provided from Eurostat, the
    World Bank, IMF, country institutions or other sources, the report provides a detailed
    assessment of developments, prospects and reforms across both graduated and non-
    graduated EU11 countries.
   Benchmarking: The report allows benchmarking of each country’s position relative not
    only to each other, but also to the averages of the EU11 and the rest of the EU
    countries. Given the uniqueness of the EU11 construct, the team will explore
    meaningful comparisons such as the ‘rest of the EU’, or the conventions used in the
    Golden Growth report (Gill and Raiser, eds., 2012) such as EU-South, EU-North, EU-
    Continental, etc.
   Timeliness: The EU11 RER provides timely economic analysis based on the latest
    information on country and regional indicators. The Report draws on the semester
    reports from the EC as well as consensus forecasts and the country knowledge of the
    local teams. While this can sometimes make it difficult to coincide with other Bank
    events, such as the Bank-Fund Spring and Annual meetings, the freshness of the data
    enhances the relevance of the Reports in the target markets.




                                              3
The EU11 Special Topics and Spotlights

The Special Topic/Focus Notes and Spotlights are an integral part of the RER. The
notes present a closer analytical look at economic and structural issues of relevance to the
EU11 region and both draw from and should contribute toward the Bank’s work in the
ECA region.

   Topic selection and process:  The selection of the focus notes and Spotlights is based on
    information and feedback from the EU11 governments and Bank’s management on
    relevant policy areas. They are cross-country analytical pieces. Thus far, the special topic
    notes have either showcased findings from Bank’s reports or presented independent
    analysis done by country economists and sectoral specialist in collaboration with external
    experts. However, the RER Focus Notes need to add value, and resonate, with client
    countries and should not simply repeat findings from other Bank reports (as the latter
    approach has not been considered of interest to clients in the past).
   Editions 28 and 29 will each feature one focus note presenting World Bank analysis on a
    topic of importance on? the EU11s economic and structural development. The focus
    notes will be based on analysis pieces being done well in advance to be ready for review
    and publication in the FY14 RERs. Other sectors will continue to be offered an
    opportunity to contribute to focus notes while the RER will present scope for presenting
    findings of original policy research conducted or managed by the Bank team.
   The RER team will also seek potential synergies with the other RERs (e.g. SEE) and
    ECA regional reports. Where there are strong commonalities and potential economies of
    scale? Where appropriate the team will coordinate research with the SEE RER.
   The special topics should be used strategically to not only fill existing gaps on current
    policy issues, but also to inform the policy dialogue with the client governments, senior
    management in the Bank, and the public in general. The ‘in-house’ preparation will
    ensure the engagement of the country economists on a particular issue of economic
    policy importance, and make them effective advocates for new ideas.
   Identification of special topics should remain flexible during the fiscal year to ensure that
    the team can respond to issues of current policy relevance. The time frame of developing
    an analytical paper to be published as a focus note in the RER is between 3-9 months.
    The team will present short outline/descriptions of candidate topics for the ECCU5
    Country Director’s consideration with each issue of the RER.
   Scope:         The potential scope of special topics f interest for the EU11 countries is
    large. The team aims to build on and deepen on-going regional or country-level work,
    and explore synergies for a cost-effective delivery of policy analysis on topical issues.

The potential scope of policy issues of interest for the EU countries is large. The team
aims to build on and deepen on-going regional or country-level work, and explore synergies
for a cost-effective delivery of policy analysis on topical issues. The CMU DMT and RER
team has identified the Special Topic for the December 2013 issue as “Poverty and Shared
Prosperity in the EU11” (outlined below):




                                               4
   December 2013 Special Topic: Poverty and Shared Prosperity in the EU112

1. Introduction (1/2 page): This section will briefly explain the twin WBG goals of reducing
   extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. It will cover the broad concepts and the
   motivations behind the goals, and also describe the indicators to be used and the target for
   reducing extreme poverty (there is no specific target associated with the shared prosperity
   goal).

2. Extreme Poverty (1 page): Extreme poverty (consumption per capita of less than US$
   1.25/day in 2005 PPP equivalent) is almost non-existent in the EU11. The focus of the
   RER is therefore on shared prosperity and will also present poverty trends for the EU11
   using two other poverty thresholds:
           a. US$5.00/day (2005 PPP), which represents an absolute poverty line that is still
              relevant for many countries in the EU11, and
           b. The relative poverty line of 60 percent of median national equivalized income,
              which is the standard used for risk of monetary poverty through the EU. This
              sub-section will also compare the poverty rates using this threshold with those in
              the EU15 countries.
   Although national poverty rates are fairly low for many of these measures, there are
   regions and sub-regions within countries with elevated poverty rates. To highlight this,
   a box will discuss the geographic distribution of poverty, using the recently-constructed
   poverty maps for selected countries, based on the EU relative poverty definition.

3. Shared Prosperity (~6 pages): This section will examine recent trends in the shared
   prosperity indicator (income/ consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent in each
   country) using the most recent household survey data available. The section will look
   at the relative contributions of growth in mean income and changes in the distribution,
   which together determine the growth of the bottom 40 percent. The section will also
   examine the characteristics of the bottom 40 percent, and investigate relative income
   mobility, that is, the degree to which people move in and out of the bottom 40 percent over
   time. Further details are as follows:

       a. Recent trends: Using the 2006–2011 EU-SILC (European Union Statistics on
          Income and Living Conditions) survey data, we will compare the income growth rates
          of bottom 40 percent with the income growth of the mean in each of the EU11
          countries except Croatia. We will also compare these patterns with those observed in
          the EU15. In those countries that have household budget surveys (HBS) for the same
          period, we will compare the HBS and EU-SILC to look at the robustness of the results
          across surveys and welfare measures (income versus consumption). This sub-section
          will include a box devoted to explaining any issues related to data availability and data
          quality. Growth incidence curves will be produced for a selected subset of countries in
          order to get a more detailed picture on the pattern of growth across the entire income
          distribution, as opposed to the aggregate income growth rates for the bottom 40

   2 Because of data limitations, Croatia cannot be included in many of the analyses for this special topic chapter.
   Croatia is not included in any of the EU-SILC microdata that have been publicly released to date. To mitigate
   this data gap we will use available data from Croatia’s Household Budget Survey whenever possible.



                                                           5
         percent and the population as a whole. Finally, we will discuss the relationship between
         inequality and shared prosperity.

       b.Who is the in the bottom 40 percent? This sub-section will develop profiles and a
         comparative analysis of key characteristics of the first quintile, second quintile and the
         top 60 percent for the EU11 countries. Under the EU risk of relative poverty
         definition, approximately 10 to 22 percent of the population, or roughly the first
         quintile, is below the poverty threshold. Separating the bottom 40 percent into the first
         and second quintiles provides insights about how the second quintile—which may be
         seen as an emerging middle class that is still vulnerable to falling into poverty—differs
         from those who are below the poverty threshold and those who are in the top 60
         percent. The analysis will consider social and demographic characteristics (age
         distribution, gender and education of the household head, household size, number of
         children, type of settlement), labor market outcomes (labor force status and sector of
         activity), and others. In the analysis we would focus on the latest year to give the most
         recent profile of the bottom 40 percent, but we will also look at the characteristics of
         the bottom 40 percent in the initial year of the interval and assess how stable the
         characteristics of the bottom 40 percent are over time.

     c. Dynamics of the bottom 40 percent: Do people tend to stay in the bottom 40
        percent (or in the top 60 percent) over many years, or is there considerable movement
        of people between these groups over time? Is falling into the bottom 40 percent
        mostly associated with real income losses in absolute terms, or with real income gains,
        but at a slower rate than those who are climbing out of the bottom 40 percent? We will
        use synthetic panel techniques or the panel component of the EU-SILC in a subset of
        countries to assess how much movement there is between the bottom 40 percent and
        the top 60 percent, taking into account absolute changes in income as well.

4. Conclusions (1 page): This section will draw out the main findings, with particular
   focus on selected countries, and consider what might be productive avenues for
   promoting growth with equity, drawing on the above analysis, or shared prosperity,
   in the EU11. As shared prosperity is still a new area for the Bank, this section will not
   provide comprehensive policy prescriptions, but will seek to raise some challenging forward-
   looking questions on the causal pathways to enhancing shared prosperity and growth.


   Possible May 2014 Special Topic(s):

   The Macroeconomic Impacts of Youth Unemployment in EU11 (a combined topic with the SEE
   RER Team): Youth employment is a chronic and serious economic problem in many EU11
   countries and even more so in the Western Balkans, compounding high structural
   unemployment in many countries and with significant long-term consequences on the
   structure and performance of these economies. The proposed analysis will aim to better
   quantify and disaggregate the nature of high youth unemployment to identify the specific
   nature of youth unemployment, e.g. along gender lines, educational attainment levels,
   specific groups etc. The analysis will investigate the link to long-term structural
   unemployment, leading to a loss of skills and human capital, the potential deterioration of
   productivity and economic growth, and the implications for poverty, shared prosperity and


                                                  6
future dependency ratios (given current demographic projections). Beyond the question of
economic growth outcomes, boosting youth employment is expected to exert a positive
impact on the public finances. A selection of focus countries may be featured from each
region to illustrate the above impacts.

Reforming the State Owned Enterprises (led by FPD and PREM). SOE operations represent large
and often unsustainable shares of government budgets in several EU11 countries that are
struggling to implement difficult fiscal consolidation programs. Also, the large share of
SOEs in economic activity is distortionary, potentially undermining private sector dynamism
and job creation while representing actual and contingent fiscal costs. This note will provide
a comparative review of the size and structure of SOEs and their private sector and fiscal
impacts, building on the joint work between FPD and PREM, and will seek to identify some
of their effects with a particular focus on policy options for accelerating (and sustaining)
reform–perhaps looking at more successful reformers in the region such as Poland.

Migration: Trends, Perils, and Opportunities. Many EU11 countries are experiencing significant
outmigration, which contributes to their rapidly aging societies with attendant impacts on
labor force, productivity, government budgets as well as external accounts. The note will
provide a region-wide perspective on recent trends in migration, highlighting key channels of
impact on these economies and related policy challenges. It will also draw policy lessons
based on international experience.

Review and Collaboration

The EU11 RER is a collaborative exercise across various dimensions.

   Review procedures: Clearance procedures for the Report need to be streamlined to ensure
    that at the time of the launch the Report reflects the latest available information. The
    Report is currently reviewed by COs, the IMF and EC, and is shared with counterparts
    in Government with approval given by the Director of ECA PREM—however the
    review times are compressed. This feature helps to ensure that the Report is relevant
    and attracts media coverage of the report’s messages, although it also raises risks
    regarding quality and can reduce the wider ownership of the product within the Bank.
    To mitigate these risks the EU11 core team will seek to involve senior staff and Country
    Managers more in the review and dissemination processes.
   The EU11 core team: The collaboration on the EU11 RER has strengthened team work
    among the economists located in offices in Brussels, Bucharest, Sofia, Warsaw,
    Washington, and Zagreb. It has widened the knowledge of team members beyond their
    specific country assignments and helps to develop a Bank team ‘view’ that can be
    consistently presented to both within and externally.
   Other Bank teams: The team collaborates closely with the Washington -based DECPG
    group to draw on their data base and ensure that the RER reflects accurately their latest
    information. Depending on the issue, staff from HD, FPD and SD have contributed to
    either the macroeconomic part or the focus notes of the RER. The team plans to
    continue to work even more closely with other sectors in ECA, particularly through the
    Special Topics. In addition, the team will also seek opportunities to collaborate with the



                                               7
    SEE RER and the Russia RER on special topics as well as the poverty and public sector
    clusters in PREM.
   Counterparts: The EU11 RER engages client countries and partner organizations in a
    dialogue on key economic policy issues. Counterparts from the ministries of finance and
    central banks, along with colleagues from ECFIN and the IMF, are invited to comment
    on the draft macroeconomic report. Comments and feedback will be sought from
    experts, dealing with the particular issues analyzed in each of the special topic paper.
   Researchers: Collaboration with research community enriches the analysis of the report
    with views of regional experts. Engaging external experts as contributors to the special
    focus notes will continue.

Dissemination

The EU11 RER tailors dissemination efforts to different audiences.
 EXT involvement: The team works closely with the EXT team in each of the ECCU5
   country offices, Brussels and Washington for media coverage. The EU11 RER is
   released with country-tailored press releases and media conferences. The RER is often
   featured as an ECA highlight story in the Bank intranet.
 Media impact:         The EU11 RER engages the public to participate in an informed
   debate about the direction of reforms in their countries. The RER is usually covered by
   in-country and international media reports via newspapers, magazines, on-line, TV. The
   EU11 RER ranks regularly among the top ECA web sites visited and reports
   downloaded (see Appendix 1). Efforts to exploit social media tools will also be made with
   the presentations of the RER. Social media may have a good potential for increasing the
   outreach of the report and a coordinated effort between the RER team and ECA EXT
   to tap into this vehicle will be made.
 Targeted audiences: Policy makers in the EU11 and from the EU institutions, the media,
   academics, policy analysis, and investors interested in Central European economic issues
   are invited to dedicated presentations of the report’s findings. The RER team will
   continue to explore opportunities to present the RER, including the special topic papers,
   to audiences of policy makers, investors, academics, and the public.
 Complementarities with other Bank reports:   In the June 2012 RER launch, a companion
   presentation of the Global Economic Prospects was carried out. This can create a
   welcome complementarily between the two reports (although it risks some
   overshadowing) and the team will consider this model in future launches should the
   RER coincide with other suitable reports (e.g. the SEE RER, the GEP, etc).
 Launch method and venues: The RER has usually been launched in one of the main
   regional offices, with VC connection to others, with country economists handling
   country-specific discussions. However, while this is a popular event in the main location,
   this risks diminishing the launch in the other locations. There is also expected to be a
   significant untapped audience for the Report in Brussels amongst the EC, journalists and
   lobby groups etc. The team will therefore consider various options to launch the next
   issue (December 2013) in the Brussels, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and Croatia offices.
   The approach should maximize the impact of the Report with the Bank’s main focus
   groups, as well as providing additional exposure and ownership for country office staff
   in leading the dissemination. As in the past and depending on demand, the extended
   team could also disseminate the Report on demand in other cities than the launch cities


                                              8
     following the initial wave of presentations. The team will strengthen its efforts to engage
     the media and country-based think tanks in dissemination events and to gather feedback
     to help refine future launches.
    Timeline: The target launch dates for the upcoming RERs are early December 2013,
     and June 2014.

3. TEAM COMPOSITION AND BUDGET

The EU11 RER ‘core team’ will continue to comprise the country economists covering the
eleven countries. Namely, the core team will comprise: Stella Ilieva, Leszek Kasek, Ewa
Korczyc, Matija Laco, Sanja Madzarevic-Sujster, Catalin Pauna, Pedro Rodriguez, Emilia
Skrok and Theo Thomas (TTL). Contributors to the macroeconomic report will comprise
members of the core team, DECPG, the ECA finance sector group (FPD) as well as on-
demand contributions from the IFC the Doing Business team and the ECA poverty and
public sector teams. Contributions to the focus notes will be sort from Bank staff from the
ECA region and/or external experts.

Peer reviewers are: Maurizio Bussolo (Lead Economist, ECACE), Ashley Taylor (Senior
Economist, EAP) and Alexander Rowland (Communications Officer, ECCBK).

The RER is a programmatic task. The EU11 RER Bank budget is proposed to be
US$300,000 for two issues of the report in FY14.

                            Indicative FY14 EU11 RER Budget
         Staff Time                                                               $125,000
         Focus Notes (STCs and Staff Time)                                        $125,000
         Logistics, team meetings, training, printing, dissemination               $50,000
                                                                    Total:        $300,000

4. RESULTS MATRIX
              Result                                                 Indicator
    Two high quality reports on
     key macroeconomic and                 On-line and printed publication of two reports (December 2013 and
       special topic issues                 June 2014)
                                           Successful main launches in EU11; targeted and on-demand
                                            presentations in Brussels, Washington, other.
                                           Successful dissemination via press, online and social network media
                                            (online chats, facebook, twitter, linkedin, email etc.) measured by the
    Effective dissemination and             number of press articles, online hits on the Bank website and the
              outreach                      number of participants in various online events (to be collected by
                                            the EXT team within a month after each report)
                                           EU11 policymakers, think tanks and/or academics participation at
                                            launches and RER events
                                           Tracking of printed and on-line report distribution




                                                9
Annex 1: Production Schedule for the 28th Issue (December 2013)


TENTATIVE TIMELINE
                 Meeting to form the team and potential assignments within the report, take
 September 25    stock and draw lessons from previous issues
 October 29       Country notes prepared by the CEs, 1st round data submission
 Nov 8           Draft sector sections completed and sent to TTL
 Nov 11          First draft of special-focus note(s)
 Nov 15          EU11 RER team discussion
 Nov 16          Draft report prepared and updated
                 Draft for management review and clearance (SM, CD, CMs, SD), authorities;
 Nov 18-25       Revised draft shared with the IMF, and ECFIN for feedback
 Nov 26          Revision and data updates completed; PPT prepared
 Nov 29          Press release drafted and PPT sent for clearance and translation
 Dec 2           Final report sent to print
 Dec 10          Launch and main dissemination
 Dec 10-18       Other dissemination events


The timetable for the twenty ninth issue will be developed using the above model, aiming for
the launch by early June.




                                              10
Annex 2: Number of hits and downloads for the RER# 26, 27

EU11 Regular Economic Report: economic recovery on hold (#27). Special Topic:
determinants of job creation in EU11 - evidence from firm level data
FEATURE STORY: Strength in Diversity: Embracing New Markets in the EU11
                  Overall (2      1st day after    2nd day after     3th day after
                  weeks)          launch           launch            launch
Page Views        527             179              117               19
Visits            401             126              86                18

PRESS RELEASE: EU11 Growth Drops in 2012 and Remains Slow in 2013 Amid Weak
External Confidence
All languages       Overall (2          1st day after        2nd day after          3th day after
                    weeks)              launch               launch                 launch

Page Views          661                 218                  167                    21
Visits              548                 174                  133                    20

Previous Launch (#26)
EU11 regular economic report - macroeconomic report : faltering recovery - special
topic : the economic growth implications of an aging European Union
FEATURE STORY: The EU 11 in an Aging Europe
 All languages   Overall (6    1th day after    2nd day after 3rd day after
                 mos)          launch           launch        launch
 Page Views      2,229         455              300           85
 Visits          1,547         229              195           57

PRESS RELEASE: EU11 Growth to Remain Weak in 2013 Amid Uncertain External
Environment
All languages       Overall (6          1th day after        2nd day after          3th day after
                    mos)                launch               launch                 launch
Page Views          886                 17                   18                     9
Visits              703                 12                   13                     8

Additional observations on EU11 RER #27:
POLAND:                    CROATIA:                     ROMANIA:                      BULGARIA:

Media coverage in          All dailies (7 of them)      Monitoring of the online,     EU11 RER launch
Poland reached 40          Relevant news portals        total items: 100+ Media       coincided with Global
articles, including an     (index.hr. tportal.hr)       webpages: 65 Blogs: 3         Economic Prospects
interview Ewa gave to      picked up the story.         Facebook: 7 Twitter: 1        (GEP) report, so media
Warsaw Business Journal.   Croatian Television,         Aggregators: 23               coverage includes both.
                           broadcast a story on the
                           report during prime time     Estimated viewership          Journalists focused on a
                           news. web: estimated         192.368 users in Romania      lowered growth forecast
                           6,500 users                                                for Bulgaria, and
                                                                                      included comments from
                                                                                      the Prime Minister who



                                                      11
     said that the EU11
     forecast is perfectly in
     line with the
     Government's
     assumption for lower
     growth this year.

     Media coverage totals
     approximately 25
     articles.




12
