           Executive Summary


Comparison of Mini / Micro LNG and CNG for
  commercialization of small volumes of
             associated gas




           Prepared by TRACTEBEL ENGINEERING S.A.




                     October 2015
The Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership (GGFR) provides its members with overviews of the
potential solutions to recover and monetize the flared and/or associated gas. This study analyses two
options that could be used for this monetization of small volumes (1 -15 MMscf/d): the LNG and CNG
chain concepts.

Technologies are available for both concepts, with different maturity level from the gained
experiences and for different transportation conditions (quantities, distances). The available
technologies allow a choice of implementation options to suit the volume of gas to be transported and
the distance from field to consumer.

The cost of the chain depends upon the parameters governing the gas recovery, its transportation and
its delivery. Among these parameters the most important are the gas volume and the transportation
distance.

As examples, two gas volumes (3 & 10 MMscf/d) and two ranges of distance to markets/consumers,
have been evaluated for a projects with 15 year durations:




                                                 ii
iii
The above data can be summarized as follows:

                      LNG & CNG unit cost: Onshore transport                                                   LNG & CNG unit cost: Offshore transport
             14                                                                                       12

             12                                                                                       10

             10
                                                                                                       8
              8




                                                                                          USD/MMBTU
 USD/MMBTU




                                                                                                       6
              6
                                                                                                       4
              4

              2                                                                                        2

              0                                                                                        0
                  0         200          400             600          800     1000                         0           200             400           600    800
                                                 Miles                                                                           Nautical miles
                                  LNG 3 MMSCFD                 CNG 3 MMSCFD                                            LNG 3 MMSCFD          CNG 3 MMSCFD
                                  LNG 10 MMSCFD                CNG10 MMSCFD                                            LNG 10 MMSCFD         CNG10 MMSCFD



It should be noted that CNG is considered to be less suitable for larger gas volumes and longer
distances due to the large CNG transport requirements (ships, barges or trucks) resulting from its
lower volumetric efficiency; even with the best CNG container option, CNG requires at least twice the
LNG chain transportation fleet for the same gas volume. The large scale of the CNG loading facilities
also required for large gas volumes reinforces this conclusion.

From the comparison:
1. Gas treatment is similar for both options, although CNG may need slightly less treatment when the
   gas is relatively clean
2. LNG liquefaction is more complex than CNG compression, and requires more capital investment
3. CNG is perceived as being of a higher safety risk, due to the high operating pressure, in the range
   of 150 – 250 barg
4. The volumetric efficiency (reduction of the gas volume relative to atmospheric conditions) is 150
   to 300:1 for CNG, compared to LNG at approximately 600:1
5. The higher capital costs of an LNG chain give CNG a cost advantage for smaller volumes and
   shorter distances. At higher volumes and longer distances, higher CNG chain operating costs
   reverse this advantage.
6. As noted above, CNG is considered to be less suitable for larger gas volumes and longer distances
   due to the large CNG transportation requirement (ships, barges or trucks). The large scale of the
   CNG loading facilities also required for large gas volumes reinforces this conclusion.
7. It is recommended that CNG should be limited to 5 MMscf/d and to 800 km in the case of road
   transportation for cost and operational complexity reasons, whilst CNG marine transportation is
   typically for large volumes and should be limited to less than 2,000 Nautical Miles




                                                                                     iv
Experience in USA, China and Pakistan shows that the gas transportation solutions have been more
developed when there is a gap in the traditional gas infrastructure (pipeline). The solutions are more
oriented to LNG chains for higher quantities and longer distances whilst they are more developed for
CNG as fuel for vehicles. It is also apparent that attractive gas prices are often the result of strategic
public policies, with laws promoting reduction in emissions or incentives via differential taxation.

Finally the implementation of the solutions to recover and monetize the flared and/or associated gas
needs to gather the conditions that make the project viable:

       The market demands
       The gas price attractiveness
       The existence of transportation infrastructure (road, river, etc.) to ensure a safe and reliable
        gas delivery.

The market currently offers some attractive niche opportunities:

       The gas to power, for electricity generation up to 50 MW
       CNG as fuel for vehicles
       LNG as fuel for large vehicles (trucks, locomotives, buses, etc.)
       LNG bunkering for ships, barges, ferries, etc.

The technologies and demand are there. The opportunities must be created.




                                                    v
