                                BHUTAN
        Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 1                          6/17/16 9:26 AM
                © 2016 World Bank Group
                1818 H Street NW
                Washington, DC 20433
                Telephone: 202-473-1000
                Internet: www.worldbank.org
                www.worldbank.org/foodsecurity
                Twitter: @WBG_Agriculture
                Email: feedback@worldbank.org

                All rights reserved

                This volume is a product of the staff of the World Bank Group. The findings, interpretations, and
                conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of
                World Bank Group or the governments they represent.

                The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
                boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
                any judgment on the part of World Bank Group concerning the legal status of any territory or the
                endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

                Rights and Permissions

                The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
                without permission may be a violation of applicable law. World Bank Group encourages dissemination of
                its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

                For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete
                information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA,
                telephone: 978-750-8400, fax: 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

                All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of
                the Publisher, World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax: 202-522-2422,
                e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

                Photo Credits

                Cover: blackcatz Shutterstock_346615667
                Page i: Winston Dawes, 2015
                Page ii: Winston Dawes, 2015
                Page 3: Marc van Vuren Shutterstock_38762917
                Page 4: (1) West Coast Scapes Shutterstock_349733012; (2) fritz16 / Shutterstock.com
                Page 10: John Williams RUS Shutterstock_318465284
                Pages 8, 9, 13, 17: Bhutan Consulting Associates
                Pages 6, 7, 12, 16: Deepa Rai, 2015
                Page 15: Winston Dawes, 2015




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 2                                                                                                 6/17/16 9:26 AM
                                       BHUTAN
                                     Promotin D v lopm nt
                                in R mot Rur l Communiti s




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 1                                6/23/16 1:56 PM
1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 2   6/16/16 1:12 PM
                Acknowledgements
                This booklet compiles stories from the field collected by the RRCDP team (Winston Dawes,
                Mio Takada, and Deepa Rai of the World Bank Group) in consultation with Dr. Kuenga
                Namgay and Jamyang Phuntsho Rabten of the Policy & Planning Division, Ministry of
                Agriculture and Forests, Bhutan.

                The team would also like to acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Udyog Subedi of Bhutan
                Consulting Associates, Purna Bahadur Chhetri, and Melissa Williams of the World Bank
                Group for their inputs.




                                                    Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     iii




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 3                                                                                       6/16/16 1:12 PM
                Translations
                Chiogs 	            A cluster of villages

                Drey 	              Local measurement bowl (1 Drey = 1.3 Kgs of Rice)

                Dzongkhag 	         District

                Geog 	              A block in a District (consisting of several villages)




                Abbreviations
                CGI	                Corrugated Galvanized Iron

                DoF	                Department of Forests

                FAO	                Food and Agriculture Organization

                Ha	Hectares

                Km.	Kilometer

                MDG	                Millennium Development Goals

                Nu.	                Ngultrum (Bhutanese currency)

                PTT	                Power Tiller Track

                RRCDP	              Remote Rural Communities Development Project

                UN	                 United Nations

                USD	                United States Dollar




                iv  |      Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 4                                                                6/16/16 1:12 PM
               T
                        he Royal Government of Bhutan’s dedication to achieving Gross National Happiness
                        keeps its programs focused on activities that also reduce poverty and promote shared
                        prosperity. Bhutan made impressive progress toward the Millennium Development
                Goals (MDG), which places it in an optimum position to achieve the remaining Sustain-
                able Development Goals. The clearest example of Bhutan’s dedication to development is its
                decrease in poverty from more than 23 percent in 2007 to just 12 percent in 2012—thereby
                achieving the MDG target of 15 percent.

                Bhutan’s mountainous terrain is a fundamental constraint to growth and rural poverty reduc-
                tion. The remaining challenge for poverty reduction lies in the remote rural areas of the
                country, which are cut off from markets and services as a result of poor road access. Since
                2003, the Royal Government has constructed over 1,500 kilometers of farm roads and tracks,
                but more remains to be done.

                The Royal Government of Bhutan wants to maximize the impact of its public expenditure
                to bring inclusive growth to even the most remote populations of the Himalayan nation.
                The objective of the 11th Five-year-Plan (2013–2018) is to achieve green economic growth,
                inclusive social development, poverty alleviation, and climate smart sustainable management
                and utilization of natural resources. To achieve these goals the Royal Government has set a
                growth target for the agriculture sector of 4% per annum. In these areas, the most important
                constraints to agriculture and natural resource productivity include:


                         Poor access due to                                                Limited irrigation
                                                          Low use of land
                           inadequate road                                                   infrastructure
                                                           resources with
                          and transportation                                               despite available
                                                         much land left fallow
                               network                                                      water sources




                                                          Fragmented and
                             No links to                   low-productivity                 Significant food
                          marketing facilities           subsistence farming                 and nutrition
                          and infrastructure                   systems                     insecurity issues




                                                                          High post-harvest
                                           High pre-harvest               losses due to lack
                                           losses to wildlife,              of storage and
                                          pests, and diseases            processing facilities




                                                            Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     1




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 1                                                                                             6/16/16 1:12 PM
               T
                        he Remote Rural Communities Development Project (RRCDP) is designed to sup-
                        port the Royal Government’s goals by improving the living conditions and incomes
                        in the country’s poorer and remote rural areas. The people who live in these areas rely
                on subsistence agriculture, but they still lack the roads, irrigation, technology, and productive
                infrastructure necessary to increase their links to the larger population and to improve their
                incomes and standard of living. RRCDP used poverty mapping to target project resources to
                the poorest rural areas in the country.

                The project is focusing on six Southwestern and South Central Dzongkhags—Samtse,
                Haa, Chhukha, Dagana, Trongsa and Wangdue—working with 6440 rural households in
                26 geogs (sub-districts) that have significant concentrations of poverty (see map).




                2  |      Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 2                                                                                       6/16/16 1:12 PM
                    “Th proj ct is chi vin improv m nt in m rk t cc ss throu h inv stm nts in
                    f rm ro ds nd m rk tin infr structur . It is lso incr sin     ricultur l pro-
                    ductivit nd rur l incom s throu h promotion of improv d irri tion nd ro-
                    nomic pr ctic s nd r h bilit tion of productiv ss ts for k commoditi s. And
                    fin ll , communit -l d inv stm nts r improvin th cc ss of th poor st p o-
                    pl to th critic l nd missin infr structur in th s l ct d r s.”

                                —Dr. Ku n N m        , D put Chi f of Polic nd Pl nnin Division,
                                 Ministr of A ricultur nd For sts, nd Proj ct Dir ctor of RRCDP
                                                    Promotin D v lopm nt in R mot Rur l Communiti s   |   3




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 3                                                                                 6/23/16 1:56 PM
                Overcoming Obstacles to Productivity
                and Growth



               R
                        RCDP’s specific objective is to increase agriculture productivity and access to com-
                        munity assets in target households by improving their access to markets, irrigation,
                        agricultural technologies, and community infrastructure. The project is achieving
                these goals by investing in:




                      Rural Infrastructure                        Community Marketing and
                         • Rural Accessibility
                                                                  Productive Infrastructure
                                                                    • Community and Marketing
                         • Irrigation                                 Infrastructure

                                                                    • Improving Productive Assets of
                                                                      Existing Producer Groups




                4  |      Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 4                                                                                  6/16/16 1:13 PM
                Investing in Rural Infrastructure



               R
                         RCDP invests in infrastructure to connect communities to larger roads and regional
                         markets and to improve production potential through improved availability of irriga-
                         tion. This component consists of two main sub-components: 1) Rural Accessibility
                and 2) Irrigation. In rural accessibility, the project is financing farm road development—
                including new farm road construction, landslide protection, and river crossing structures. For
                irrigation, the focus is on irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization.




                                Rural Accessibility                                   Irrigation


                                                                           Rehabilitation and modernization
                                Farm road construction

                                                                                High efficiency irrigation

                                  Landslide protection                          Water storage structures

                                                                                  Engineering support
                                River crossing structures
                                                                               WUA training and support



                For the economic uplift of communities in remote and rural areas of Bhutan, Remote Rural
                Communities Development Project (RRCDP), among other initiatives, will implement
                49 irrigation schemes serving an area of 998 hectares in six dzongkhags (districts) in south-
                western and south-central Bhutan.




                                                            Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     5




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 5                                                                                             6/23/16 1:56 PM
                Getting Crops the Water They Need



               T
                         he farmers of Wengkhang worked against odds to increase their rice productivity,
                         however, lack of water kept yields at a low 200–300 drey. One of the major con-
                         straints was that their irrigation channel was unlined, so they lost water to seepage.
                RRCDP worked with these farmers to line 1.5 kilometers of the canal, which has increased
                the amount of water available for crops. The Wengkhang farmers manage and maintain the
                irrigation channel themselves. The farmers anticipate that the yields would now be around
                600–800 drey.

                This investment is an example of strong collaboration between the government and com-
                munities. The district office worked closely with the Wengkhang community to complete
                paper work for the project, and guided the community on the technical requirements for the
                investment.

                Lesson for Implementation
                The budget for this investment was not sufficient to line the entire canal, so a one-half kilo-
                meter portion at the water source was not cemented. Therefore, the problems of water loss
                and landslides continue. Farmers work together to clear that portion of the canal when it
                becomes blocked, but ultimately, they will need to line that final portion.

                                                         “RRCDP support has been really good. Before
                                                         the channel was constructed, we didn’t have
                                                         sufficient water for the crops, it used to be about
                                                         this high (about a foot—showing with his hand)
                                                         but now (points towards the land) you can see
                                                         for yourself how well the crops have been. This
                                                         is all because of the cemented irrigation channel
                                                         which has increased the availability of water
                                                         by minimizing water loss through leaching and
                                                         percolation.”
                Karma showing the un-cemented part of
                the channel
                                                                   —Karma, Wengkhang channel beneficiary




                6  |       Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 6                                                                                     6/16/16 1:13 PM
                The Wenkhang irrigation channel leading up to the paddy fields. This irrigation channel provides water for 53
                households—benefiting roughly 300 individuals in the Wengkhang community.




                                                               Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |            7




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 7                                                                                                       6/16/16 1:13 PM
                Providing Water for People
                and Cardamom in Samtse



               O
                           ne of the most crucial elements of RRCDP is the involvement of community in
                           investment planning and implementation. The Sernyagang community of Namg-
                           yalchhoeling Geog in Samtse Dzongkhag has proven the success of this approach.

                                                                            The community had a short-
                                                                            age of drinking water, espe-
                                                                            cially during winter. People
                                                                            had piped water from a source
                                                                            3 km away, but the source
                                                                            would shrink in winter, forcing
                                                                            people to fetch water from the
                                                                            river. In a participatory plan-
                                                                            ning exercise, the community
                                                                            prioritized dual-use water pro-
                                                                            vision to meet their drinking
                                                                            water needs and their need to
                                                                            irrigate the cardamom crop.
                Irrigation water ensures a good cardamom crop               This investment will save time
                                                                            for women, who had to fetch
                water from the river for drinking, bathing, and laundry. In addition, it will benefit about
                25 acres of cardamom area and allow for vegetable cultivation for self-consumption.



                    “With the irrigation channel being closer to households we have ample water now
                    and we are grateful to the project as apart from drinking water, we can now irrigate
                    our cardamom plants. Cardamom being the main cash crop, many plants died during
                    the winter season and we had to replant the seedlings. The project provided us sup-
                    port for construction of a tank that can also be used to irrigate cardamom through
                    pipes during the winter season as we were also provided with sprinklers and the car-
                    damom fields are in and around our houses.”




                8  |       Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 8                                                                                 6/16/16 1:13 PM
                More Than Just a Power Tiller Track



              W
                          ith a budget of Nu. 556,000, a community of Pokri Dangra village opted for
                          a power tiller track (PTT) from Sernyagang (KholaKharka) to Tsholingkhar
                          (Pokhari Dara)—a 2.4 km access road in Namgyelchoeling Geog, Samtse
                Dzongkhag.

                The community hired an excavator with the allocated budget and provided their own labor
                as in-kind contribution. The community also used their own vehicles for transportation of
                fuel for the machine.




                Villagers work on the track. Labor is an important in-kind contribution that poor communities can bring to a
                project.


                A bridge over Larayni Khola was also built using local material. The road is not only suitable
                for power tillers but is also wide enough for other vehicles. The track took only 23 days to be
                constructed and it now benefits 40 households during the summer season.

                Now that vehicles are available in the community, they are better able to get help during
                emergencies. The community now has two essential shops along the road to sell rice and
                other food. Many households have expanded the area under cardamom cultivation. Buy-
                ers can now come to the village to buy cardamom, and villagers can take their produce to
                surrounding areas like Tala, Pemaling and Zhemgang. This has brought additional income
                to these households which in turn has resulted in the construction of improved toilets, as
                bringing construction materials were previously unaffordable because of transportation costs.
                Some have even transported Corrugated Galvanized Iron (CGI) sheets and have changed
                their thatched roofs.



                                                              Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |            9




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 9                                                                                                      6/16/16 1:13 PM
                                     “The main benefit for us is the transportation of
                                     Cardamom which is the main cash crop. Without
                                     a road, transporting 40 kg Cardamom cost Nu.
                                     500. We now pay only Nu. 2 per kg, allowing us
                                     to transport the same quantity for Nu. 80 only.
                                     At the same time, bringing all essential items
                                     (mainly food items) has become a lot easier.
                                     Earlier, people used to carry loads from the
                                     nearest Indian border market which took about
                                     10 hours. We can now save time on travel and
                                     have time for our agricultural work.”




                10  |       Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 10                                                           6/16/16 1:13 PM
                Community, Marketing and Productive
                Infrastructure



               C
                        omponent B covers investments in marketing and post-harvest infrastructure, critical
                        community-level infrastructure, and investments identified by producers to increase
                        agricultural productivity. It consists of two sub-components: 1) Establishing com-
                munity and marketing infrastructure and 2) Improving productive assets of existing producer
                groups.


                        Community and Marketing                          Improving Productive Assets
                        Infrastructure                                   of Existing Producer Groups

                             • Post harvest infrastructure                   • Horticulture
                             • Marketing sheds and                           • Livestock
                               agroprocessing units
                                                                             • Forestry
                             • Mule tracks, foot paths, gravity
                               ropeways, and foot bridges
                             • Drinking water supply
                               and sanitation




                Under the poultry scheme, beneficiaries like Dechen received Corrugated Galvanized Iron
                (CGI) roofing sheets, wire mesh, feeders, drinkers as well as cement and construction mate-
                rials to build chicken sheds. 60% of the pullets’ cost was met by the project. Labor costs for
                construction and local materials were borne by the beneficiaries.




                                                             Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     11




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 11                                                                                              6/16/16 1:13 PM
                Dechen’s Poultry Enterprise



              W
                             omen represent about 41 percent of all people employed in agriculture in the
                             project area and about 29 percent of all households in the targeted geogs are
                             headed by women. One such woman is Dechen, a soft-spoken, 31 year-old
                mother of three. She lights up when she talks about her poultry farm, and she has good rea-
                son to feel proud because she is the sole proprietor of a successful farm enterprise.

                Dechen’s farm is a 10 hour drive on winding roads from Thimphu, and a 15-minute uphill
                trek from a motorable road in Langthel village in the Trongsa district in central Bhutan.
                Despite the remoteness, Dechen is doing well. She received 180 chickens provided by the
                RRCDP project. Using the income acquired from this batch of chickens, Dechen invested
                in buying 270 additional chickens. From the income from this new batch, she has already
                bought 300 more chickens. She makes about Nu 3500 (US $38) a month by selling eggs to
                nearby shops. When asked whether there is a strong market for the eggs from her farm, she
                answers with a timid smile: “My customers want more. They ask me to sell more eggs. I never have
                enough.” She has earned Nu 45,000 (US $684) net profit since she started her poultry farm
                a year and a half ago

                This poultry farm is the not the only source of income for Dechen. She also maintains a
                vegetable garden where she uses manure from her farm. However, what is intriguing about
                Dechen is not her hard work, or her daily struggle, but her ability to dream big in overcom-
                ing adversity. She wants to expand the farm and build her own house. She says that had there
                been more chickens available for purchase, she would have bought 700 already.

                Having her own successful business has made her more self-confident and determined.

                                                          “I am happy with the generous support that I
                                                          have received so far. For someone like me, it has
                                                          been a great help to get by. By selling these eggs,
                                                          I buy what I need for my daily needs and I have
                                                          been able to provide for my children.

                                                          I want to build my own house on my own land
                                                          as this is not mine. I want to give my children
                                                          a higher education. I want to expand my farm
                                                          and have more chicken in a bigger farm—near a
                                                          motorable road for easy access.”



                12  |       Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 12                                                                                     6/16/16 1:13 PM
                Om Maya’s Dairy



               O
                         m Maya Sharma and her family of five in Dophuchen Geog in Samtse were self-
                         sufficient in rice and owned two cows, but they had no cash income. Mrs. Sharma
                         applied to RRCDP’s dairy farming scheme and received one Jersey cross-bred cow
                at a 50 percent subsidized rate in June 2014 to bring her herd total to three cows.

                                                                                 However, RRCDP does not
                                                                                 stop with just providing a
                                                                                 productive asset. The project
                                                                                 provides a package of goods
                                                                                 that will make that asset pro-
                                                                                 ductive—such as cement and
                                                                                 CGI sheets to build a shed for
                                                                                 the cattle, measuring jars and
                                                                                 storing cans for milk, a but-
                                                                                 ter churn, and barbed wire to
                                                                                 fence pasture land.

                                                                                Om Maya’s family now mar-
                                                                                kets dairy products—milk,
                Om Maya and her family in their cattle stall                    cheese, and butter—through-
                                                                                out the Geog. They can sell
                one ball of cheese for Nu. 20, and the proceeds go to purchase cattle feed. The family has
                a small land holding—only 60 decimal (about 0.6 acres) of dry land, so pasture has been
                an issue. As Om Maya reports, “Since we have less land, we have not been able to plant and
                fence pasture. I have demanded pasture seed and soon I will plant pasture in paddy field for about
                15 decimal, which will be fenced.”

                Her monthly income of Nu. 1800 has been an economic boom for the family. Another unan-
                ticipated outcome is that 12 households have built a bio-gas plant using their own resources,
                matched with Nu. 11,700 from the Royal Government of Bhutan.

                Learning Lessons
                Though the project has helped many households, some beneficiaries have faced difficulty
                with this scheme. For example, where the primary source of income is day labor and that
                have no land for pasture, households have to weigh the trade-off between managing an ani-
                mal and earning a wage. Where the return on day labor is higher than the return on livestock,




                                                        Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     13




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 13                                                                                         6/16/16 1:13 PM
                this enterprise solution is not a viable option. For those families that can participate, there is
                a need for more technical assistance to operate the cream separator provided by the project.
                RRCDP will use these lessons to inform future beneficiary assessments and the design of
                asset transfer and technical assistance.

                In addition to these constraints, there are other aspects in management that needs to be
                addressed, says Jamyang Phuntsho Rabten, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer of the
                RRCDP, Policy & Planning Division, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests: “Beneficiaries
                need to learn about basic record keeping and maintaining production data as linked to the genera-
                tion of income. We are missing that aspect. There have been trainings but it seems that those are not
                enough. I feel it needs to be refocused and diversified. We also should be able to focus on the formula-
                tion of groups and cooperatives as that way, it would be much better to market and sell the products.”



                                 “This h s b n r t h lp to m hous hold. I m d nic cow sh d nd h v
                                   two c ttl lon with on J rs cross f m l c lf. Th cow iv s 3–4 litr s
                                    of milk p r d with ood m n       m nt (with conc ntr t f d). On v r
                                       w could produc 120 b lls of loc l ch s nd bout 5 k butt r in
                                        month. Th s vin of Nu. 1800 h s b n ood incom for m
                                          hous hold nd w us it m inl to purch s food it ms for th
                                           f mil ,”

                                                                                    —Mrs. Om M             Sh rm




                14      |   Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 14                                                                                             6/16/16 1:13 PM
                Enhancing a Community Forestry
                Group in Dagapela



               B
                        hutan’s constitution requires a minimum of 60 percent of the country’s land area
                        to be covered by forests. This conserves the country’s natural resources and pre-
                        vents ecosystem degradation. As of 2011, Bhutan’s total forest cover was recorded at
                69.1 percent (FAO, UN).

                RRCDP has supported 25 Community Forestry Groups comprising of 1,500 households
                on a cost-sharing basis to support production and value addition to wood and non-wood
                forest products. The project provided nursery materials while the groups provided labor to
                maintain the forests. The group first grows seeds in a nursery through a netting and plant-
                ing facility provided by the project and then transfers them to the designated forest land.
                The groups decide on the species of plants with technical assistance from the Department
                of Forests and Park Services.

                In a village in Gaserling, the SaeerTsho community forestry group members are dedicated to
                keeping the community forest well maintained and looked after. A total of 27 households are
                benefitting from the 5 hectare plantation of champ (a native species) to provide fodder in the
                short-term and for wood in the years to come. The forestry group also collects money from seed-
                lings that they grow in the nursery. “Money we collect from the nursery is useful in order to give out
                low interest loans within the community,” says Sumchu Lhamo, one of the group members.




                Forest seedling nursery in project village.



                                                              Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     15




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 15                                                                                               6/16/16 1:13 PM
                The group’s ownership of the forest and their dedication, despite the extra workload and
                delayed monetary returns, can be seen as a positive outcome. The case of Gaserling has also
                confirmed the importance of training and capacity building in motivating the community
                towards action for their own welfare. According to Lhamo: “We feel energetic and actually, it
                feels good to tend to our plants. These trees that you see are good for us. We had this scheme earlier as
                well but we didn’t do much as we didn’t have a good teacher and therefore we were not interested
                but now it’s all different.”

                The credit for the new found zeal within the group goes to Geog Forestry Extension Officer,
                Karma Kelzang Oewazin. From the design phase to getting the seeds and planting them in
                the nursery, Karma’s support to the community group has been constant and highly produc-
                tive. He says: “Some of the forestry group members don’t even have enough to eat at home and yet,
                they go to the nursery and work in the plantation.”

                The plantation, completed a year ago, will take decades to mature until it can be fully uti-
                lized by the community. The knowledge that he has been able to plant in the group has been
                powerful: “This is for the generations to come—not just for us.” However, in the short-term, they
                can benefit from non-wood forest products such as wild mushrooms, bamboos, and sitting
                beehives that would provide them additional income.




                The villagers tending to their community forest in Dagapela




                16  |       Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 16                                                                                              6/16/16 1:13 PM
                A Sustainable Forest Enterprise for
                Gongdokha and Sektena Villages



               T
                        he community of Gongdokha and Sektena villages of Gakiling Geog in Haa Dzong-
                        khag collaborated in building a community forest office and sales counter. They have
                        also formed a Community Forest Management Group to maintain 108 acres of for-
                est. Ideas transferred to the community by the Dzongkhag Forestry Sector have helped raise
                awareness about the importance of community forests in villages.

                RRCDP has supported this endeavor by providing building material, transportation support,
                and technical support while the community has contributed labor. The unit was completed
                in July 2015 and will be used to market community forest products—mainly timber—and
                as an office to issue permits and carry out daily routine work required to manage the forest.

                The beneficiaries say: “Though we have not extracted any timber or other forest products yet, we
                feel that this office and counter will benefit us in long run for marketing the products as we need to
                store the products, mainly timber, cane ropes, and baskets.”




                Forest seedling nursery in project village.




                                                              Promoting Development in Remote Rural Communities   |     17




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 17                                                                                               6/16/16 1:13 PM
                  RRCDP Project in Brief
                  Project Initiation         November 2012

                  Project Completion         June 2018

                  Total Project Investment   USD 9 million

                  For more information,      Dr. Kuenga Namgay
                  contact:                   Policy & Planning Division
                                             Ministry of Agriculture and Forests,
                                             Thimphu, Bhutan




                18  |       Bhutan




1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 18                                                      6/16/16 1:13 PM
1616895_Bhutan Booklet.indd 19   6/16/16 1:13 PM
