Environmental and Social
Management System
Self Assessment and
Improvement Guide
                     Although the environmental and social management system described in this publication
                     is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein may not provide for
                     meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Stadard 1, or any other IFC Performance
                     Standard. The purpose of this publication is to demonstrate a technical means of integrat-
                     ing environmental and social concerns into company management, so that a business
                     can become more effective in reducing its impact on the environment, its workers and
                     its neighboring communities. The publication is provided “AS IS” and without warranty
                     of any kind, either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of
                     merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or noninfringement. Development of an
                     environmental and social management system based on this publication does not imply
                     any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Standards, including but
                     not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply endorsement by or affiliation
                     or sponsorship with IFC.

                     The publication is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor the
                     organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged in rendering
                     technical advice. The publication is intended as a reference and for informational purposes
                     only, and is not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes. Implementation of
                     the publication is solely the responsibility and risk of the final users. The material in the
                     publication is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can be accepted
                     for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the information con-
                     tained herein. Neither IFC nor any other member of the World Bank Group shall be liable
                     for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, consequential, punitive or exemplary dam-
                     ages, including, but not limited to, damages for loss of profits, goodwill, use, data or other
                     intangible losses (even if IFC has been advised of the possibility of such damages) in any
                     way arising or resulting from use or reliance on the publication or any such conclusion or
                     determination. The publication is distributed subject to the condition that it shall not by
                     way of trade or otherwise be sold, or otherwise circulated on a commercial basis without
                     IFC’s prior written consent.

                     IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeliness, complete-
                     ness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is not responsible or liable
                     for any such content or your use thereof. The views, advice, opinions and other state-
                     ments herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not necessarily represent the views
                     and opinions of, IFC or its Board of Directors, the World Bank or its Executive Directors, or
                     the countries they represent.




2   Welcome and How to Use This Self -Assessment and Improvement Guide
              Table of Contents
              Welcome & How To Use This Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide..............4
              Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire...................................................7
              Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide................................................................35




Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                               3
                     Welcome & How to
                     Use This Self-Assessment and
                     Improvement Guide
                     Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                     more and more important in today’s global
                     economy. There are thousands of environmental
                     and social codes and standards in the world
                     today. The codes and standards define the rules
                     and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                     implementation. An environmental and social
                     management system helps companies to integrate
                     the rules and objectives into core business
                     operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                     repeatable processes.


                     This Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide is
                     intended to be a practical guide to help companies
                     measure and improve their environmental and
                     social management system (ESMS). This should help
                     to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use This Self -Assessment and Improvement Guide
                       The ESMS Self-Assessment is a questionnaire that
                       covers the nine fundamental elements of an ESMS.
                       Based on its responses, a company can rate its
                       maturity level in each of these nine ESMS elements,
                       on a scale of 0 to 5. This helps to identify and
                       prioritize the areas for improvement.


                       The ESMS Improvement Guide provides a maturity
                       matrix that helps the company to understand what
                       each level of 0 to 5 means in each ESMS element.
                       It also provides improvement tips that can help
                       companies move up one level, and a template
                       that can help them to reflect and develop an
                       improvement plan.


                       As you go through the Self-Assessment and
                       Improvement Guide, you may want to refer to the
                       companion publications, the ESMS Implementation
                       Handbook and the ESMS Toolkit and Case
                       Studies, which give more background on each of
                       the nine ESMS elements. Our hope is that these
                       will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                       improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                       employees and stakeholders.

Version 2.3   October 2015     ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide   5
                      Quick Reference for Using this Guide
                       Section I:              This section contains a questionnaire to help measure the
                       Self-Assessment         maturity of your ESMS.


                                               This section contains a maturity matrix, improvement tips
                       Section II:
                                               and a template to help develop your ESMS improvement
                       Improvement Guide
                                               plan.


                                               This companion publication provides background on
                       ESMS
                                               environmental and social management systems in a particular
                       Implementation
                                               industry and provides step by step instructions on how to
                       Handbook
                                               develop and implement an ESMS.


                                               This companion publication provides tools, including forms,
                       ESMS Toolkit            templates, checklists, and other useful documents to help you
                                               develop and implement an ESMS.




                    Acknowledgments
                    This ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide was written by the Social
                    Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss and Jane Hwang,
                    with key contributions from Yogendra Chaudhry and Dundar Sahin, as
                    commissioned by IFC Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA). Key contributions
                    and editorial guidance were provided by the IFC team of Irene Angeletti, Rob
                    Horner, Larissa Luy, and Jeremy Ansell. Graphic design services were provided
                    by Pam Henry.




6   Welcome and How to Use This Self -Assessment and Improvement Guide
                                I
                        ESMS Self-Assessment
                        Questionnaire


                        This section provides a questionnaire to help you
                        measure the level of maturity of your ESMS.

                        For each question, select the response that best
                        describes your situation.


                        .




Version 2.3   October 2015    ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide   7
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS TO
DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS

The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you
measure and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The illustration
below shows how you can use these three publications in a cycle of con-
tinual improvement.




                                                              •	   Understand the benefits of an
                                                                   ESMS
                                            ESMS              •	   Learn the nine fundamental
                                          HANDBOOK                 elements of an ESMS




                                                             ESMS SELF-
                         ESMS
                                                           ASSESSMENT &
                        TOOLKIT
                                                           IMPROVEMENT
                                                               GUIDE


            •	   Use tools to implement               •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                 improvement plan                     •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                                           overall ESMS improvement plan




8     Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
Welcome to the ESMS Self-Assessment.

There are nine sections of the Self-Assessment, one for each element in your
ESMS:
•	      Policy;
•	      Identification of Risks and Impacts;
•	      Management Programs;
•	      Organizational Capacity and Competency;
•	      Emergency Preparedness and Response;
•	      Stakeholder Engagement;
•	      External Communications and Grievance Mechanisms;
•	      Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities; and
•	      Monitoring and Review.

There are three-to-nine questions in each section.  Each question has six response
options.  Circle the response that best describes the situation at your company.  
Do not worry if there is no exact match – just pick the one that you think is clos-
est. Once you have answered all the questions in one section, calculate the aver-
age score for that section. Add the point values of your responses and divide by
the number of questions. You will get a score of between 0 and 5 (5 is highest).

Answer as candidly and objectively as you can.  Gather input from others in your
company that might have knowledge about your ESMS. The purpose of this Self-
Assessment is to give you an accurate measure, for your company’s own bench-
marking and capacity-building purposes. The goal is to improve your ESMS, for
the benefit for your company, employees and stakeholders.  Remember that you
can’t improve what you don’t measure.

Let’s get started.

Company name:
Name of person(s) completing the Self-Assessment: Title(s):
Email address(es):
Date:



Version 2.3   October 2015    ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide              9
10   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
  ELEMENT 1


 Policy                                                                                        Definitions:
                                                                                               Mature – fully devel-
                                                                                               oped; having reached
 1.	 The following best describes our policy on environmental objectives                       an advanced stage of
     and principles:                                                                           development

      a.	 We do not have any policies regarding our environmental objectives and prin-         Policy – the principles
          ciples. (=0)                                                                         or rules in your com-
                                                                                               pany
      b.	 We are in the process of developing policies regarding our environmental objec-
          tives and principles. (=1)                                                           Periodic – repeating or
                                                                                               happening at regular
      c.	 We have policies regarding environmental issues that are most common in our
                                                                                               intervals
          industry and region. (=2)
      d.	 We have policies that align with the environmental code of conduct and standards     ILO – International
          of our customers or lenders.( =3)                                                    Labour Organization

      e.	 We have policies that align with the environmental code of conduct and standards     OSHA –Occupational
          of our customers or lenders, including a management system requirement. (=4)         Safety and Health
                                                                                               Administration
      f.	 We have policies that align with the environmental code of conduct/standards of
          our customers or lenders, including a management system requirement. We have
          a documented process to periodically review and revise our policies. (=5)


 2.	 The following best describes our policy on occupational health and
     safety:
      a.	 We do not have any policies regarding our occupational health and safety objec-
          tives and principles. (=0)
      b.	 We are in the process of developing policies regarding our occupational health and
          safety objectives and principles. (=1)
      c.	 We have policies regarding occupational health and safety issues that are most
          common in our industry and region. (=2)
      d.	 We have policies that align with the occupational health and safety requirements
          of ILO or OSHA standards. (=3)
      e.	 We have policies that align with the occupational health and safety requirements
          of ILO or OSHA standards, including a management system requirement. (=4)
      f.	 We have policies that align with the occupational health and safety requirements
          of ILO or OSHA standards, including a management system requirement. We
          have a documented process to periodically review and revise our policies. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015           ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                     11
                                                                                                          1. Policy



             3.	 The following best describes our policy on labor and working condi-
                 tions:
                 a.	 We do not have any policies regarding our labor and working conditions objec-
                     tives and principles. (=0)
                 b.	 We are in the process of developing policies regarding our labor and working
                     conditions objectives and principles. (=1)
                 c.	 We have policies regarding labor and working conditions issues that are regulated
                     by national labor law. (=2)
                 d.	 We have policies that align with the requirements of the ILO conventions on
                     labor and working conditions. (=3)
                 e.	 We have policies that align with the requirements of the ILO conventions on
                     labor and working conditions, including a management system requirement. (=4)
                  f.	 We have policies that align with the requirements of the ILO conventions on
                      labor and working conditions, including a management system requirement. We
                      have a documented process to periodically review and revise our policies. (=5)


             4.	 The following best describes our policy on community health, safety,
                 and security:
                 a.	 We do not have any policies regarding community health, safety, and security
                     objectives and principles. (=0)
                 b.	 We are in the process of developing policies regarding community health, safety,
                     and security objectives and principles. (=1)
                 c.	 We have policies regarding community health, safety, and security issues that are
                     most common in our industry and region. (=2)
                 d.	 We have policies that align with the code of conduct and standards of our cus-
                     tomers or lenders. (=3)
                 e.	 We have policies that align with the code of conduct and standards of our cus-
                     tomers or lenders, including a management system requirement. (=4)
                  f.	 We have policies that align with the code of conduct and standards of our
                      customers or lenders, including a management system requirement. We have a
                      documented process to periodically review and revise our policies. (=5)


             5.	 We review and revise our environmental and social policies as fol-
                 lows:
                 a.	 We do not review our policies. (=0)
                 b.	 We revise our policies in reaction to external requests. (=1)
                 c.	 We revise our policies when we become aware of changes in local regulations. (=2)
                 d.	 We have a procedure to review and revise our policies based on any changes in
                     regulations or customer/lender requirements. (=3)
                 e.	 We periodically review and revise our policies based on any changes in regulations



12   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
                                                                                               Definitions:
          or customer/lender requirements, and the results of monitoring and review of our
          performance. (=4)                                                                    External Stakeholder
                                                                                               – an individual or
      f.	 We periodically review and revise our policies based on any changes in regulations   group that is influenced
          or customer/lender requirements, and the results of monitoring and review of our     by or influences your
          performance.   We involve our workers and external stakeholders in the process.      company but is not
          (=5)                                                                                 part of your internal
                                                                                               structure.

 6.	 The following best describes how our environmental and social poli-                       Stakeholders can in-
     cies are communicated:                                                                    clude customers, suppli-
                                                                                               ers, lenders, civil society
      a.	 We do not have a way to communicate environmental and social policies. (=0)
                                                                                               groups related to your
      b.	 We verbally communicate environmental and social policies in our workplace.          business and workers’
          (=1)                                                                                 issues (government,
      c.	 Our environmental and social policies are prominently posted in our facility and     academia, non- govern-
                                                                                               mental organizations,
          mentioned during the initial orientation for new employees. (=2)
                                                                                               trade unions)
      d.	 Our environmental and social policies are distributed and explained to all employ-
          ees, including contract and seasonal workers. (=3)
                                                                                               Proactive – evaluating
      e.	 We communicate our environmental and social policies in all relevant languages       needs and acting before
          for all employees, including contract and seasonal workers. We check to make sure    problems occur, instead
          that everyone understands. (=4)                                                      of waiting to fix them
      f.	 We communicate our environmental and social policies in all relevant languages       after they occur
          for all employees, including contract and seasonal workers, and external stake-
          holders. We proactively engage to make sure that everyone understands. (=5)


 7.	 Based on actions by our senior management, the following statement
     best reflects their level of commitment to our environmental and
     social policies:
      a.	 Senior management has no awareness or involvement. (=0)
      b.	 Senior management has delegated this activity and has limited involvement. (=1)
      c.	 Senior management communicates with lenders and customers about their re-
          quirements and then instructs the relevant employees to address the issue. (=2)
      d.	 Senior management communicates our environmental and social policy commit-
          ment to all levels of the company and in a public statement. (=3)
      e.	 Senior management makes a clear statement of commitment to all levels of the
          company and provides the necessary resources to implement the policies. (=4)
      f.	 Senior management participates in the formal review and revision of our environ-
          mental and social policies. They provide the necessary resources to continually
          improve.  They communicate their commitment both internally and externally.
          (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015           ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                     13
                             ELEMENT 2ELEMENT 2



Definitions:
                               Identification of Risks and
Risk Assessment – a            Impacts
formal evaluation of
                                 1.	 Our risk assessment considers the following risk factors in our opera-
which negative impacts
                                     tions that may lead to potential environmental impacts:
are likely to occur or
have a high degree of                1. Raw materials consumption
severity                             2. Energy consumption
                                     3. Water consumption
                                     4. Wastewater quantity
                                     5. Wastewater quality
                                     6. Air emissions
                                     7. Solid waste generation
                                     8. Hazardous waste generation
                                     9. Usage of chemicals
                                     10. Usage of hazardous materials
                                     11. Noise generation
                                     12. Land conversion

                                     a.	   We do not do a risk assessment. (=0)
                                     b.	   Our risk assessment covers at least 3 of the topics above. (=1)
                                     c.	   Our risk assessment covers 4-6 of the topics above. (=2)
                                     d.	   Our risk assessment covers 7-8 of the topics above. (=3)
                                     e.	   Our risk assessment covers 9-11 of the topics above. (=4)
                                     f.	   Our risk assessment covers all of the topics above. (=5)

                                 2.	 Our risk assessment considers the following risks related to potential
                                     occupational health and safety impacts:
                                     1. Fire and explosion hazards
                                     2. Physical hazards (e.g. cuts, falls, rotating/moving equipment, vibration)
                                     3. Ergonomic hazards (e.g., lifting, repetitive work, work posture injuries)
                                     4. Chemical hazards
                                     5. Biohazards
                                     6. Radiation hazards
                                     7. Electrical hazards
                                     8. Work zone air quality
                                     9. Work zone noise level
                                     10. Eye hazards
                                     11. Workplace temperature and humidity
                                     12. Working at heights
                                     13.Working in confined spaces
                                     14. Industrial vehicle driving and site traffic
                                     15. Transportation of workers

                                     a.	   We do not do a risk assessment. (=0)
                                     b.	   Our risk assessment covers at least 3 of the topics above. (=1)
                                     c.	   Our risk assessment covers 4-7 of the topics above. (=2)
                                     d.	   Our risk assessment covers 8-11 of the topics above. (=3)
                                     e.	   Our risk assessment covers 12-14 of the topics above. (=4)
                                     f.	   Our risk assessment covers all 15 of the topics above. (=5)
               14        Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
                                                                                     Definitions:
 3.	 Our risk assessment considers the following information to identify
     whether our company may have a potential negative impact related                Worker Representative
     to labor and working conditions:                                                – a non-management
     1. Age profiles of workforce                                                    worker freely elected
     2. Gender composition of workforce                                              by workers to facilitate
                                                                                     communication with
     3. Presence of dormitories
                                                                                     senior management
     4. Differences in nationalities/ethnicities
                                                                                     on environmental and
     5. Use of security guards
                                                                                     social issues
     6. Use of migrant labor
     7. Use of temporary, seasonal and contract labor, on- or off-site
     8. Use of apprentice programs
     9. Use of production-quota-based pay systems
     10. Use of recruiting or labor contracting agencies
     11. Presence of worker representatives

      a.	   We do not do a risk assessment. (=0)
      b.	   Our risk assessment covers at least 3 of the topics above. (=1)
      c.	   Our risk assessment covers 4-5 of the topics above. (=2)
      d.	   Our risk assessment covers 6-7 of the topics above. (=3)
      e.	   Our risk assessment covers 8-10 of the topics above. (=4)
      f.	   Our risk assessment covers all 11 of the topics above. (=5)


 4.	 Our risk assessment considers whether our company may have a po-
     tential negative impact on the community due to:
     1. Contamination of surface water bodies (rivers, lakes, estuaries, etc.)
     2. Ambient air quality/odor from industrial emissions
     3. Solid waste disposal
     4. Hazardous waste disposal
     5. Usage of chemicals and hazardous materials
     6. Ground or surface water depletion
     7. High ambient noise level due to industrial operations
     8. Ground water contamination
     9. Air emissions and noise from transportation
     10. Traffic congestion
     11. Cultural heritage site/historical monuments/ecologically sensitive sites
     12. Land acquisition and usage
     13. Buildings and infrastructure development/decommissioning
     14. Security personnel

      a.	   We do not do a risk assessment. (=0)
      b.	   Our risk assessment covers at least 4 of the topics above. (=1)
      c.	   Our risk assessment covers 5-7 of the topics above. (=2)
      d.	   Our risk assessment covers 8-11 of the topics above. (=3)
      e.	   Our risk assessment covers 12-13 of the topics above. (=4)
      f.	   Our risk assessment covers all 14 of the topics above. (=5)



Version 2.3    October 2015             ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide        15
             5.	 The following best describes how we identify and assess our envi-
                 ronmental risks:
                 a.	 We do not conduct an environmental risk assessment. (=0)

                 b.	 We do not have a formal method, but we are aware of the environmental regu-
                     lations that apply to our operations. (=1)

                 c.	 We look at inputs and outputs of all of our business processes to assess environ-
                     mental risks. (=2)

                 d.	 We look at inputs and outputs of all of our business processes to assess envi-
                     ronmental risks. We have a risk evaluation and prioritization method. (=3)

                 e.	 We look at inputs and outputs of all of our business processes to assess envi-
                     ronmental risks. We have a risk evaluation and prioritization method. The risk
                     assessment is reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever we
                     have a change in processes and activities, or an expansion. (=4)

                  f.	 We look at inputs and outputs of all of our business processes to assess envi-
                      ronmental risks, including those involving contractors and primary suppliers.
                      We have a risk evaluation and prioritization method. The risk assessment is
                      reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever we have a change in
                      processes and activities, or an expansion. (=5)


             6.	 The following best describes how we identify and assess our occu-
                 pational health and safety risks:
                 a.	 We do not conduct an occupational health and safety risk assessment. (=0)

                 b.	 We do not have a formal method but we are aware of some of the occupational
                     health and safety risks. (=1)

                 c.	 We look at all of our business processes to assess occupational health and safety
                     risks. We use methods such as job hazard analysis. (=2)

                 d.	 We look at all of our business processes to assess occupational health and safety
                     risks. We have a risk evaluation and prioritization method. (=3)

                 e.	 We look at all of our business processes to assess occupational health and safety
                     risks. We have a risk evaluation and prioritization method. The risk assessment
                     is reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever we have a change
                     in processes and activities, or an expansion. (=4)

                  f.	 We look at all of our business processes to assess occupational health and safety
                      risks, including those involving contractors and primary suppliers. We have a
                      risk evaluation and prioritization method. The risk assessment is reviewed for
                      its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever we have a change in processes
                      and activities, or an expansion. (=5)




16   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
                                                                                                Definitions:
 7.	 The following best describes how we identify and assess our risks
     related to labor and working conditions:                                                   Periodic – repeating
                                                                                                or happening at regular
      a.	 We do not conduct a labor risk assessment. (=0)                                       intervals
      b.	 We do not have a formal method but we are aware of some of the labor risks. (=1)

      c.	 We look at employment contracts, payment records, grievances log to assess as-
          sociated labor risks. (=2)

      d.	 We look at employment records and employee profiles such as age, gender, na-
          tionality, and ethnicity to assess associated labor risks. (=3)

      e.	 We look at employment records and employee profiles to assess associated labor
          risks. The risk assessment is reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and
          whenever we have a change in processes and activities, or an expansion. (=4)

      f.	 We look at employment records and employee profiles for all workers, including
          outsourced activities, contractors and suppliers, to assess associated labor risks.
          The risk assessment is reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever
          we have a change in processes and activities, or an expansion. (=5)


 8.	 The following best describes how we identify and assess our risks of
     negative impacting the surrounding communities:
      a.	 We do not conduct a community risk assessment.(=0)

      b.	 We do not have a formal method for community risk assessment, but we are
          aware of some of the risks. (=1)

      c.	 We have identified the communities that might be affected by our operations. The
          information is documented and available upon request. (=2)

      d.	 We have identified the communities that might be affected by our operations.  
          We have identified the risks and analyzed their significance. The information is
          documented and is available upon request. (=3)

      e.	 We have identified the affected communities and the nature and significance of
          the risks. The information is documented and is available upon request. The risk
          assessment is reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever we have
          a change in processes and activities, or an expansion. (=4)

      f.	 We have identified and documented the affected communities and the nature and
          significance of the risks for our operations and those involving contractors and
          primary suppliers.  We consider the different impacts on women and vulnerable
          groups. The information is documented and is available upon request. The risk
          assessment is reviewed for its adequacy on a periodic basis and whenever we have
          a change in processes and activities, or an expansion. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015           ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                     17
             9.	 The following best describes who participates in the identification
                 and assessment of risks:
                 a.	 We do not conduct any risk assessment. (=0)
                 b.	 The managers of each area conduct the risk identification and assessment inde-
                     pendently. (=1)
                  c.	 The managers of each area conduct the risk identification and assessment indepen-
                      dently. Supervisors and worker representatives participate in the identification of
                      risks. (=2)
                 d.	 A committee involving multiple departments jointly conducts the identification
                     of environmental and social risks. Supervisors and worker representatives partici-
                     pate in the identification of risks. External experts are engaged as necessary. (=3)
                 e.	 A committee involving multiple departments jointly conducts the identification
                     of all environmental and social risks. Supervisors and worker representatives par-
                     ticipate in the identification of risks.  The committee proactively engages external
                     experts, contractors and primary suppliers. (=4)
                  f.	 A committee involving multiple departments jointly conducts the identification
                      of all environmental and social risks. Supervisors and worker representatives par-
                      ticipate in the identification of risks.  The committee proactively engages external
                      experts, contractors, primary suppliers and other external stakeholders for the
                      identification of risks. (=5)




18   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
    ELEMENT 3
 ELEMENT 3


Management Programs                                                                              Definitions:


                                                                                                 Mitigation hierarchy
 1.	 When we find or learn of environmental and social problems, we do                           – the order in which
     the following:                                                                              actions should be priori-
                                                                                                 tized when managing
      a.	 Assume that the people involved will handle the problem. (=0)
                                                                                                 E&S risks
      b.	 Depend on the investor, customer or external stakeholder to tell us what to do.
                                                                                                 - first try to avoid the
          (=1)
                                                                                                 negative impact, then
      c.	 Take action in the affected area to minimize the impact. (=2)                          minimize, then compen-
      d.	 Take action in the affected area to minimize the impact and review other related       sate/offset
          areas to see if the problem is replicated elsewhere. (=3)
      e.	 Analyze the problem and improve our operations to minimize the impact and the
          chance of recurrence. (=4)                                                             Procedure – the docu-
      f.	 Analyze the problem and improve our operations and ESMS to address the                 mented steps you take
                                                                                                 to make sure you follow
          impact and prevent it from happening again. We prioritize actions that avoid the
                                                                                                 the rules
          impact, over those that minimize it. (=5)


 2.	 The following best describes how our procedures address environ-
     mental and social risks and impacts:
      a.	 Our procedures are focused on business operations only and do not address envi-
          ronmental and social risks and impacts. (=0)
      b.	 The people at my company are aware of the environmental and social risk man-
          agement procedures but these are not documented. (=1)
      c.	 We have some documented procedures to minimize and/or offset negative im-
          pacts and improve performance. These address some of the environmental and
          social risks and impacts identified by our risk assessment. (=2)
      d.	 We have documented procedures to avoid as well as minimize and/or offset nega-
          tive impacts and improve performance. These address all environmental and social
          risks and impacts identified by our risk assessment. The risk assessment covers our
          internal operations only. (=3)
      e.	 We have documented procedures to avoid as well as minimize and/or offset nega-
          tive impacts and improve performance. These address all environmental and so-
          cial risks and impacts identified by our risk assessment. The risk assessment covers
          our internal operations. We routinely review and improve our procedures. (=4)
      f.	 We have documented procedures to avoid as well as minimize and/or offset nega-
          tive impacts and improve performance. These address all environmental and so-
          cial risks and impacts identified by our risk assessment. The risk assessment covers
          our internal operations and our supply chain. We routinely review and improve
          our procedures based on our monitoring and internal and external feedback. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                      19
Definitions:
                                  3.	 The following best describes how we develop our environmental and
Action Plan – specific                social Action Plans:
actions to correct en-                a.	 Normally we do not require specific Action Plans, as the concerned departments
vironmental, labor and                    take appropriate actions to address the environmental and social issues. (=0)
community problems
                                      b.	 Our Action Plans are primarily developed for us by external consultants/experts.
and remediate negative
                                          (=1)
impacts
                                      c.	 Supervisors and managers are qualified and they prepare the necessary Action
Target date – specific                    Plans, with the support of external experts as and when required. (=2)
date in the future when               d.	 Supervisors and managers are responsible for preparing the necessary Action
the Action Plan will be                   Plans, in consultation with the workers. External experts are engaged when neces-
achieved                                  sary. (=3)
                                      e.	 Our Action Plans are based on extensive research on best practices and input from
                                          workers, managers and external experts as appropriate. (=4)
                                       f.	 We consider industry best practices and consult all our key stakeholders (e.g. inves-
                                           tors, customers, suppliers, community) when developing Action Plans. There is
                                           appropriate involvement of workers and senior management. (=5)


                                  4.	 The following best describes the structure of our Action Plans:
                                      a.	 Normally we do not develop specific Action Plans. If necessary, the concerned
                                          personnel are informed verbally or by phone/e-mail. (=0)
                                      b.	 Our Action Plans are simple and list the actions to be taken along with the target
                                          dates. (=1)
                                      c.	 Our Action Plans specifically mention the responsible personnel along with the
                                          actions and target dates. (=2)
                                      d.	 Our Action Plans include actions to be taken with target dates, responsible person-
                                          nel and the necessary resources required for implementation of each action. (=3)
                                      e.	 Our Action Plans include targeted objectives and indicators. All necessary infor-
                                          mation pertaining to actions, target dates, responsibility and necessary resources
                                          are well-defined. (=4)
                                       f.	 We have a structured format for the Action Plans that includes operational
                                           procedures needed for the long term sustainability of the actions. All necessary
                                           information pertaining to targeted objectives and indicators, actions, target dates,
                                           responsibility and necessary resources are well-defined.(=5)




               20         Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
 5.	 We make sure that the Action Plans have been implemented by do-
     ing the following:
      a.	 If we don’t hear another complaint about it, we assume it’s resolved. (=0)
      b.	 The people directly involved are responsible for checking progress on the Action
          Plans. (=1)
      c.	 The people directly involved are responsible for checking and reporting on the
          progress on the Action Plans. (=2)
      d.	 The people with responsibility for our ESMS routinely review records and prog-
          ress on the Action Plans with all department managers. (=3)
      e.	 Multiple departments and senior management review and verify progress on Ac-
          tion Plans. They review records of all problems and resolutions and verify that the
          appropriate adjustments to the Action Plans and the ESMS have been made. (=4)
      f.	 Multiple departments and senior management review and verify progress on Ac-
          tion Plans and ESMS improvements, and set annual improvement goals. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015           ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                 21
                             ELEMENT 4


                              Organizational Capacity
                              and Competency
Definitions:

HR – abbreviation for
Human Resource de-
partment or function
                                  1.	 In my company the people from the following functional areas have
                                      day-to-day involvement in managing environmental and social (OHS,
EHS – abbreviation                    labor, and community) risks and impacts:
for Environmental
                                       a.	 We only deal with these matters on a case-by-case basis, so no one is assigned.
Health and Safety de-
partment or function
                                           (=0)
                                       b.	 This is usually handled on a limited basis by one or two people in the areas that
                                           manage our customer/investor relationships, such as Marketing, Finance, Admin-
Multi-departmental                         istration and Legal. They handle these issues only when customers and investors
– an activity that in-                     ask. (=1)
volves many separate
                                       c.	 The people that manage our customer/investor relationships have some knowl-
departments or
                                           edge and involvement. Each issue is also handled by the relevant functional area
functions in your
                                           – labor issues are handled only by HR, environmental issues are handled only by
company
                                           EHS, and community issues by Communication/CSR. (=2)
                                       d.	 The people that manage our customer/investor relationships are trained and
                                           involved, as well as the people in the HR, EHS and Communication/CSR areas.
Root cause – the
original or most                           They work together with trained people in the Production and Maintenance
fundamental rea-                           departments, so that environmental and social issues are reviewed as part of daily
son for a problem.                         operations. (=3)
Sometimes there are                    e.	 We have a cross-functional team of trained people from all the internal business
layers or chains of                        and operations areas, led by a senior management member. They meet and review
events that lead to                        environmental and social issues on a routine basis. There is an integrated manage-
a problem; you may
                                           ment system that covers the Quality, EHS, and Labor areas. (=4)
need to look beyond
the surface symptom                    f.	 We have a cross-functional team of trained people from all the business and op-
or most direct reason                      erations areas, including our supply chain. They are led by a senior management
to find the root cause                     member and meet and review environmental and social issues on a routine basis.
and address it, so the                     There is an integrated management system that covers the Quality, EHS, Labor,
problem does not keep                      and Community Relations areas.  Our Sourcing/Procurement area is involved in
happening                                  extending our environmental and social policies to our supply chain. (=5)




               22        Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
 2.	 The people at my company involved in managing environmental and
     social risks and impacts have the responsibility and authority to do
     the following:
     1. Develop and modify policies
     2. Revise and implement procedures and work instructions
     3. Conduct internal monitoring
     4. Follow up on the internal and external audits to address problems
     5. Conduct manager and worker training
     6. Establish and manage worker communication channels
     7. Coordinate among the business departments to implement Action Plans
     8. Approve or veto business decisions that have significant potential negative impact
     9. Hire external experts as needed
     10. Manage environmental and social issues with suppliers and contractors
     11. Engage local organizations, government, trade union and other groups on issues
     related to workers, environment and community
     12. Report on performance to senior management

      a.	 0 of the above activities (=0)
      b.	 1-3 of the above activities (=1)
      c.	 4-5 of the above activities (=2)
      d.	 6-7 of the above activities (=3)
      e.	 8-9 of the above activities (=4)
      f.	 10-12 of the above activities (=5)


 3.	 The following best describes our current expertise to develop and
     manage our ESMS:
      a.	 We do not have environmental and social expertise in our company. (=0)
      b.	 We do not have environmental and social expertise in our company. We com-
          pletely rely on external parties. (=1)
      c.	 We have some staff with knowledge on environmental and social issues. They
          review materials from our investors, customers and external parties.  (=2)
      d.	 We have competent professionals with current knowledge and skills on environ-
          mental and social issues, including regulatory requirements and industry best
          practices. (=3)
      e.	 We have competent professionals with current knowledge and skills on environ-
          mental and social issues, including regulatory requirements and industry best
          practices. We involve external experts to assist in the identification of risks for
          complex projects. (=4)
      f.	 We have competent professionals with current knowledge and skills on environ-
          mental and social issues, including regulatory requirements and industry best
          practices. They have also been trained on management system standards. We
          involve external experts to assist in the identification of risks for complex projects.
          (=5)


Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                    23
             4.	 Training for our employees about our ESMS is best described by the
                 following statement:
                 a.	 We focus our employee training on job-related skills only. (=0)
                 b.	 We introduce our environmental and social policies in our employee orientation.
                     (=1)
                 c.	 In addition to the employee orientation, we provide additional training for our
                     EHS and HR staff. (=2)
                 d.	 We provide ongoing introductory and refresher training at least once a year to all
                     managers and workers. Workers are trained on the environmental and social poli-
                     cies and procedures that apply to their work area. (=3)
                 e.	 We provide ongoing introductory and refresher training at least once a year to all
                     managers and workers, including full-time, part-time, temporary and contractors.
                     Training is based on the content of the policies and procedures that apply to each
                     area. (=4)
                  f.	 Everyone in our company receives ongoing training on the applicable environ-
                      mental and social policies and procedures. The people responsible for the ESMS
                      receive specialized training in management systems, monitoring and internal
                      auditing, root cause analysis, and continual improvement programs. We measure
                      the effectiveness of our training through tests, surveys and interviews to continu-
                      ally improve our training program. (=5)




24   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
   ELEMENT 5


 Emergency Preparedness
 and Response
 1.	 Our emergency preparedness and response plan can best be described as:
      a.	 We are aware of the potential emergency situations at our site and know how to deal
          with them. However, we do not have a formal plan. (=0)
      b.	 We have an emergency management plan that was developed by an external agency.  
          (=1)
      c.	 Our emergency response plan was developed with external assistance, but we review it
          periodically for its continued suitability and adequacy, and we update it when required.
          (=2)
      d.	 Our employees play an active role in identification of potential emergency situations
          and emergency response planning.  We consult external expertise when required. The
          emergency response plan is periodically reviewed and updated. (=3)
      e.	 All our employees across all shifts, including contract workers, are involved in emer-
          gency identification and management planning.  Regular training, mock drills in all
          shifts, periodic review and update, and documentation/record keeping are some of the
          key features of our emergency response plan. Senior management has an active role in
          monitoring of emergency response, and we focus on continual improvement of emer-
          gency management. (=4)
      f.	 Not only do we have employees’ and contractors’ full involvement, we also focus on
          continued participation and communication with surrounding communities on emer-
          gency management planning. External communication channels in case of an emer-
          gency are defined.  “Off-site” emergency management and “mutual aid” are key features
          of our emergency plan. (=5)

 2.	 We develop practical skills for emergency response as follows:
      a.	 Mock drills and exercises are conducted when necessary. (=0)
      b.	 Mock drills are conducted regularly. We do not conduct drills in all shifts, but we are
          aware of the emergency risks in the night shift. (=1)
      c.	 Mock drills are conducted in all shifts with regular frequency. Records of mock drills
          are maintained mostly for internal safety requirements or regulatory compliance. (=2)
      d.	 Mock drills are conducted in all shifts with regular frequency. Records and analysis
          of the results are documented. Performance on emergency response is monitored and
          evaluated to identify opportunities for potential improvements. Sometimes these find-
          ings are incorporated in our emergency management plan. (=3)
      e.	 Mock drills are conducted in all shifts with regular frequency. Mock drill reports from
          all shifts are evaluated and analyzed for improvement opportunities. All findings are
          discussed and recommendations/corrective actions are incorporated in the emergency
          management plan. (=4)
      f.	 There is demonstrated involvement of senior management, which normally takes part
          in mock drills. Senior management reviews recommendations and corrective ac-
          tions resulting from the mock drill reports and provides resources to implement them
          promptly. (=5)


Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                     25
             3.	 We train our workforce on emergency management as follows:
                 a.	 Basic awareness on fire safety and evacuation is part of the employee orientation
                     program. Subsequent training is normally not required. (=0)
                 b.	 Basic awareness on fire safety and evacuation is part of the employee orientation
                     program. Re-training is done when necessary. (=1)
                 c.	 All employees across all shifts, including contract workers, are regularly trained on
                     life safety under common emergency scenarios (e.g. fire safety, evacuation, shelter-
                     in-place, first aid). (=2)
                 d.	 All employees across all shifts, including contract workers, are regularly trained
                     on life safety. In addition, we have specific training requirements for emergency
                     response teams. (=3)
                 e.	 All employees across all shifts, including contract workers, are regularly trained
                     on life safety. In addition, we have specific training requirements for emergency
                     response teams. Managers are trained on risk identification and management. We
                     monitor the effectiveness of emergency training. (=4)
                  f.	 We have an annual emergency training program with targeted objectives for all
                      levels and departments. We continually update our training program to cover new
                      acquisitions and changes to operations and the surrounding environment. We
                      adapt our training based on employee input. (=5)


             4.	 Our system for managing our emergency detection, alarm, and re-
                 sponse equipment can best be described as:
                 a.	 We have the necessary and appropriate portable fire extinguishers in the facil-
                     ity. (=0)
                 b.	 The number, type and size of fire extinguishers are decided based on the risk
                     assessment. They are maintained as per the manufacturer’s specification. (=1)
                 c.	 In addition to fire extinguishers, critical areas are covered with smoke detec-
                     tors and other early warning systems. We also have emergency alarms, light-
                     ing, and signage in all working areas. (=2)
                 d.	 We cover all working areas with early warning systems, emergency alarms,
                     lighting and signage, portable fire extinguishers, and pressurized water sup-
                     pression systems. (=3)
                 e.	 We regularly test our early warning system, alarms, and fire extinguisers.  Our
                     fire hydrant system, including the water tank, is cleaned, maintained and
                     tested at a defined frequency. Our emergency systems are connected to an
                     independent energy source and are operational at all times. (=4)
                  f.	 Our procurement system is in line with our risk assessment and covers multi-
                      emergency equipment, such as early warning systems, alarms, lighting, and
                      signage, first aid, and fire suppression, flood, earthquake, and chemical spills
                      response equipment. The inventory of our emergency equipment is regularly
                      maintained and upgraded to keep up with the new technologies and potential
                      risks. (=5)



26   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
 ELEMENT 6


 Stakeholder Engagement                                                                        Definitions:


                                                                                               Stakeholder mapping –
 1.	 The following best describes the way that we identify the external                        the process of review-
     groups that may be affected by or might influence our company:                            ing all aspects of the
                                                                                               company’s operations
      a.	 We handle all issues internally. (=0)                                                and identifying stake-
      b.	 Sometimes our investors or customers put us in touch with external groups or we      holders.
          get approached directly by such groups. (=1)                                         A stakeholder mapping
      c.	 We keep a record of the groups that contact us and then use this as our stakehold-   exercise starts with the
          er map so we know whom we have dealt with in the past. (=2)                          identification of the
                                                                                               company’s geographic
      d.	 Our staff has conducted a stakeholder mapping exercise in which we identify our
                                                                                               sphere of influence.
          affected stakeholders. (=3)
                                                                                               This includes not only
      e.	 We review our stakeholder mapping with external groups to identify any other         the company’s owned
          relevant groups and regularly update as our business changes. (=4)                   facilities, but also sup-
                                                                                               pliers, transportation
      f.	 We survey our workers and outside experts as well as external groups to identify
                                                                                               routes, areas potentially
          relevant groups and regularly update as our business changes. (=5)
                                                                                               affected by cumulative
                                                                                               impacts, and unplanned
 2.	 We involve external stakeholders in our environmental and social                          but predictable devel-
                                                                                               opments.
     management program in the following ways:

      a.	 We don’t engage with any external stakeholder. (=0)
      b.	 External stakeholders can contact us through our external communication and
          grievances mechanisms. (=1)
      c.	 We regularly inform on our current and planned operations and the expected
          environmental and social positive and negative impacts. (=2)
      d.	 We regularly provide relevant information on our current and planned and
          expected impacts, so that people can express concerns and suggestions to reduce
          negative impacts. (=3)
      e.	 We provide relevant information on our plans and expected impacts, so that
          people can express concerns and suggestions to reduce negative impacts. Our Ac-
          tion Plans are adapted based on this exchange of information. (=4)
      f.	 Besides the system described above, we take specific measures so that vulnerable
          and marginalized groups can participate. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                    27
             3.	 We routinely work with the following organizations to improve our
                 environmental and social performance:
                  1. Local community groups
                  2. External consultants and experts
                  3. Organizations focused on workers’ issues
                  4. Organizations focused on environmental issues
                  5. Trade unions
                  6. International nongovernmental organizations
                  7. Other local and national nongovernmental organizations
                  8. Consumer groups
                  9. Government ministries
                  10. Industry associations


                 a.	 0 of the above (=0)
                 b.	 1 of the above (=1)
                 c.	 2 of the above (=2)
                 d.	 3 of the above (=3)
                 e.	 4 of the above (=4)
                  f.	 5 or more of the above (=5)




28   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
 ELEMENT 7



External Communications                                                                          Definitions:

and Grievance Mechanisms                                                                         Communication
                                                                                                 Channel – a way for
                                                                                                 different parties to
 1.	 If representatives of the local community complained that our com-                          share their thoughts
     pany was causing negative environmental and/or social impacts, we                           and opinions with
     would most likely respond as follows, based on our current practices:                       each other. A formal
                                                                                                 channel, such as a
      a.	 We do not deal with such groups. (=0)                                                  grievance mechanism
                                                                                                 or a message board, is
      b.	 We would request details from them and then handle it internally. (=1)
                                                                                                 structured and moni-
      c.	 We would meet with the group to discuss the negative impact and get their sug-         tored through official
                                                                                                 procedures; informal
          gestions on how to deal with the problem. (=2)
                                                                                                 channels, such as brief
      d.	 We would meet and coordinate with the group to investigate the problem and             chats on the workshop
          discuss the related Action Plans. (=3)                                                 floor, do not have a set
                                                                                                 structure or procedure
      e.	 We would meet and coordinate with the group to investigate the problem and             but can still be an
          develop, implement and monitor the related Action Plans. (=4)                          important part of com-
                                                                                                 munications.
      f.	 We routinely work with such groups on an ongoing basis to monitor and conduct
          root-cause analysis of negative impacts that affect the community and address
          them. (=5)


 2.	 The following best describes our external stakeholder grievance
     mechanism related to our ESMS:

      a.	 We do not have a grievance mechanism for external stakeholders. (=0)
      b.	 We have some channels to receive communications from external stakeholders,
          such as suggestion boxes, email, mail, phone or designated persons to record
          verbal complaints. (=1)
      c.	 We have communication channels such as those listed above. People can present
          confidential and anonymous complaints. (=2)
      d.	 Besides the communication channels described above, we have documented pro-
          cedures for collecting and investigating complaints, and for communicating back
          decisions taken. (=3)
      e.	 Besides the system described above, we make sure that our stakeholders under-
          stand how they can present a complaint and what will be the process to handle
          them. (=4)
      f.	 We have procedures covering all aspects of our grievance mechanism. We involve
          external stakeholders in reviewing its effectiveness and revising it as needed. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                      29
                                     7. External Communication and Grievance Mechanism



             3.	 At my company, handling inquiries, concerns or formal complaints
                 from external stakeholders is the day-to-day responsibility of:

                 a.	 It is unclear who at my company has this responsibility. (=0)

                 b.	 We have one person or one area of the company that usually handles this. (=1)

                 c.	 We have one person or one area of the company that manages this, and they coor-
                     dinate with other areas of the company relevant to particular cases. (=2)

                 d.	 We have a team of people that share this responsibility and have received specific
                     training. (=3)

                 e.	 We have a trained team that manages this, and senior management is directly
                     involved. (=4)

                  f.	 We have a trained team that includes senior management and has the author-
                      ity to make operational decisions to address external grievances. We reach out to
                      independent facilitators in case of serious complaints. (=5)




30   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
   ELEMENT 8


 Ongoing Reporting to
 Affected Communities
 1.	 If there are concerns or complaints from affected communities about
     environmental and/or social risks and impacts, we communicate with
     them in the following way:
      a.	 We do not communicate with anyone about our company’s operations. (=0)
      b.	 We acknowledge receipt of their request and tell them we will handle it internally.
          (=1)
      c.	 We respond if the affected community contacts us with a specific request for
          information. (=2)
      d.	 We provide the affected community with reports on a regular basis. (=3)
      e.	 We provide the affected community with a report in the local language and in an
          easily understandable format on a regular basis and any time there is a significant
          update. (=4)
      f.	 In addition to regular reports and updates as described above, the affected com-
          munity can access the current status of cases through a variety of communication
          channels. (=5)


 2.	 The following best describes the information that we report back to
     affected communities:
      a.	 We do not communicate with anyone about our company’s operations. (=0)
      b.	 We inform the individual or group that presented a grievance about the actions
          taken. (=1)
      c.	 We report to affected communities on our action plans and resolution of the is-
          sues identified during the stakeholder engagement process or through our griev-
          ance mechanism. (=2)
      d.	 We regularly report on the progress of our commitments, and on those aspects of
          our operations that have been identified as important by the affected communities
          (e.g. effluents, jobs created, etc.).  (=3)
      e.	 Besides reporting on the progress of our commitments and relevant aspects of our
          operations, we report on the outcomes and impacts of what we have put in place.
          (=4)
      f.	 We regularly report on the progress and impacts of our commitments, and rel-
          evant aspects of our operations.  Affected communities participate in the monitor-
          ing of the commitments and aspects that they have identified as important.(=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015           ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                 31
                                                     8. Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities



3.	 The following describes the channels that we use for reporting and
    receiving feedback from the affected community:
     1. Meetings (reporting out and receiving feedback)
     2. Website (reporting out)
     3. Dedicated email address (receiving feedback)
     4. Dedicated phone line (receiving feedback)
     5. Town hall (reporting out and receiving feedback)
     6. Presentations at forums, training workshops and conventions (reporting out)
     7. Written reports (reporting out)
     8. Direct mail (reporting out)
     9. Brochures, flyers, banners (reporting out)
     10. Advertisements in local publications (reporting out)
     11. Surveys (receiving feedback)


     a.	 0 of the above (=0)
     b.	 1 of the above (=1)
     c.	 2 of the above (=2)
     d.	 3 of the above (=3)
     e.	 4 of the above (=4)
     f.	 5 or more of the above (=5)




32     Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
    ELEMENT 9


   Monitoring and Review                                                                         Definitions:
                                                                                                 Monitor – to watch,
                                                                                                 keep track of, or check
 1.	 The following best describes our monitoring plan:                                           for environmental and
      a.	 Normally we do not have a requirement for monitoring our environmental and             social compliance.
          social (i.e. OHS, labor, community) performance. If a problem arises, people in        This can be through
          that area will monitor the situation. (=0)                                             on-site audits but
      b.	 We don’t have a monitoring plan but some information is recorded to verify our         also through methods
          compliance with legal requirements. (=1)                                               like document review,
                                                                                                 worker and stakeholder
      c.	 We have a monitoring plan for some of the critical areas selected by our managers
                                                                                                 interviews, etc.
          and supervisors. (=2)
      d.	 Our monitoring plan is linked to our environmental and social risk assessment,
          which is reviewed periodically. Monitoring is done for all areas having a potential    Corrective Action
          risk. (=3)                                                                             System – a system to
      e.	 Our monitoring plan covers all areas having a potential risk. Besides indicators,      put in place and track
          the plan includes procedures and assigned responsibilities for the recording, analy-   immediate and ongoing
                                                                                                 actions to address a
          sis, and reporting of results. (=4)
                                                                                                 compliance issue
      f.	 Besides the monitoring plan described above, we have trained internal or external
          auditors that conduct regular audits and inspections for which we have identified
          a set of environmental and social criteria. (=5)                                       Proactive – evaluating
                                                                                                 needs and acting before
                                                                                                 problems can occur,
 2.	 The following best describes how we use our monitoring results:
                                                                                                 instead of waiting to fix
      a.	 We do not monitor our environmental or social performance. (=0)                        them after they occur
      b.	 We only collect and analyze information to verify compliance with regulatory
          requirements. (=1)
      c.	 Besides verifying regulatory compliance, we track our environmental and social
          performance. (=2)
      d.	 Besides verifying regulatory compliance, we track our environmental and social
          performance. We identify areas of under-performance and take suitable correc-
          tive/preventive actions to address them. (=3)
      e.	 Besides verifying regulatory compliance, we track our environmental and social
          performance. We identify areas of under-performance and take suitable corrective/
          preventive actions to address them and continually improve our environmental
          and social management system. (=4)
      f.	 Besides the system described above, senior management sets annual improvement
          plans with progressive environmental and social performance targets. (=5)




Version 2.3   October 2015            ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide                      33
                                                                                 9. Monitoring and Review



             3.	 We use the following resources and methods to monitor our envi-
                 ronmental and social performance:
                 1. Use calibrated testing and measuring devices
                 2. Review documents and records (e.g. policies, procedures, employment contracts,
                 payslips, timecards, complaint logs, utility bills, water meter logs, records of purchased
                 chemicals, training records)
                 3. Review labor inspection records
                 4. Review environmental inspection records
                 5. Conduct physical inspections of our facility
                 6. Surveys and questionnaires
                 7. Talk to workers
                 8. Talk to managers and supervisors
                 9. Talk to affected communities
                 10. Ask customers to share guideance
                 11. Seek advice from external consultants and experts
                 a.	 We do not do not monitor our environmental and social performance. (=0)
                 b.	 We use 1-2 of the resources above. (=1)
                 c.	 We use 3-4 of the resources above. (=2)
                 d.	 We use 5-6 of the resources above. (=3)
                 e.	 We use 7-8 of the resources above.(=4)
                  f.	 We use 9 or more of the resources above. (=5)


             4.	 The following best describes senior management involvement in the
                 review of our environmental and social management system:
                 a.	 We do not monitor our environmental and social performance. (=0)
                 b.	 Monitoring results are handled by the managers of respective departments. Busi-
                     ness or operational planning is normally independent of environmental and social
                     performance results. (=1)
                 c.	 Senior management periodically receives information summarizing our environ-
                     mental and social performance and progress in the implementation of our action
                     plans. (=2)
                 d.	 Senior management regularly meets to review our environmental and social per-
                     formance and progress in the implementation of our action plans. (=3)
                 e.	 Senior management regularly meets to review the effectiveness of our environ-
                     mental and social management system. They analyze the areas of under-perfor-
                     mance and assign the necessary resources to take suitable corrective/preventive
                     actions. (=4)
                  f.	 Besides the management system review as described above, senior management
                      sets annual improvement plans with progressive environmental and social perfor-
                      mance targets and include them as an official part of our annual business planning
                      process. (=5)


34   Section I: ESMS Self-Assessment Questionnaire
                                     II
                             ESMS Improvement Guide


                             This section summarizes the ESMS elements
                             Maturity Levels (0-5).

                             For each ESMS element, we suggest Improvement
                             Tips to help you increase its maturity.


                             .




Version 2.3   October 2015        ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide   35
     USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS TO
     DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS

     The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you
     measure and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The illustration
     below shows how you can use these three publications in a cycle of con-
     tinual improvement.




                                                                                                        ESMS
                                                                                                      HANDBOOK
                                                                    •	   Understand the benefits of an
                                                                         ESMS
                                                 ESMS               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
                                                                         elements of an ESMS
                                               HANDBOOK


                                                                                  ESMS
                                                                                TOOLKIT &
                                                                               CASE STUDIES



                                                                 ESMS SELF-
                               ESMS
                                                               ASSESSMENT &
                              TOOLKIT
                                                               IMPROVEMENT
                                                                   GUIDE


                 •	   Use tools to implement              •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                      improvement plan                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                                               overall ESMS improvement plan




36      Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
            Welcome to the ESMS Improvement Guide.

            There are nine sections of the guide, one for each element in your ESMS:
            •	 Policy;
            •	 Identification of Risks and Impacts;
            •	 Management Programs;
            •	 Organizational Capacity and Competency;
            •	 Emergency Preparedness and Response;
            •	 Stakeholder Engagement;
            •	 External Communications and Grievance Mechanisms;
            •	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities; and
            •	 Monitoring and Review.

           Each section shows the maturity levels (0-5) for the specific ESMS element. Read
           “What Each Level Means,” and circle the level that corresponds to the score that
           you obtained in the Self-Assessment.  Also, read the “Improvement Tips” at each
  ESMS SELF-
           level – these suggest the means to move up one level.
ASSESSMENT &
IMPROVEMENTBased on your scores for each of the nine ESMS elements, choose which ones you
    GUIDE want to prioritize. Note any observations that you made as you completed the
           Self-Assessment. Note any actions that you want to put in place to improve. This
           is the start of your Improvement Plan.

            Gather input from others both inside and outside your company about ideas for
            improvement. The purpose of this Improvement Guide is to develop a step-by-
            step pathway to continual improvement. The goal is to improve your ESMS, for
            the benefit for your company, employees and stakeholders.

            Let’s get started.
            Company name:
            Name of person(s) completing the Self-Assessment: Title(s):
            Email address(es):
            Date:




           Version 2.3   October 2015    ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide         37
                               ELEMENT 1


                               Policy

         What each level means                      Improvement tips to move up one
                                                    level



5        E                                          S
            &S policies and procedures                 et more aggressive annual improve-
            clearly communicated internally            ment targets as part of business plan-
         and externally. Senior management          ning.
         commitment to continual improvement.       Share your policies and procedures with
                                                    your suppliers.




4        F                                          C
            ull set of E&S policies, procedures          reate an annual improvement plan.
            and records, centrally maintained and       Share leading practices with other
         routinely reviewed. Wide awareness in      companies.
         company.




3        P                                          C
            olicies and procedures in place              ommunicate to everyone in ALL lo-
            meeting selected E&S standards.              cal languages in use.
         Sporadic communication, implementation     Set a schedule for management review and
         and review.                                updates.




2        P                                          C
            olicies in place meeting selected E&S        entralize code, policies, procedures
            standards. Sporadic, conflicting or          and records.
         confusing procedures.                      Keep a log of updates.




1        L                                          E
           imited E&S policies in place.                xpand policies to address key E&S
                                                        risks in the industry and region.
                                                    Check for updates to local laws and regu-
                                                    lations and customer/investor codes.




0        N                                          A
             o E&S standards adopted. No                dopt an E&S policy statement.
             related policies and procedures.

                                                    Send CEO commitment letter to all em-
                                                    ployees.




    38    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       39
                                   ELEMENT 2


                                 Identification of Risks
                                 and Impacts
         What each level means                          Improvement tips to move up one


                                                                                                          5
                                                        level



5        M                                              E
               ature system, routinely reviewed             ngage all levels of company and external
               and updated as part of continual             stakeholders, evaluating risk assessment
         improvement plan. Internal and                 results against performance indicators.
         external inputs. Procedures extended to        Integrate into continual improvement plan.
         contractors, subcontractors, third parties     Include in business risk analysis and plan-
         and supply chain as relevant.                  ning.




4        S  ystematic, documented identification
            and prioritization of E&S risks and
         impacts. Routinely reviewed and
         updated across existing, new and
                                                        D     evelop and implement a procedure for
                                                              consulting with stakeholders to proac-
                                                        tively identify risks.
                                                        Develop and implement a procedure for
                                                        identifying risks in the supply chain.
                                                                                                          4
         changing activities. Wide awareness and
         engagement in company.




3        A                                              S
              wareness and engagement of staff              et a procedure, schedule and team for
                                                            conducting, reviewing and updating the



                                                                                                          3
              in identification and prioritization of
                                                        risk assessment. Include both facility and
         E&S risks and impacts. External experts
                                                        outsourced operations.
         involved as required.
                                                        Develop and implement a procedure for
                                                        involving workers in the risk assessment.


                                                        D
2        P   rocedures in place for identification of         evelop and implement a checklist of
             E&S risks and impacts across all key             key E&S risks based on good interna-
                                                        tional practices.  Conduct a process map-
         activities.



                                                                                                          2
                                                        ping.
                                                        Develop and implement a matrix to priori-
                                                        tize E&S risks across all key units.




1                                                       A   nalyze employee gender, age and ethnic
         B  asic identification and assessment of
            E&S risks and impacts, but limited to a
         few activities.
                                                            profiles to identify potential labor risks.
                                                        Develop a list of the communities that



                                                                                                          1
                                                        could be affected by facility operations.




                                                        I
0        N   o identification or assessment of E&S        dentify the five most common E&S risks
             risks and impacts.                           in industry and region.
                                                        Conduct a physical walk-through of your



                                                                                                          0
                                                        facility to see where these five most com-
                                                        mon risks might be relevant.




    40    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       41
                                   ELEMENT 3


                                 Management
                                 Programs
         What each level means                          Improvement tips to move up one
                                                        level



5        V                                              I
             erified progress against objectives          nclude external stakeholder feedback in
             and targets; significant improvements        reviewing and updating action plans and
         in E&S performance. Demonstrated               objectives and targets.
         commitment to continual improvement            Integrate into continual improvement plan.
         using annual improvement plans.                Include in business/operations planning.




4        R                                              L
             outine, consistent implementation of           ink action plans to ESMS improvements
             actions/activities to proactively manage       and operational changes.
         E&S risks and impacts. Measurable              Launch worker-manager pilot in a key risk
         company-wide objectives and targets.           area. Include key performance indicators.
         Periodic review and update.




3        A                                              I
              ctions/activities in place to manage       nclude root-cause analysis in develop-
              E&S risks and impacts, following the       ing action plans and provide training for
         mitigation hierarchy - Avoid, Minimize,        managers and worker reps.
         Offset/ Compensate. Proactive approach to      Set company-wide objectives and targets
         managing issues.                               and review progress against action plans.




2        P                                              I
            rocedures and assigned responsibilities       nclude managers from different depart-
            to address and mitigate E&S risks and         ments in creating and reviewing action
         impacts across all key activities. Primarily   plans.
         reactive.                                      Include the analysis of options to Avoid,
                                                        Minimize and Offset/Compensate in the
                                                        procedure for developing action plans.




1        A                                              D
             few informal programs or activities to          evelop an action plan template that
             mitigate E&S risks and impacts.                 includes the activity, deadline, person
                                                        responsible, operating procedures.
                                                        Start a central tracking log and assign some-
                                                        one to be responsible for organizing and
                                                        updating.




0        N                                              W
             o process for mitigating E&S risks and           rite and implement an action plan
             impacts                                          for addressing one key environmental
                                                        and one key community risk.
                                                        Write and implement an action plan for
                                                        addressing one key labor and one key OHS
                                                        risk.




    42    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       43
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
         What each level means                        Improvement tips to move up one
                                                      level

                                                                                                        5
5        A                                            H
              ll levels of the company are trained         elp suppliers to build organizational
              and engaged – multiple units and             capacity to manage E&S issues -
         workers as well as managers. E&S             develop a supplier orientation training and
         staff has implementation authority.
                                                      simple toolkits.
         Management commitment is reflected in        Rotate team members to involve more
         resources devoted to E&S management          people. Provide leadership, change man-



                                                                                                        4
                                                      agement and train-the-trainer training for
         and training.                                team, including worker reps.



4        M                                            D
               ultiple units have E&S                      evelop and implement annual ESMS
               responsibilities, and senior                resource allocation plan as part of an-
         management is involved. E&S is managed       nual business planning.
         as an integrated system. New staff           Increase decision-making authority for the
         receives some E&S management guidance.       team and add role to job description and



                                                                                                        3
                                                      performance review.




3        A                                            B
              ll levels of the company are involved       uild multi-departmental team and
              in awareness training. E&S roles and        implement a progressive annual training
         responsibilities are assigned and part of    plan covering ESMS improvement plan-
         daily operations. E&S staff is trained and
                                                      ning.
         competent.                                   Assign senior management to oversee the
                                                      team. Set team meeting and management
                                                      review schedule and procedures.



2        E                                            E
                                                                                                        2
             &S roles are defined and assigned.            xpand the new employee training to un-
             Each issue is handled only by one             derstand risk identification, action plans
         functional area. Some awareness training     and grievance mechanisms.
         is provided at orientation, and additional   Define roles and responsibilities for manag-
         training is provided for EHS staff.          ing E&S risks in all areas.  Assign and train
                                                      staff and worker representatives.  Conduct
                                                      refresher training for all employees.



1        N                                            A
              o assigned staff with E&S                   ssign and train key managers to monitor



                                                                                                        1
              management responsibilities. Some           E&S in key areas.
         limited awareness and E&S roles and
                                                      Assign and train a team leader to develop
         responsibilities starting to get defined.    and implement Action Plans.




0        N                                            D
             o internal awareness and no formally           isplay posters and announcements and
                                                            conduct a 20-minute orientation for



                                                                                                        0
             assigned responsibility for E&S.
                                                      all employees, explaining E&S policy state-
                                                      ment.
                                                      Consult external experts to identify risks
                                                      and develop Action Plans. Assign key man-
                                                      agers to observe.


    44    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       45
                                   ELEMENT 5


                                  Emergency Preparedness
                                  and Response
         What each level means                          Improvement tips to move up one
                                                        level



5        R                                              D
             egular engagement with local                    evelop shared resources and collective
             community and government for                    community response systems.
         onsite and offsite emergency plan.
                                                        Implement train-the-trainer programs so
         Formal resource-sharing agreements with        that workers can train their peers, families
         neighboring companies.                         and communities.




4        S                                              C
            enior management and all units                    onduct periodic consultations with the
            and shifts, including contract and                surrounding community to identify on-
         temporary workers, participate in              site and off-site emergency scenarios.
         emergency risk assessment, preparedness        Develop and implement external communi-
         planning and mock drills. Continual            cations channels and management system.
         improvement.




3        A                                              C
              ll onsite and off-site emergency               onduct worker surveys to measure
              issues have been identified, and an            awareness and to get ideas for weak
                                                        areas and improvement ideas.
         effective preparedness plan is in place. The
         emergency plan meets the local regulatory      Set a procedure and schedule for senior
         requirements and the local industry best       management review.
         practices




2        T                                              I
             he emergency preparedness plan is            nclude early warning systems and pre-
             in place, but there is no evidence           ventive actions as a required part of the
         of consistent implementation. Some             emergency management system.
         trainings are provided to the workers on       Conduct training, refresher training and
         emergency requirements.                        tests for all workers on early warning sys-
                                                        tems and preventive actions.




1        E                                              A
             mergency management planning is not            ssign and train an emergency manage-
             effective, as all emergency risks have         ment team to identify all key risks and
         not been identified. Occasional trainings
                                                        prepare response plans.
         are provided to workers.                       Conduct orientation and refresher training
                                                        for all workers on the response plans.




0        V                                              W
             ery limited emergency control and                ork with external experts to develop
             personal protective equipment. No                an emergency response plan for the
                                                        most common emergencies in your industry
         formal plan in place.
                                                        and area.
                                                        Develop and implement a schedule for
                                                        mock drills.




    46    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       47
                                   ELEMENT 6


                                  Stakeholder Engagement

         What each level means                        Improvement tips to move up one
                                                      level



5        S                                            I
             takeholder engagement is part of           nclude stakeholders in ESMS assess-
             regular activities. Awareness and          ment and improvement planning.
         engagement at senior levels. Fluent and
         inclusive communication and consultation     Launch worker-manager pilot with key
         process with stakeholders.                   stakeholders as facilitators.




4        M                                            S
               ultiple and ongoing public                et schedule and procedure for periodi-
               consultation and participation in a       cally updating stakeholder map and
         culturally appropriate manner. Stakeholder   engagements.
         feedback is actively considered. Reporting
         to communities and effective grievance       Include stakeholder participation in inter-
         mechanism is evidenced by formal records.    nal and external grievance mechanism.




3        S                                            C
             takeholders have been identified              onsult with key groups as part of risk
             and engaged in several events with            assessment process.
         effective dialogue. Some procedures and
         assigned responsibility for engaging with    Organize an open stakeholder meeting to
         stakeholders.                                discuss a common challenge.




2        S                                            A
             ome public events, limited ongoing           dd “proactive communication” to
             engagement process. Sporadic and             your procedure.
         selective responses when approached by
         stakeholders.
                                                      Document and track engagement efforts
                                                      and key discussion outputs.




1        L                                            D
           imited channels in place. A few                 evelop a map of key stakeholders.
           meetings and discussions, but not an
         ongoing process yet.
                                                      Write a policy and procedure for respond-
                                                      ing to stakeholders.




0        L                                            I
            ittle or no transparency with               dentify one key stakeholder for E&S
            stakeholders                                and start a dialogue about key risks.
                                                      Appoint a main contact person.




    48    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       49
                                ELEMENT 7


                                External Communications
                                and Grievance Mechanisms
         What each level means                         Improvement tips to move up one
                                                       level



5        P                                             F
            roactive and responsive                        ormalize involvement of key stake-
            communications and grievance                   holders in the procedures for receiv-
         mechanisms. Stakeholders are consulted        ing and handling complaints.
         on the effectiveness and are part of the
                                                       Provide training and tools to help suppli-
         regular review process.
                                                       ers to implement their own system.




4        E                                             E
              ffective grievance mechanism is              xtend your system to suppliers and
              evidenced by formal records. There           contractors.
         is routine review of records and the
                                                       Include complaints and resolutions in
         effectiveness of the program.
                                                       public reporting.



                                                       S
3
                                                           et schedule for senior management
         G     rievance mechanism is fully
               implemented; however there is not
         enough evidence of its effectiveness. No
                                                           and team to periodically review the
                                                       system and the cases.
         tracking of internal or external awareness;   Develop a system for logging, tracking
         limited tracking of cases.                    and analyzing complaints and resolu-
                                                       tions.



2        P                                             C
            rocedures and assigned responsibilities         ommunicate procedures to employ-
            for receiving and handling complaints.          ees and stakeholders.
         Awareness is limited to those directly
                                                       Conduct training for staff on how to
         handling the complaints.
                                                       manage the system.


         S  ome basic procedures for receiving
                                                       D    evelop a procedure for responding


1
            complaints. Responsibility limited to           to complaints.
         one person or unit.
                                                       Keep a log of complaints and responses.




         N   o mechanism in place.
                                                       D    evelop a procedure for receiving



0
                                                            complaints.
                                                       Assign and train a main responsible staff
                                                       person.




    50    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       51
                                ELEMENT 8


                                Ongoing Reporting to
                                Affected Communities
         What each level means                         Improvement tips to move up one
                                                       level



5        A                                             E
               ffected communities’ issues and             xpand reporting to include supply
               concerns are proactively addressed.         chain risks and impacts, management
         There is ongoing communication to avoid       and performance.
         risks and impacts before new projects, as
                                                       Provide training and tools to help suppli-
         well as to address existing issues.
                                                       ers implement their own reporting system.




4                                                      P ublish annual E&S reports following
         R    eporting to affected communities is
              regularly implemented and evidenced
         in documentation. Key units are involved
                                                         international leading practices, such as
                                                       GRI.
         in the review of the key issues.              Expand proactive consultation and report-
                                                       ing on risk assessments and avoidance be-
                                                       fore new projects, expansions and changes.



3        W                                             E
                hen applicable, consultation               xpand reporting to include perfor-
                processes have been implemented.           mance tracking and complaints.
         External consultants are involved as
                                                       Conduct routine consultations including
         required. No ongoing review.
                                                       affected communities, multiple depart-
                                                       ment managers and senior management.




2        P                                             C
            rocedures in place for reporting,               onsult with affected communities to
            usually assigned to E&S staff. Primarily        ask what reporting would be most
         reactive.                                     useful.
                                                       Develop multiple channels for reporting.




1        S                                             D
            ome basic communications with                    evelop a procedure and assign staff
            affected communities, mostly limited             for reporting to affected communi-
         to meetings.                                  ties on key risks and action plans.
                                                       Develop a simple reporting format and
                                                       centralized log.




0        N                                             I
             o reporting.                                 dentify one key stakeholder for E&S
                                                          issues and start a dialogue about key
                                                       risks.
                                                       Appoint a main contact person.




    52    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       53
                                      ELEMENT 9


                                     Monitoring and Review

         What each level means                          Improvement tips to move up one
                                                        level



5        R                                              F
             obust system of continual learning and         ormalize the involvement of key stake-
             improvement. Senior management                 holders in monitoring and review and
         receives periodic reports about E&S            related ESMS improvement planning
         performance and progress toward E&S
                                                        Integrate the results of supply chain moni-
         objectives and targets. All key project
                                                        toring and review into sourcing policies
         decisions consider E&S.
                                                        and supplier capacity-building programs.



4        M                                              A
               onitoring, supervising and auditing           pply the results of monitoring and
               activities are integrated and                 review to periodic review and update
         included in management review. Includes        of the ESMS improvement plan.
         consultation with workers, customers and
                                                        Extend the monitoring system to suppliers
         suppliers.
                                                        and contractors.




3                                                       T   rain and involve workers in the moni-
         R   outine review of monitoring and
             supervision activities, including
         participation of workers. Corrective actions
                                                            toring activities.
                                                        Include monitoring system and results in
         routinely implemented. An E&S internal         formal and periodic management review
         audit plan is in place.                        and updates of risk identification and
                                                        management programs.



2        K                                              D
             ey E&S monitoring plans in place, with          evelop and implement an internal
             inspection and supervision activities.          E&S audit procedure.
         Primarily reactive and guided by external
                                                        Set a schedule and assign staff to peri-
         experts, customers and investors.
                                                        odically review monitoring activities and
                                                        results.


                                                        D
1        F  ew monitoring plans to satisfy                    evelop a procedure for monitoring
            regulatory requirements. No formal                the most severe and/or most prob-
         review activities.                             able risks.
                                                        Appoint a team member to be in charge of
                                                        monitoring.


         N   o monitoring of E&S performance.
                                                        I dentify three key indicators for each of



0
                                                          the E&S risks identified.  
                                                        Develop a procedure for measuring the
                                                        three key indicators.




    54    Section II: ESMS Improvement Guide
                                                      Implementation priority in
                                                      the next three (3) months?
                                                           Yes            No



   OBSERVATIONS:




   ACTIONS:




Version 2.3   October 2015   ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide       55
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



October 2015
