UNDERSTANDING
BANK RECOVERY
AND RESOLUTION
IN THE EU:
A GUIDEBOOK
TO THE BRRD
Understanding Bank Recovery
and Resolution in the EU:
a Guidebook to the BRRD
Disclaimer
The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this book are entirely those of
the authors. They do not represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/The World Bank and its affiliated organizations or those of the affiliated
organizations of the authors. Although every effort was made to ensure that the information in
this book was correct at the time of publication, the authors and publisher do hereby disclaim
any liability to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions,
whether such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause.

Acknowledgements
The Guidebook was prepared under the coordination of Pamela Lintner (Senior Financial
Sector Specialist, FinSAC, The World Bank), with the outstanding assistance of
Johanna Lincoln (Consultant), Piotr Pyziak (Consultant), Andrew Godwin (Consultant),
Susan Schroeder (Consultant), and Nurgul Irsalieva (Assistant, The World Bank).
Special thanks goes to the Single Resolution Board, European Commission,
and European Banking Authority staff level for valuable comments on an earlier draft
of this Guidebook. Any errors are exclusively the authors’ (see disclaimer above).
Oversight was provided by Aurora Ferrari (Practice Manager, The World Bank) and
Katia D’Hulster (Lead Financial Sector Specialist and FinSAC Coordinator, The World Bank).

Graphic design by Johanna Roither, www.roither.info

printed by gugler* print



        Printed according to criteria documents of the austrian Eco-Label
       „printed products“. gugler* print, Melk, UWZ-Nr. 609, www.gugler.at




                                                    carbon positive printed




© April 2017
                                                                                         Contents




C ontents

Foreword	                                                                                       4
Introduction	                                                                                   5
Overview	                                                                                       9
List of Abbreviations	                                                                         14
Background, Rationale and Institutional set-up of Bank Resolution in the European Union	       16
	   Chapter 1: The BRRD as a Response to the Global Financial Crisis	                          16
	   Chapter 2: The EU Banking Union and the BRRD	                                              23
	   Chapter 3: The BRRD – an Overview of its Scope, Objectives, Powers and Tools	              29
	   Chapter 4: The Maintenance of Critical Functions as a Key Resolution Objective	            35
	   Chapter 5: The Resolution Authority: Governance and Conflicts of Interest 	                43
Recovery Planning and Early Intervention 	                                                     50
	   Chapter 6:Recovery Plans	                                                                  50
	   Chapter 7: Intra-group Financial Support Agreements (IGFSAs)	                              56
	   Chapter 8:Early Intervention Measures (EIM)	                                               62
	   Chapter 9: Precautionary Public Support – Exceptional Public Recapitalization
	   of a Solvent Bank	                                                                         67
Resolution Planning	                                                                           73
	 Chapter 10a: Resolution Plans	                                                               73
	 Chapter 10b: Resolvability Assessment	                                                       79
	 Chapter 11: The Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL)	           83
Preparation and Conditions for Taking Resolution Action	                                       92
	 Chapter 12: Valuation in Advance of Resolution	                                               92
	 Chapter 13: Write-down or Conversion of Capital (WDCC) Instruments 	                          99
	 Chapter 14: Conditions for Taking Resolution Action and the Adoption of a Resolution Scheme	 104
Resolution Tools and Legal Safeguards 	                                                        111
	   Chapter 15: The Bail-in Tool	                                                             111
	   Chapter 16: The Sale of Business Tool	                                                    121
	   Chapter 17: The Bridge Institution Tool (Bridge Bank)	                                    126
	   Chapter 18: The Asset Separation Tool- Asset Management Vehicle (AMV)	                    131
	   Chapter 19: The Government Stabilization Tools	                                           136
	   Chapter 20: Valuation of Difference in Treatment ex-post Resolution –
	   No Creditor Worse Off than under Liquidation (NCWOL)	                                     139
Resolution Financing	                                                                         143
	 Chapter 21a: Resolution Financing	                                                          143
	 Chapter 21b: Ex-ante Financed Resolution Funds	                                             148
	 Chapter 22: Use of Deposit Guarantee Schemes under Resolution	                              153
Judicial Review	                                                                              159
	 Chapter 23: Judicial Review of Resolution Action	                                           159
Annexes	164
	 Annex 1: Crisis Management and Communications	                                              164
	 Annex 2: Overview of National Options 	                                                     167
	 Annex 3: Overview of State Aid in the Financial Sector and Bank Resolution	                 168
Authors	176

                                                                                                 3
foreword




Foreword


When a company turns insolvent, it should exit the market in an orderly manner, and should not be
allowed to destroy economic wealth on a continuing basis. This is a precondition of a functioning
market economy, and should also apply to failing financial institutions. The financial crisis, howe-
ver, demonstrated that, when it comes to creative destruction, banks are different. Failing financial
institutions were kept on life support, and the hospital bills were sent to the taxpayer. This was done
because Europe wanted to avoid the unpalatable alternative of witnessing a re-run of Lehman Bro-
thers. Lehman showed that the insolvency of a large or interconnected financial institution can result
in a full-blown meltdown of the entire industry. A lack of appropriate tools for the resolution of banks
resulted in the necessity to resort to public funds to maintain financial stability.

Europe has shown its determination to remedy this unsatisfactory situation. The clear goal was that
taxpayers should no longer be liable to bail out troubled institutions. In response to the crisis, the
European legislator took the necessary steps and established a toolkit that allows the orderly resolu-
tion of banks without compromising financial stability, and without resorting to public funds. The
Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) became one of the most important building blocks
of the Banking Union.

New rules need to be analysed, interpreted and put into context. This guide will make an important
contribution to connecting the theoretical underpinnings of the BRRD with its practical application.
To ask questions is the first step to gaining knowledge. Therefore, every chapter of this Guidebook asks
the key questions first. In this way, it guides readers through the complex issues and helps them to
understand how the new recovery and resolution regime works. The Guidebook does not limit itself to
merely describing the new regulatory framework. It also presents the first, and still developing, cases
of application.

This Guidebook has benefited from the valuable contributions and insights of numerous experts. Its
publication forms part of the research activities of the Financial Sector Advisory Center (FinSAC). Fin-
SAC was established 2011 in Vienna with the financial support of the Austrian Ministry of Finance.
The Program aims to provide financial sector reform advice and implementation assistance to client
countries in the European and Central Asia region. The Center of Expertise is part of the World Bank
Global Practice “Finance and Markets” and has managed to become a renowned regional “knowledge
center” that specifically responds to client demand in matters pertaining to the financial sector, its
supervision and its stability. The Guidebook provides an early stocktaking exercise of the new recovery
and resolution tools. We hope it will be helpful in establishing a sound financial sector environment in
which problem banks can be allowed to fail safely.



Harald Waiglein
Director General, Economic Policy and Financial Markets,
Federal Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Austria




4
                                                                                                                                          INtroduction




I ntrod u ction


The 2007 financial crisis has exposed major weaknesses in global financial systems, including the
threat to financial stability posed by banks that were too big, interconnected and complex to be closed
or go bankrupt1. As a result, many banks have been rescued using public support, allowing for an unin-
terrupted provision of their services, but effectively shifting (most) of their losses to taxpayers instead
of banks’ owners or investors.

The political realities following the bail-out of banks called for game-changing regulation to reduce
both the likelihood and the impact of failure. Together with higher capital and liquidity requirements,
the enhancement of resolution regimes was a central element of the international regulatory response
to increase banks’ resilience. The Financial Stability Board’s Key Attributes of Effective Resolution
Regimes for Financial Institutions (KA), endorsed by the G20 in 2011, provide the new harmonized
international standard for resolution regimes for financial institutions. The KA, although focused on
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), serve as guidance to jurisdictions that are adopting or
amending national resolution regimes. The key objectives are relevant for domestic key players in the
EU just as European legislation is relevant for FinSAC client countries which host EU banks (that may
be significant in terms of the local market but small relative to the parent bank's operations).

Within the European Union (EU), more than 40 legislative and non-legislative measures were adop-
ted in the wake of the financial crisis. The EU was a forerunner in implementing the KA especially
in terms of the bail-in tool. A new framework for dealing with failing banks, the Bank Recovery and
Resolution Directive (BRRD) was agreed in 2014, for national implementation as of January 2015. The
BRRD translates the KA in the EU context and provides for a harmonized framework and enhanced
cooperation for bank resolution in the EU. It builds on other EU legislation, such as the capital ade-
quacy requirements for banks (CRR/CRD), the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR), the
Deposit Guarantee Scheme Directive (DGSD), and EU state aid rules2, as a cornerstone and potential
game-changer in creating a more stable and fairer banking system that serves the economy at large.

The BRRD regulates the different stages and elements of a problem bank’s recovery and resolution
process, including advanced planning and restructuring. It rests upon the following key elements:

–	 Recovery and resolution planning including the removal of obstacles to resolvability;
–	 An enhanced set of early intervention measures to foster forward looking supervision and crisis
   prevention;
–	 A harmonized set of resolution tools and powers to manage bank failure, aiming to ensure that
   losses are absorbed by shareholders and creditors while allowing the continuity of critical functions.
   The four main resolution tools are the:
   1.	Bail-in tool: ensuring that losses are absorbed by shareholders and creditors.
   2	 Sale of business tool: allowing the resolution authority to sell all or part of the failing bank to a
      private acquirer.



	 Commonly referred to as the “too big to fail” problem.
1

	 Other jurisdictions considering alignment with the EU resolution framework should take account of the full breadth of EU legislation.
2




                                                                                                                                                     5
INtroduction




   3.	Bridge institution tool: transferring the good assets and essential functions of the problem bank
      into a new temporary institution (bridge bank) with the aim of selling it.
   4.	The asset separation tool: isolating the “bad” assets of the bank in an asset management vehicle for
      orderly wind down, if immediate liquidation is not justified in current market conditions.
–	 The limitation of government support, only foreseen as a last resort under special circumstances;
–	 An ex-ante resolution funding sourced from bank contributions to ensure the implementation of
   resolution tools when preconditions are met;
–	 An enhanced cooperation between Member States as well as with authorities in third countries in
   all phases of preparation, intervention and resolution (via resolution colleges).

Notably the BRRD resolution toolkit is applied only if justified by public interest i.e. to systemically
important banks to ensure the continuation of their critical functions (see chapter 14); the BRRD does
not regulate bankruptcy or insolvency law which remain in the national competence as an alternative
to resolution or alongside resolution (to liquidate the rump left behind). When undertaking national
reform of bank resolution frameworks it is advisable to allow some resolution powers and respective
safeguards to also be applied for non-systemic banks. The sale of business tool and the bridge bank
tool (to allow, for example, the transfer of several small banks into a bridge bank) should be available
for non-public interest banks as part of a bank liquidation/bankruptcy regime.

The objectives and target audience for the BRRD Guidebook
The BRRD is the outcome of a long negotiation process.3 The new bank recovery and resolution frame-
work has wide reaching implications, both within the EU but also for countries with banking relati-
onships with the EU. This Guidebook aims to explain the scope, the principles, and the rationale of the
BRRD4 and related secondary legislation and guidance.5 Expert contributors, including lawyers and
academics, share in this Guidebook their experience of and insights to the BRRD negotiation process,
recovery and resolution planning, adoption of resolution decisions and the negotiation of bail-in. The
Guidebook also raises awareness of discretionary or non-regulated areas and provides some initial
thoughts for further development and possible implementation challenges. These challenges include
but are not limited to the management of potential conflict of interests, the application of the public
interest test, the choice of resolution tools, and the interaction between cross-border regulations.

The Guidebook has been prepared by the World Bank Financial Sector Advisory Center (FinSAC), a dedi-
cated technical unit of the Finance & Markets Global Practice that delivers policy and technical advice
and analytical services to client countries in Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region.6 The Guidebook
aims to assist FinSAC’s client countries in the process of reforming and aligning their national resolu-
tion frameworks with international good practice and with the EU acquis communautaire. It outlines
the main provisions, underlying concepts, and practical consequences of the new EU regime; assists
with the identification of gaps and overlaps of existing resolution frameworks, taking into account
regional characteristics; and highlights key implementation challenges. The Guidebook should not be

3
 	 After formal consensus was reached in 2014 political reluctance and technical uncertainties prevailed in several Member States. This delayed the
   implementation and triggered the referral of six Member States to the European Court of Justice for failing to transpose the BRRD into national law
   within the established timeframe.
4
 	 While the scope of the BRRD extends to big investment firms and banks, this Guidebook focuses on banks and does not address the peculiarities
   associated with investment firms.
5
 	 At the time of publication, around 40 standards and guidelines have been adopted by EBA and/or the European Commission
6
 	 FinSAC client countries include: Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Georgia, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia,
   Moldova, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia and Ukraine.

6
                                                                                                                                      INtroduction




read as a legal interpretation of the BRRD, nor is it intended to promote the adoption of a particular
approach or suggest that “one-size-fits-all”, but rather it outlines possible scenarios, and general con-
siderations and factors to be addressed. In this way it seeks be a useful tool for international financial
institutions and countries in other parts of the world seeking closer cooperation with the EU or aiming
to strengthen their understanding of the European framework.

Timing and the added value in developing new agendas 	
The publication of this Guidebook is timely as the BRRD, though already more than a year old, intro-
duces some challenging new concepts which will take time to operationalize and show effects. By way
of example, the Single Resolution Board (SRB), which deals with the resolution of banks within the
euro area, only became operational in January 2016 and is still in the process of drafting resolution
plans and setting the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) for the
banks under its purview. The resolution planning process, including whether to follow single or mul-
tiple point of entry approaches, will fundamentally impact banks’ target set-ups in going concern, and
affect subsidiaries of EU banking groups in FinSAC client countries. Furthermore, the development of
a resolution framework is a dynamic process and adoption of the legal framework is only a starting
point, though a strong one in terms of improving market discipline. The soundness of the resolution
framework will depend on proper implementation of the powers and their actual use.7

In addition to explaining the legislation and the associated issues, the Guidebook raises awareness of
discretionary or non-regulated areas and provides some initial thoughts for further development and
possible implementation challenges. These challenges include but are not limited to:

–	Establishment of an independent resolution authority often within the supervisory authority and
  the management of possible conflict of interests.
–	Removal of impediments for resolution or liquidation and the recognition of resolution as a going
  concern task.
–	Justifying resolution action under the public interest test rather than applying regular insolvency
  proceedings.
–	The choice between resolution tools, the application of moratoria and a realistic “resolution valua-
  tion”. The lack of a clear creditor hierarchy for MREL holders and differences in national insolvency
  regulations in particular may increase the asymmetry among countries and even affect the calcu-
  lation of the no creditor worse off than under liquidation (NCWOL) safeguard test (thereby limiting
  the effectiveness of the bail-in tool).
–	The operationalization of bail-in and contagion effects. For banks that depend heavily on depo-
  sit financing, or when bail-in affects retail investors (due to prior misselling and legacy problems),
  strict bail-in requirements could themselves become a source of financial instability if insufficient
  high-quality loss absorbing instruments are available. In addition, governance problems may arise
  when bondholders are bailed-in and become shareholders, particularly in countries where related
  parties constitute a high percentage of bondholders and issues concerning the fit and proper test for
  bank ownership come into play.
–	The financing of resolution action and ensuring the liquidity of a problem bank and its long term
  viability (without public support). In that regards also the limitations of deposit guarantee sche-
  mes (DGS) should be acknowledged. The super preference attributed to DGS under the insolvency


	 The FSB adopted the Key Attributes Assessment Methodology for the Banking Sector in October 2016 which set out the essential criteria to guide the
7

  assessment of the compliance of a jurisdiction’s bank resolution frameworks with the FSB’s ‘Key Attributes’.

                                                                                                                                                       7
INtroduction




  ranking (above uninsured depositors), means their impact on resolution is likely to be marginal in
  cases where a very high recovery rate is expected and where the DGS role is essentially limited to acting
  as a liquidity provider under (hypothetical ) liquidation.
–	Cross-border cooperation and recognition of foreign resolution actions and bail-in instruments will
  be crucial to the success of resolution regimes. The new European framework promotes cross-border
  cooperation and information-sharing but is still largely based on cooperation (as opposed to centra-
  lization in the euro area). Cooperation could be hampered by differences in national implementation.
  Moreover, non-binding agreements and ex-ante understandings without legal enforcement mecha-
  nisms could create a false sense of security. For example, individual authorities may deviate from an
  agreed group cross-border resolution plan when the actual resolution scheme is decided.
–	It is crucial to remember that any resolution regime can only achieve its purpose if banks are actually
  resolvable and if the costs associated with bank failure do not fall upon the public/taxpayer. The sover-
  eign-bank nexus – namely, the mutual reinforcement and dependency between banks and govern-
  ments that have impeded bank resolution in the past – is not per se broken by tools such as bail-in
  (although, depending on the liability holders, it should contribute to weakening the nexus as banks
  become more self-sufficient in resolving their financial difficulties).

Accompanying publication: “Bank Resolution and “bail-in” in the EU: Selected case studies pre and
post BRRD”
To better illustrate the complexities and challenges of failing banks, FinSAC have gathered a selection of
case studies (attached to this Guidebook) which detail how some EU countries approached resolution in
the wake of the financial crisis. Most of these cases took place before adoption of the BRRD and highlight
the gradual transition from publicly funded bail-out to statutory private loss absorption outside liqui-
dation (via bail-in). The case studies provide examples of different measures used to deal with distressed
financial institutions, and mitigate the impact on financial stability. Some cases also discuss what might
have been different had the BRRD framework already been in place.

Concluding remarks
The BRRD (building upon the KA) creates a comprehensive and powerful framework for the resolution
of financial institutions. It promotes a forward looking approach to supervision, with early and timely
intervention measures, the removal of impediments to resolution under going concern ensuring that an
entity is actually “resolvable”, when circumstances require. By making failure possible, the BRRD aims
to reduce the need for public support, boosting sustainable market economies and creating positive
effects for civil society. By removing the implicit government guarantee, it also helps to increase banks
accountability towards their customers, clients and investors encouraging better risk management and
financial strength. As such, the BRRD serves as a robust benchmark for accession countries and the wider
ECA region.8

The Guidebook, together with the accompanying case studies, should help FinSAC client countries under-
stand the resolution process and identify the impact that the BRRD will have on their own financial sys-
tems. In this respect, the FinSAC team of dedicated experts will continue to support its client countries
to: i) assess local law for bank resolution against international good practice; ii) assist in the strategic
analysis on the possible design and effects of new tools especially bail-in; iii) draft legal requirements
for the revised banking recovery and resolution frameworks; iv) raise awareness and share knowledge of


	 Most of FinSAC client countries host EU banks. These banks may in some case be significant in the local markets, even though they are small relative to
8

  the parent bank's operations

8
                                                                                                    overview




new tools and changes to the law amongst principal authorities; and v) test the new framework via crisis
simulation exercises. The establishment and maintenance of resolution frameworks will be resource
and cost intensive for both, banks and authorities, and the assignment of proper and qualified staffing
to deal with the new framework a pre-requisite and a condition for success.



Pamela Lintner
Senior Financial Sector Specialist, FinSAC, The World Bank




overview

The topics covered by this Guidebook are divided into six parts.
This overview provides an outline of each part and chapter.



   Chapter	Outline
   The Background, Rationale and Institutional Set-up of Bank Resolution in the EU
   1	       The BRRD as a response to the global financial crisis
   	        Chapter 1 outlines the reasons behind the 2007/08 financial crisis and places the BRRD
            within the context of the broader regulatory response to the crisis.
   2	       EU Banking Union and the BRRD
   	        Regulatory answers to the financial turmoil in the European Union are described in
            chapter 2, putting the BRRD within perspective of the EU Banking Union. The Banking
            Union builds upon a centralized system for the euro area with banking supervision
            attributed to the European Central Bank (ECB) and a centralized resolution scheme with
            the Single Resolution Board (SRB) at its heart.
   3	       An overview of the BRRD’s scope, objectives, powers and tools
   	        Chapter 3 outlines the scope, objectives and powers of the new resolution framework.
            It examines why normal insolvency proceedings are unsuitable for banks and what is so
            special about the new regulatory resolution schemes post-crisis.
   4	       The maintenance of critical functions as a key resolution objective
   	        The continuity of critical functions as a key resolution objective is examined in more
            detail in chapter 4. It describes the criteria for identifying and mapping critical banking
            functions to the real economy and financial markets.
   5	       The resolution authority: governance, conflicts of interest and financing
   	        Chapter 5 discusses which authority should be designated for taking resolution action
            and how to strike a balance between resolution and supervisory and other authorities in
            terms of cooperation and information-sharing, while at the same time ensuring their
            operational and functional independence. In cases where the resolution powers are vested
            in the same authority that is responsible for supervision, some minimum requirements
            for managing possible conflicts of interests are identified.


                                                                                                          9
overview




     Recovery Planning and Early Intervention
     6	    Recovery plans
     	     The post crisis resolution framework requires banks to draw up recovery plans setting
           out measures that can be executed in the event of a deterioration of their financial
           situation in order to restore their viability and return to "business as usual." 	
           Chapter 6 stresses the importance of recovery planning as a robust governance tool and
           outlines the practical aspects that  authorities should take into account to assess the
           effectiveness of such plans. 
     7	    Intra-group financial support agreements (IGFSAs)
     	     Intra-group financial support agreements are a preventative tool recognized in the BRRD
           to strengthen the financial position of groups. They allow participating institutions that
           experience financial difficulties to receive financial support, for example in the form of
           loans, guarantees, or the provision of assets for use as collateral in transactions, from
           other participating entities – subject to approval by the supervisory authorities and
           the shareholders of each entity that is party to the agreement. Chapter 7 describes the
           conditions, safeguards and the limited regulatory incentives to enter into IGFSAs.
     8	    Early intervention measures (EIM)
     	     While recovery planning is in the hands of the banks, supervisory authorities are
           empowered to take early intervention measures to ensure that financial difficulties are
           addressed as soon as they arise. Chapter 8 explains the importance of early intervention
           measures by supervisors in cooperation with resolution authorities when there is a
           significant deterioration in an institution’s financial condition and when it does not meet
           or is likely to be in breach of regulatory requirements including capital requirements.
     9	    Precautionary Public Support – Exceptional Public Recapitalization of a Solvent Bank
     	     Chapter 9 elaborates how government support, for example in the form of precautionary
           recapitalization, can be provided to an otherwise solvent bank without taking resolution
           action while complying with the EU state aid requirements.

     Resolution Planning
     10a	 Resolution plans
     	    How to prepare for taking resolution action in case of need is described in chapter 10a.
          Resolution authorities are required to draw up resolution plans laying out how to deal
          with a failing bank which is no longer viable and specifying the application of possible
          resolution tools and ways to ensure the continuity of critical functions.
     10b	 Resolvability assessment
     	    Planning for resolution includes the assessment of whether a bank is actually resolvable
          via liquidation (as the default option) or via resolution under the so called “resolvability
          assessment”. This is outlined in chapter 10b. If authorities identify obstacles to
          resolvability in the course of this planning process they can require a bank to change its
          legal or operational structures to ensure that it can be resolved with the available tools in
          a way that does not compromise critical functions, threaten financial stability, or involve
          costs to the taxpayer.
     11	   The minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL)	
     	     Resolution planning further involves the definition of MREL i.e. the loss absorbing
           capacity each bank must have to facilitate bail-in in the form of high quality instruments


10
                                                                                                   overview




       which, when triggered, would not create contagion or negative effects in the real
       economy. The MREL is a new regulatory ratio conceptually similar to the total loss-
       absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirement of the Financial Stability Board, both of which are
       outlined in chapter 11.

Preparation and Conditions for Taking Resolution Action
12	    Valuation in advance of resolution (ex-ante)
	      The independent valuation of a bank’s assets and liabilities plays a key role in the
       different stages of the resolution process as outlined in Chapter 12. The first step is
       for the resolution authority to decide whether a bank is failing or likely to fail (FOLTF)
       after resolution is triggered by the supervisory authority. In a second step a “resolution
       valuation” informs the selection of the most appropriate resolution tools and ensures
       that any losses on the assets are fully recognized at the point of resolution to define the
       adequate amount of bail-in and transfer prices. In addition an estimate on the losses
       under hypothetical liquidation is to be provided in light of the NCWOL test. The chapter
       stresses challenges of ensuring timely valuation and highlights differences from book
       values and also from pure accounting and prudential values.
13	    Write-down or conversion of capital (WDCC) instruments
	      Chapter 13 describes the power to write down or convert capital instruments (WDCC),
       which can be applied by the resolution or supervisory authority outside resolution at the
       point of non–viability without the need for a public interest test. In addition, the chapter
       describes how the use of CoCo Bonds i.e. contingent convertible bonds can act as a loss-
       absorber outside the legal BRRD framework.
 14	   Conditions for taking resolution action and the adoption of a resolution scheme
	      Resolution takes place if the preventive and early intervention measures or WDCC outside
       resolution fail to restore the bank (though there is no condition of prior EIM intervention).
       Liquidation under national insolvency proceedings is the standard procedure for a failing
       bank and taking resolution action must be justified in the public interest. Chapter 14
       elaborates on the responsibilities and conditions for taking resolution action and the
       BRRD’s rather wide discretion in defining public interest. It also outlines the process for
       adopting a group resolution scheme under the BRRD as well as under the single resolution
       mechanism of the euro area.

Resolution Tools and Legal Safeguards
Chapters 15 to 20 describe the minimum set of resolution tools provided for under the BRRD
and elaborate on matters to be considered when deciding on the choice of resolution tools,
all of which can be applied without the consent of owners and creditors. No ranking of the
best resolution tool is stipulated as the application of resolution tools is strongly related to the
resolution strategy developed on a case by case basis.
15	    The bail-in tool
	      Bail-in allows a reduction in the liability side of the bank to close the asset-liability gap. It
       implies the write-down or dilution of equity or other instruments of ownership and the
       recapitalization of the entity emerging from resolution via write down and conversion
       of creditors. Bail-in can either be applied on a stand-alone basis (open bank bail-in tool,
       e.g. where complexity and interconnectedness make it impossible to apply a transfer


                                                                                                           11
overview




            tool or where in light of TBTF and/or competition aspects a transfer is not feasible) or in
            combination with other resolution tools. Chapter 15 elaborates on the scope of bail-in,
            possible exclusions, cross-border issues as well as the prior 8 % requirement before the
            use of public support and the Resolution fund is allowed.
     16	    The sale of business tool
     	      The BRDD does not single out a preferred resolution option. However, resolution by
            way of a transfer to a private acquirer (sale of business tool) might often be a favored
            resolution option, if a purchaser can be found (possibly in combination with loss
            absorbance via bail-in). Chapter 16 describes the different phase of a sales process and the
            challenges in applying a standardized transparent marketing process.
     17	    The bridge institution tool (Bridge Bank)	
     	      Chapter 17 explains the use of a Bridge Bank as a temporary institution allowing the
            continued provision of essential services by a failing bank without the need for bail-out
            by public funds. This gives authorities time to find a buyer, reorganize the bank, or wind
            down parts of its business in an orderly manner. The remaining part of the old bank with
            the “bad” or non-essential functions will regularly be liquidated under normal national
            insolvency proceedings.
     18	    The asset separation tool/asset management vehicle (AMV)
     	      The asset separation tool cleans the balance sheet of a bank. In order to prevent this tool
            from being used solely as a state aid measure, the framework prescribes that it may be
            used only in conjunction with another tool (Bridge Bank, sale of business or write-down).
            Chapter 18 elaborates on the justifying conditions for the creation of an AMV, as well as
            on the challenges of managing one.
     19 	   The government stabilization tool and public support
     	      Though the key objective of new resolution tools is the protection of public funds, the
            BRRD does not fully prohibit the use of public money, as outlined in Chapter 19. Instead
            it controls and limits its use to a tool of last resort that should only be used in exceptional
            circumstances of systemic crises and after all resolution tools and resolution financing
            schemes have been exhausted. In these cases prior 8 % bail-in of shareholders and
            creditors will be required.
     20	    Valuation ex-post resolution – no creditor worse off than under liquidation (NCWOL)
     	      The interference in the property rights of shareholders and creditors that the new
            resolution tools entail must be justified by the overriding need to intervene in the “public
            interest”. Legal safeguards ensure that resolution tools are not improperly used. The
            key safeguard and benchmark in justifying the application of statutory power by the
            resolution authority is the comparison of actual losses under resolution with losses under
            a hypothetical liquidation; the so called “no creditor worse off than under liquidation”
            (NCWOL) principle. Chapter 20 describes the key elements of this fiduciary ex-post
            insolvency valuation and refers to first experiences gained under the Austrian and Danish
            resolution cases.

     Resolution Financing and Judicial Review
     21a	 Resolution financing
     	    Chapter 21a deals with the setting up of ex-ante resolution financing arrangements
          through contributions from banks that are proportionate to their liabilities and risk


12
                                                                                               overview




      profiles in each Member State and the Single Resolution Fund for the euro area members.
      The funds are exclusively used for supporting orderly reorganization and resolution but
      not to bail out and recapitalize a failing bank. In general (in)direct loss-absorption is only
      allowed after 8 % bail-in by shareholders and creditors.
21b	 The resolution fund
	    Chapter 21b outlines the purpose, structure and use of the resolution fund and alternative
     financing resources, also touching upon financing in cross-border resolutions. Banks and
     investment firms that are within the scope of the BRRD, and branches of third-country
     banks and investment firms established in a Member State, are obliged to contribute to
     national resolution funds. Within the euro area, from 2016, these are replaced by the
     Single Resolution Fund, part of the Single Resolution Mechanism (see chapter 2).
22	   Use of deposit guarantee schemes for resolution
	     The compulsory contribution to, and conditions for using, Deposit Guarantee Schemes
      (DGS) money for resolution purposes are elaborated in chapter 22.
23	   Judicial Review of Resolution Action	
	     Chapter 23 describes and elaborates on the judicial review of resolution action under the
      BRRD, which, in line with international best practice, is mainly administrative based and
      the role of the judiciary is largely limited to an ex-post assessment.
Annexes
1	    Crisis management and communications
	     Maintaining public confidence in financial stability is an essential part of handling
      troubled banks and the application of resolution tools. Annex 1 considers the key elements
      of an effective communication strategy which should be developed as part of resolution
      planning and elaborated as necessary during application of resolution tools.
2	    List of national options
	     Annex 2 gives an overview of the national options provided for in the BRRD.
3	    Overview on State aid and Bank Resolution




                                                                                                       13
List of Abbreviations




L ist of Abbreviations


AMV	                    Asset management vehicle
AT1	                    Additional Tier 1 capital
Atlas	                  Shareholder of last resort
AQR	                    Asset Quality Review
BAMC	                   Slovenian Bank Asset Management Company
BES	                    Banco Espírito Santo S.A.
BIS	                    Bank for International Settlements
BoE	                    Bank of England
BOC	                    Bank of Cyprus
BRRD 	                  Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive
CCPs	                   Central Counterparties
CDS	                    Credit default swaps
CET1	                   Common Equity Tier 1 Capital
CJEU	                   Court of Justice of the European Union
CoCo Bonds	             Contingent Convertible Bond
CRA	                    Credit Rating Agencies
CRD IV/CRR	             The EU Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV) and Regulation (CRR)
CSDs	                   Central Securities Depositories
DGS	                    Deposit Guarantee Schemes
DGSD	                   EU Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive
DIA	                    Deposit Insurance Agency
DIF	                    Depositors Insurance Fund
DNB	                    Central Bank of the Netherlands
EBA	                    European Banking Authority
ECB	                    European Central Bank
EDIS	                   European Deposit Insurance Scheme
EIM	                    Early Intervention Measures
ELA	                    Emergency Liquidity Assistance
EMU	                    Economic and Monetary Union
ESM	                    European Stability Mechanism
EU	                     European Union
EUR	                    Euro
FOLTF	                  Failing or Likely to Fail
FROB	                   Spanish Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring
FSB	                    Financial Stability Board
FSC	                    Danish Financial Stability Company
GACS	                   Italian guarantee scheme on non-performing loans
GDP	                    Gross Domestic Product
G-SIB	                  Global Systemically Important Banks
G-SIFI	                 Global Systemically Important (Financial) Institutions
HaaSanG	                The Austrian Federal Act on Restructuring Measures
                        for Hypo-Alpe-Adria-Bank International AG
IADI	                   International Association of Deposit Insurers


14
                                                                       List of Abbreviations




IGFSA	   Intra Group Financial Support Agreement
IMF	     International Monetary Fund
IPO	     Initial Public Offering
IPS	     Institutional Protection Schemes
ISDA	    International Swaps and Derivatives Association
IT	      Information Technology
JST	     Joint Supervisory Teams
LCR	     Liquidity Coverage Ratio
LT2	     Lower Tier 2 Capital
M&A	     Mergers and Acquisitions
MiFID	   EU Markets in Financial Instruments Directive
MPE	     Multiple Points of Entry
MREL	    Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities
MoF	     Ministry of Finance
NCWOL	   No Creditor Worse Off than in Liquidation
NCA	     National Competent Authorities (National Supervisory Authorities)
NDA	     Non-disclosure Agreement
NPL	     Non-performing Loans
NRA	     National Resolution Authorities
NSFR	    Net Stable Funding Ratio
O-SII	   Other Systemically Important Institution
PONV	    Point of Non-viability
PRA	     Prudential Regulation Authority
RTS	     Regulatory technical standards
RWA	     Risk-weighted Assets
SLE	     Subordinated Liability Exercises
SPE	     Single Point of Entry
SPV	     Special Purpose Vehicle
SRB	     Single Resolution Board
SREP	    Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process
SRF	     Single Resolution Fund
SRM	     Single Resolution Mechanism
SSM	     Single Supervisory Mechanism
T2	      Tier 2 Capital
TBTF	    Too Big to Fail Institutions
TLAC	    Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity
WDCC	    Write down or conversion of capital




                                                                                          15
Chapter 1




Background, Rationale
and Institutional set-up
of Bank Resolution
in the European Union

Chapter 1:
The BRRD as a Response to
the Global Financial Crisis
                            By Anastasia Gromova-Schneider



                            Key questions
                            –	 What led to governments intervening to stabilize markets during the
                               2007–2009 global financial crisis?
                            –	 Why did the euro area crisis follow the global financial crisis?
                            –	 What lessons were learnt from the crises?
                            –	 How does regulatory reform address issues of
                               “too big/too interconnected to fail”?



The BRRD is to be read as   The BRRD as a Response to the Financial Crisis
a response to the global    The global financial crisis, which began in 2007–2009, is still being dige-
financial crisis in the
                            sted by many economies. It revealed a lack of clarity about how to react to a
context of the broader
regulatory post crisis
                            distressed banking sector, and serious shortcomings in the tools available
framework.                  to deal with failing banks without interrupting the provision of syste-
                            mically critical functions to customers and the economy at large. Much
                            work has been done nationally and internationally since then to develop
                            comprehensive bank recovery and resolution regimes, including the 2010
                            Dodd-Frank Act in the US and the European Union’s Bank Recovery and
                            Resolution Directive (BRRD), adopted in 2014. The new post-crisis resolu-
                            tion framework essentially aims to regulate how banks should be organi-
                            zed and what instruments should be in place to preserve overall financial
                            stability while reducing the costs of a failed systemically important bank
                            for sovereigns and tax-payers.

16
                                                                                                                                           chapter 1




Financial Crisis – A Brief History of the Brrd Background


                  Northern Rock, UK
                  Bear Stearns, US
                  Lehman Brothers, US
                  AIG, Fannie Mae,
                  Freddie Mac
                                            Enforcement
                  Iceland                   of Dodd-Frank
                  Crisis    New Regulatory Act in the US
                            Require-
   Start of the crisis:     ments        Start of the Greek
   Sharp rise of            worldwide Sovereign Crisis
   money market             (FSB)
   interest rates,                       Spill-over                 Cyprus Crisis             EU         Enforce-
   increase of              Regulation of the Crisis to             and Bail-in     EU Single Banking    ment of      Obligatory
   spreads                  UK/CH        Emerging Markets           of Creditors    Rulebook Union       BRRD/EU      Bail-in/EU



                                                                                                                                  Further
 2007           2008        2009        2010         2011         2012         2013        2014         2015         2016         Implementation


                                                               Quantative easing programs from ECB and US FED




                                                                                              COSTS OF THE CRISIS (2007–2009)
Liquidity                                                                                     Nationalization of Banks*               29
Crisis
                             Limited interbank borrowings, credit crunch
                                                                                              Gross restructuring support             In % of GDP
Volatile                                                                                      for countries concerned*                0,7–7,7
Stock Markets
                             Constant uncertanties of values
                                                                                              Liquidity support*                      %-points
Bank and                                                                                                                              1,1–18,3
Sovereign Crisis
                             Economic downturn and low growth
                                                                                              Asset purchases and guarantees*         In % of GDP
Credit                                                                                                                                0,2–13,4
Crunch
                             Limited access to funds and therefore limited investments
                                                                                              Other measures taken included
                                                                                              guarantees for liabilities
                                                                                              and bail-in of creditors (Cyprus)




                                                                                                                                                    17
Chapter 1




                           Boom and Bust in the Financial Sector
                           The global financial crisis followed an economic boom phase. Deregula-
                           tion and innovation massively transformed the financial system in the late
                           20th century. The boom phase was characterized by accelerating housing
                           market prices and financial innovation in the form of asset securitization,
                           including the development of a complex derivative instruments market.
                           Derivatives rose from 2.5 times world GDP in 1998 to 12 times world
                           GDP on the eve of the crisis, while primary securities remained broadly
                           stable over the same period at around two times GDP.1 This boom phase
                           was facilitated, if not encouraged, by insufficiently stringent regulation of
                           financial institutions; government policies to increase home-ownership;
                           expansionary monetary policies; and global imbalances. All of these cont-
                           ributed to an asset price bubble and then to the bubble bursting, beginning
                           with the US subprime mortgage market in 2007. What began on a local
                           level in the US with failing institutions like Bear Stearns, and in the UK
                           with Northern Rock, quickly spread globally due to the high interconnec-
                           tivity of the financial sector and had very strong effects across the globe
                           including in Europe.2 Reactions to the losses (notably through mortgage
                           defaults), and opaqueness regarding the quality of banks’ balance sheets
                           worldwide led to a shortage of liquidity in the interbank market, an
                           increase in counterparty risk, and a credit crunch in the global economy
                           as banks stopped lending. The insecurity of market participants after the
                                      Lehman brothers in September 2008 – as a result of huge losses
                           default of ­
                           accrued in lower-rated mortgage-backed securities – can be considered
                           the start of the financial crisis.

Governments globally       Massive Fiscal Interventions Restored Financial Stability and Calmed
undertook massive fiscal   the Markets
interventions to restore
                           Massive fiscal interventions were undertaken by governments worldwide
financial stability and
keep the markets calm,
                           to restore financial stability and keep the markets calm, avoiding what
preventing potential       otherwise could have become a system-wide financial and economic
system-wide financial      meltdown. The exceptional economic and financial instability and unpre-
and economic meltdown.     dictable contagion risks triggered fast and decisive action by sovereigns
                           and central banks. Reserve banks’ quantitative easing programs pumped
                           billions of liquidity into banks. Central banks’ claims on financial insti-
                           tutions increased between 1.1 %–18.3 % worldwide3 in 2007–2009
                           through measures that included weaker collateral requirements, the
                           purchase of asset-backed securities, and the introduction of non-conven-
                           tional liquidity facilities. But despite these measures, banks continued to
                           fail and required capital injections to restore market confidence. Globally,


                           1
                            	 Adrian Blundell-Wignall, Solving the Financial and Sovereign Debt Crisis in Europe, OECD Journal:
                              Financial Market Trends, 2011 – issue 2
                           2
                            	 For example on the interconnectedness of US banks to Europe in the case of CDS derivatives see
                              OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends, 2011 – issue 2, page 12
                           3
                            	 Data retrieved from ”Resolution of Banking Crisis: ’The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly‘ by Luc Laeven
                              and Fabian Valencia, IMF Working Paper 2012“

18
                                                                                                                                       chapter 1




29 banks (considered of domestic systemic importance) were nationalized
between 2007 and 2009 and between 2.7 %–21.1 % of GDP was spent on
restructuring costs, asset purchases and guarantees.4

In Europe, the European Commission authorized total aid of EUR 3,892.6
billion (29.8 % of EU GDP in 2013) for guarantees on liabilities between
2008 and 2014. The outstanding amount peaked in 2009 at EUR 835.8
billion (6.39 % of EU 2013 GDP), and has since decreased to 352.3 billion
in 2013 (2.7 % of EU 2013 GDP). An additional EUR 448 billion (3.4 % of
EU 2013 GDP) was spent on the public recapitalization of banks between
2008 and 2013.5 One of the hardest hit European countries was Iceland,
a small state based on area, population and real economy, with a large
financial sector that was too big to save, though the domestic parts of it
were nationalized.

The Euro Area Debt Crisis                                                                                              The sovereign and
As the crisis advanced, its effects spilled over from banks to the real eco-                                           banking crises
                                                                                                                       exacerbated each other,
nomy. The sovereign and banking crises exacerbated each other especially
                                                                                                                       especially in Europe.
in Europe, shown most clearly by the Greek sovereign crisis in 2009. The
European (sovereign) debt crisis, also referred to as the “euro area” or “euro
zone” crisis, made apparent the fragility of monetary union under crisis
conditions and the lack of macroeconomic tools for effective interven-
tion. The cross-border exposure of some big European Union (EU) banks
to sovereign debt in weaker (peripheral) European economies was quite
significant in some countries. The main problem, however, was found in
the nexus between (domestic) bank risk and sovereign risk.6 The share of
euro area sovereign bonds in total bank assets in the euro area increased
over the past five years by one-third, from 4 % to 5.3 %.

Several euro area Member States (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain)                                             The European Stability
were unable to repay or refinance their government debt and/or to bail out                                             Mechanism (ESM) was
                                                                                                                       created as a special
their “national” banks without assistance from the European Central Bank
                                                                                                                       vehicle to provide direct
(ECB), or the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The European ­  Stability                                             financial assistance to
Mechanism (ESM) was created as a special vehicle to provide direct finan-                                              euro area Member States
cial assistance – prohibited under the EU Treaty at that point in time –                                               experiencing financing
to euro area Member States experiencing financing difficulties7, issuing                                               difficulties.
debt instruments in order to finance loans and other forms of financial


4
 	Ibid.
5
 	 EU Commission website: http://ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/scoreboard/financial_economic_
   	crisis_aid_en.html
6
 	 Adrian Blundell-Wignall, Solving the Financial and Sovereign Debt Crisis in Europe, OECD Journal:
   Financial Market Trends, 2011 – issue 2
7
 	 Article 136 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) was amended accordingly and
   the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) was created. The ESM is an intergovernmental organization under
   public international law created in 2012 as a special vehicle to provide direct financial assistance to euro area
   Member States experiencing financing difficulties. The ESM may recapitalize banks directly only if private
   investors have been bailed-in under the BRRD. The total amount of ESM resources is limited to EUR 60 billion.

                                                                                                                                                 19
Chapter 1




                             assistance. In exceptional circumstances, the ESM may directly recapita-
                             lize financial institutions as an instrument of last resort when bail-in and
                             contributions from the resolution funds are insufficient (see chapter 21a
                             on resolution financing). Although significantly affected by the crisis, euro
                             area debt to GDP ratio stood at 85 %8 of GDP at year end 2015 (65 % in
                             20079), compared to 103 % in the US (which was also around 64 % in
                             2007).

                             State aid approved to financial institutions in the period 2008–2012 ​
                             (in % GDP 2012)*


                                     Hungary
                                     Sweden
                                       France                                             Recapitalization and asset relief
                                    Denmark                                               Outstanding guarantees
                                    Germany
                                                                                   *	 For Slovenia the recapitalization
                                          Italy
                                                                                      in December 2013 has been included.
                                       Austria
                                        Latvia
                                 Netherlands
                                  Total EU-27
                             United Kingdom
                                Luxembourg
                                        Spain
                                     Portugal
                                       Cyprus
                                     Belgium
                                      Greece
                                      Ireland
                                                  0%   10 %   20 %   30 %   40 %   50 %       60 %      70 %      80 %        90 %


The FSB developed the        Regulatory Response
‘Key Attributes’ as the      The financial crisis highlighted a lack of effective means of dealing with
international standard
                             institutions deemed “too big” or “too interconnected” to be allowed to fail
for the resolution of
institutions deemed
                             because of their potential systemic impact. In 2008, the G20 called for
“too big” or “too            strengthened cooperation on crisis prevention, management and reso-
interconnected” to be        lution to permit an orderly resolution, including of large complex insti-
allowed to fail because of   tutions, without public bail-out. Regulators reacted by developing new
their potential systemic
                             policies and strengthening regulations at the international and national
impact.
                             level worldwide. In 2009, the Financial Stability Forum published high-le-
                             vel principles for cross-border cooperation on crisis management. This
                             work was continued by its successor body, the Financial Stability Board
                             (FSB), which developed the “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regi-
                             mes for Financial Institutions” as the international umbrella standard for
                             resolution regimes covering financial institutions of all types that could be
                             systemic in failure. The Key Attributes were published in October 2011 and
                             extended to financial market infrastructures and insurers in 2014.


                             	 http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7235991/2-21042016-AP-EN.pdf, 6.7.2016
                             8

                             	 The Maastricht Treaty limits the debt ratio to 60 % GDP.
                             9




20
                                                                                                   chapter 1




The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) published recommendations             Basel III was the
for supervisors to strengthen cooperation in cross-border bank reso-               cornerstone of the post-
                                                                                   crisis banking reform
lution in 2010, stressing the need to help support market discipline by
                                                                                   along with new banking
encouraging counterparties to focus more closely on the financial risk of          resolution rules.
an institution and help protect institutions from the moral hazard that
arises through relying on public support. The IMF and the World Bank
co-published a report on the legal, institutional and regulatory framework
for bank insolvency in 2009. Furthermore, Basel III as the cornerstone of
post-crisis reforms aims to strengthen minimum standards of resilience
so that financial firms are less likely to fail, and to reduce the impact on the
financial system and the economy in case a firm does fail. The main chan-
ges under the Basel III requirements relate to: i) an increase in the quality
and level of capital; ii) the enhancement of risk capital; iii) the inclusion
of a leverage ratio requirement; iv) the introduction of capital buffers to
mitigate various sources of systemic risk (macro-prudential dimension);
v) the mitigation of liquidity risk through a liquidity coverage ratio (LCR)
and a net stable funding ratio (NSFR); and vi) enhancements to the “secu-
ritization model”.

European Response                                                                  The BRRD creates a
Within the context of the European integration process, the financial crisis       common framework for
                                                                                   bank resolution across all
made particularly apparent the previously tolerated discrepancy between
                                                                                   EU Member States.
the freedom to provide services within an integrated market, national              Its key elements are
supervision, and the unsolved problem of burden-sharing. The crisis sho-           –	 recovery and
wed that the EU had to improve the European-wide system for coordina-                 resolution planning
tion and cooperation in the management of cross-border banks. A system             –	 enhanced set of early
                                                                                      intervention measures
based on ad hoc coordination was insufficient in an integrated market and
                                                                                      by the supervisor
even more within a common currency. European legislators summed this               –	 strong set of resolution
up in the recitals of the SRM Regulation as follows: “Interbank markets               tools and powers in
have become less liquid and cross-border bank activities are decreasing               the case of an actual
due to fear of contagion, lack of confidence in other national banking sys-           bank failure
                                                                                   –	 cooperation and
tems, and in the ability of Member States to support banks.”
                                                                                      coordination between
                                                                                      national authorities.
Switzerland and the UK were forerunners in the adoption of national reso-
lution schemes. Within the euro area a new Banking Union was created,
responsible for the centralized oversight and resolution of banks under a
set of fully harmonized laws, regulations, and practices (see chapter 2 on
Banking Union). The BRRD was developed as a common framework for
bank resolution across all EU Member States. It gives authorities additi-
onal powers to develop a future framework for the banking industry and
has been designed to better prepare for and resist shocks leading to the
implementation of bail-in instruments (see chapter 11 on MREL) and to
ensure resolvability across national borders (at least within the European
Union), regardless of size and structure. Broadly speaking the BRRD regu-
lates four key elements: i) the preparation and prevention of resolution via
recovery and resolution planning; ii) the taking of early intervention mea-
sure by the supervisor; iii) the application of resolution tools and powers

                                                                                                            21
Chapter 1




            in the case of an actual bank failure; and last but not least iv) the coopera-
            tion and coordination between national authorities

            The European Commission in the BRRD impact assessment has calcu-
            lated that whilst the increased costs to financial institutions may have
            a negative impact on GDP, the improved financial stability of the sector
            and reduced likelihood of system crises and risks to taxpayers' money to
            recapitalize failing banks would have a much larger positive impact on
            GDP. Also the FSB’s assessment on the impact of implementing the new
            standard on Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC, see chapter 11) at glo-
            bal level concluded that even under the most conservative assumptions
            macroeconomic benefits of introducing TLAC (+15/20 bps of annual GDP)
            would exceed costs (-15 bps).

            Relevant documents
            –	Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Public
              Law No: 111-203 (07/21/2010). An Act to promote the financial stability
              of the United States by improving accountability and transparency in
              the financial system, to end “too big to fail'', to protect the American tax-
              payer by ending bail-outs, to protect consumers from abusive financial
              services practices, and for other purposes.
            –	EC Commission, State Aid Scoreboard 2015 – Aid in the context of
              financial and economic crisis
            –	EC, Impact Assessment, Accompanying the BRRD legislative proposal,
              SWD(2012) 166 final
            –	FSB, Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Insti-
              tutions, 2014 (2011)
            –	FSB, Summary of Findings from the TLAC Impact Assessment Studies,
              2015
            –	BIS, Report and Recommendations of the Cross-border Bank Resolution
              Group, March 2010
            –	IMF, World Bank Group (WBG), An Overview of the Legal, Institutional,
              and Regulatory Framework for Bank Insolvency, 2009
            –	IMF, Cross-Border Bank Resolution: Recent Developments, 2014
            –	UNCITRAL, Documents published by the Working Group V on Insol-
              vency Law
            –	Henri Maurer and Patrick Grussenmeyer, ECB, Statistics Paper Series,
              Financial assistance measures in the euro area from 2008 to 2013: stati-
              stical framework and fiscal impact:
            –	Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Finalizing post-crisis reforms:
              an update, A report to G20 Leaders, November 2015




22
                                                                                                                                chapter 2




Chapter 2:
The EU Banking Union
and the BRRD
By Pamela Lintner and Lira Qefalia



Key questions
–	 What is Banking Union and who is involved?
–	 What responsibilities are left for the national authorities?
–	 What are the competencies of the European Central Bank (ECB)
   as a supervisor and of the Single Resolution Board (SRB)?
–	 What is the Single Rulebook?



The financial crisis demonstrated severe shortcomings in the institutio-                                        Banking Union was
nal framework of the European Union (EU) in general, and in the Eco-                                            introduced to create a
                                                                                                                safer, sounder and more
nomic and Monetary Union (EMU) in particular. During the crisis there
                                                                                                                stable EU financial sector.
was limited cross-border cooperation in financial supervision and crisis
management, and no rules for common burden-sharing were stipulated.
A negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns, i.e. the link bet-
ween sovereign debt and bank debt, impaired a coordinated centralized
response to the financial crisis in the EU. Member States largely addressed
the systemic fragility of their banking systems through national policy
tools. The crisis revealed evidence that national authorities had strong
incentives to protect and act in the interests of their national markets.1
The increasing risk of fragmentation in the EU banking market risked
undermining the single market for financial services and impairing the
effective transmission of monetary policy to the real economy throughout
the euro area. The European Commission has since 2010 proposed nearly
30 sets of rules to ensure a safer, sounder and more stable EU financial
sector. The Single Rulebook, with the CRD/CRR for supervision and the
BRRD for resolution as its key elements, was introduced to ensure a single
set of rules across the Single Market. On the basis of the Single Rulebook,
Banking Union with centralized supervisory and resolution powers was
created for those countries which share the euro. Its aim was for deeper
integration to restore confidence in the euro and as part of a longer term
vision of further economic and fiscal integration.


	 COM (2013) 520 final Rc 5: “national supervisors have strong incentives to minimize the potential impact of
1

  bank crises on their national economies by adopting unilateral action to ring-fence banking operations”.

                                                                                                                                        23
Chapter 2




The European Banking Union




                                   SSM                       SRM                    EDIS

                                  Euro 19+                   Euro 19+               Euro 19+

     ESAs                          Single                     Single               European
                                Supervisory                Resolution               Deposit
                                 Mechanism                 Mechanism               Insurance
                                                         including Single           Scheme
                                                         Resolution Fund             (EDIS)



                             Direct Supervision          SRB: significant
     –	draft implementing     ≈ 120 significant          + cross-border
     	acts
                                 banks: ECB                   banks
     –	mediation powers
     –	direct decision       Indirect Supervision       Implementation
     	making                       via NCAs                via NRAs


                                                    Single Rulebook
                                                         EU 28
                                CRD/CRR                     BRRD                    DDGS

                                                      National insolvency law
                                   National                                      National deposit
                                                       national ownership
                                 fiscal policy                                  guarantee systems
                                                           instruments




24
                                                                                                 chapter 2




The Single Rulebook                                                              The Single Rulebook
The Single Rulebook is the term used for the set of legislative texts that       forms the harmonized
                                                                                 prudential rules that all
all financial institutions in the EU must comply with and on which Ban-
                                                                                 financial institutions
king Union depends. The BRRD is one part of this Single Rulebook and,            in the EU must comply
together with new rules on capital and liquidity requirements (CRD IV            with.
and CRR) and on deposit guarantee schemes (DGS), it ensures a unified
regulatory framework. The Single Rulebook consists of a series of level 1
legislation adopted by the EU Parliament and the Council of the European
Union (the Council), complemented by level 2 delegated legislation and
implementing acts prepared and drafted by the European Banking Autho-
rity (EBA) and adopted by the European Commission in cooperation with
Member States Committees. These Regulations are directly applicable and
do not need to be transposed in national law. These legislative measures
are further complemented by EBA “soft law” guidance.

Foundations of Banking Union                                                     Banking Union creates a
In June 2012, EU Heads of State and Government agreed to create a Ban-           centralized framework
                                                                                 of banking supervision,
king Union, completing the EMU by providing for the centralized appli-
                                                                                 crisis management,
cation of EU-wide rules for banks in the euro area. The Banking Union            and bank resolution
guarantees the harmonized application of European regulation through             applicable to all countries
the creation of centralized Supervision and Resolution Powers (SSM and           in the euro area.
SRM). The Banking Union creates common instruments for micro and
macro prudential supervision, crisis management and bank resolution
applicable to all countries in the euro area (non-euro area countries may
also join). It consists of three main elements/pillars:
–	the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) with the European Central
  Bank (ECB) as a centralized supranational supervisor;
–	the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) with the Single Resolution
  Board (SRB) responsible for managing banks in case of failure; and
–	a European deposit guarantee scheme, which is not yet centralized but is
  based on the same harmonized principles as for all EU Member States.

Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM)                                               Under the SSM the ECB
The SSM delivers prudential supervision led by the European Central Bank         directly supervises the
                                                                                 largest banks in the euro
(ECB) as the supervisor of financial institutions in the euro area, together
                                                                                 area, while the national
with the national supervisory authorities of the participating member            supervisors continue to
states (i.e. all euro area member states and those who choose to participate     monitor the remaining
by “opting-in”). Around 129 “significant” banks are under the ECB’s direct       banks via indirect ECB
supervision, representing approximately 82 % of euro area bank assets.           supervision.
National Competent Authorities (NCAs/supervisory authorities) remain
primarily responsible for the supervision of “less significant”, i.e. smaller,
banks in close cooperation with the ECB (indirect supervision). In practi-
cal terms the ECB has to apply divergent national laws implementing
CRD IV. It operates via Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs) comprising ECB staff
and relevant national supervisors. The JSTs foster a common supervisory
culture and promote consistent supervisory practices and approaches.
They carry out ongoing supervision of significant banks, in particular the

                                                                                                         25
Chapter 2




                            Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREPs) supervisory exami-
                            nation programs, and they are responsible for coordination with on-site
                            inspection teams.

                            Before formally taking on its responsibilities in November 2014, the ECB
                            conducted a “comprehensive assessment”, including an Asset Quality
                            Review (AQR) and stress tests, of banks that would fall under its remit. Of
                            the 130 banks assessed, 25 banks were found to have a capital shortfall.

Bank resolution is          Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM)
managed by the Single       Banks cannot be completely protected against failure, even with strong
Resolution Board (SRB),
                            supervision and the use of early intervention tools. The second pillar of
which decides on the
application of resolution
                            Banking Union, the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), allows their
tools and the use of the    resolution to be managed effectively, with the aim of reducing costs to
Single Resolution Fund      taxpayers and minimizing any negative effects to the real economy at the
(SRF).                      European level.

                            Bank resolution within the euro area is managed by the Single Resolu-
                            tion Board (SRB), which is responsible for resolution planning and decides
                            on the application of resolution tools as well as on the use of the Single
                            Resolution Fund (SRF), financed by the banking industry and owned by
                            the SRB. Both the SRB and the SRF became fully operational in January
                            2016 (See chapter 21b on the gradual building up of the SRF via national
                            compartments until 2024).

                            The SRM applies – in parallel to the SSM – to all banks in the euro area,
                            and in addition to cross-border banks (around 15 have been identified by
                            the SRB). ECB actions and powers in its capacity as the single supervisor
                            and SRB actions under the SRM are intertwined and partially mutually
                            dependent. While the ECB is the main authority empowered to decide if a
                            bank is considered FOLTF (as a rule, see chapter 14), it is up to the SRB to
                            trigger the resolution procedure and assess if the conditions for resolution
                            are fulfilled. Moreover, the ECB is represented in a non-voting capacity on
                            the SRB Board.

                            The SRM creates a uniform institutional framework for the application of
                            the BRRD, including a SRF, for participating Member States. Resolution
                            decisions are taken – for the largest institutions and cross-border banks
                            – by the SRB. The application of specific resolution tools to deal with a fai-
                            ling institution, the “resolution scheme”, is decided by the SRB in a rather
                            complex voting procedure between the Member States, with veto powers
                            by the European Commission and the Council (see chapter 14).

                            The SRM Regulation is complementary to the BRRD, and not a replacement
                            or substitute. Proper and comprehensive transposition of the BRRD by each
                            Member State establishing a national resolution authority (NRA) that is
                            powerful and capable of acting is essential. The SRB can apply its own tools

26
                                                                                                 chapter 2




and powers under the SRM Regulation (which is directly applicable in all
Member States). The SRB’s resolution scheme decisions are as a rule direc-
ted towards NRAs, for their enforcement under national law. Only excep-
tionally, if the NRA fails to comply with the SRB’s decisions, may the SRB
address orders directly to the bank under resolution. NRAs within the euro
area are responsible for the resolution of national banks not covered by the
SRB (small, non-cross-border banks with no use of the SRF).

European Deposit Insurance Scheme                                                 European deposit
Unlike the first two pillars of Banking Union, the third pillar is (so far) not   insurance is currently
                                                                                  based on harmonized
based on a centralized system shifting competencies and powers to the
                                                                                  rules applied in 28
European level but relies on the traditional concept of rule harmoniza-           Member States. EDIS
tion to ensure a common scope and level of deposit insurance (deposits            would, if adopted by the
up to EUR 100.000 are insured per person per bank). To complete the Ban-          EU Parliament and the
king Union the European Commission adopted a legislative proposal for             Council in future, ensure
                                                                                  a centralized deposit
a “European Deposit Insurance Scheme” (EDIS) in November 2015. This is
                                                                                  guarantee system for
now under negotiation in the EU Parliament and the Council. EDIS would            euro area Member States.
be based on the creation of a European Deposit Insurance Fund, managed
by the SRB, which would become fully operational by 2024. It aims to cre-
ate a centralized euro area-wide deposit insurance scheme, which would
comprise national deposit guarantee schemes plus a European deposit
insurance fund built gradually over eight years. It would have the typical
Banking Union construction: a Single Rulebook in the form of the existing
DGS Directive and its national implementing laws and standards for all
Member States, complemented by EDIS which would be mandatory for
euro area Member States and open to non-euro area Member States wis-
hing to participate.

EDIS would gradually build up and pool available funds for payout events
at the central level over time without requiring an overall increase in
banks’ contributions. EDIS is planned to be developed in three sequential
stages: i) a re-insurance scheme for the first three years, providing liqui-
dity assistance and limited loss absorbance of the national schemes; ii) a
co-insurance scheme for four years until 2024 under which EDIS would
absorb a progressively larger share of losses of the national schemes; and
iii) in the final stage, EDIS would fully insure deposits and would cover all
liquidity needs and losses in the event of a pay-out or resolution procedure
and protect deposits below EUR 100,000. National DGSs would remain in
place even after 2024 to administer pay-out events and to act as a contact
points for depositors and banks.

Relevant documents
–	Directive 2014/49/EU on Deposit Guarantee Schemes
–	Communication from the Commission - A Roadmap towards a Banking
  Union (COM/2012/0510 final)
–	European Court of Auditors: European banking supervision taking
  shape – EBA and its changing context No 05/2014

                                                                                                         27
Chapter 2




            –	ECB, Guide to Banking Supervision, September 2014
            –	Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 establishing uniform rules and a uniform
              procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain invest-
              ment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a
              Single Resolution Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010
            –	Proposal for a Regulation amending Regulation (EU) 806/2014 in order
              to establish a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (COM/2015/586
              final)
            –	Regulation (EU) No 1022/2013 establishing a European Supervisory
              Authority (European Banking Authority) as regards the conferral of spe-
              cific tasks on the European Central Bank
            –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
              Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards
              specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group
              resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is
              to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the con-
              ditions for group financial support, the requirements for independent
              valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion
              powers, the procedures and contents of notification requirements and
              of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of the resolu-
              tion colleges




28
                                                                                                chapter 3




Chapter 3:
The BRRD – an Overview
of its Scope, Objectives,
Powers and Tools

By Dominik Freudenthaler



Key questions                                                                   Art. 1, 31, 34, 63 BRRD
–	 Which entities fall within the scope of the recovery and resolution
   regime?
–	 What is the difference between bank resolution and regular insolvency
   proceedings?
–	 What general powers does the BRRD provide?
–	 What is the relationship between resolution powers and resolution tools?
–	 What types and forms of a moratorium are allowed under the BRRD? Is it
   a resolution tool?



Scope                                                                           The BRRD’s scope
The BRRD takes account of the recommendations of the Financial Stability        includes “credit
                                                                                institutions” and
Board (FSB) Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial
                                                                                “big” investment firms
Institutions (see chapter 1), and is aligned with the regulatory framework      (with initial capital
of the EU for financial institutions. The BRRD’s scope includes those ins-      > EUR 730,000 and
titutions that are subject to the prudential supervision and regulatory         financial holding
capital requirements provisions in the EU Capital Requirements Directive        companies established
                                                                                in the EU) as well as
(CRD IV); that is, “credit institutions” and “big” investment firms with an
                                                                                “financial institutions”
initial capital above EUR 730,000 (jointly “institutions”) and financial hol-   as defined in the CRR
ding companies established in the EU. It also applies to “financial institu-    that are subsidiaries of
tions” as defined in the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) that are         institutions or holding
subsidiaries of institutions or holding companies when they are supervi-        companies when they
                                                                                are supervised on a
sed on a consolidated basis.
                                                                                consolidated basis.

The BRRD will additionally have indirect effects on many more EU entities
and group members, including branches outside the EU, even though they
may not fall directly within the scope of the legislation.

Unlike the Key Attributes, the BRRD is not applicable to financial mar-
ket infrastructures like Central Counterparty Clearing Houses (CCPs) and

                                                                                                           29
Chapter 3




Resolution Tools




                                                                                                               key objectives

                                                                                                               –	continuity of critical functions
                                                                                                               –	protect depositors, client assets
                                                                                                               	 and public funds
       TooLs                                                                                                   –	minimize risks to financial stability
                                                                                                               –	avoid unnecessary destruction of value

       Sale of business                                   Bridge institution
       –	(Part) Transfer to a private                     –	Transfer to public bridge bank
         purchaser on commercial terms                    –	Based on commercial terms



       Asset separation                                   Bail-in
       (Only in conjunction with another tool)            –	Loss absorption through
       –	Transfer of bad assets to an asset                 write down or conversion
         management vehicle (bad bank)                      of eligible liabilities
       –	Workout happens in bad bank                      –	Recapitalization or providing
       –	Capital relief for failed/bridge bank              capital for bridge/bad bank




                                                 General Powers
                                                 To prepare application and implement the resolution tools, e.g.:
                                                 –	Gathering information to prepare resolution actions
                                                 –	Exercising rights and powers conferred upon
                                                   shareholders and the management body
                                                 –	Transferring shares, rights, assets or liabilities
                                                 –	Altering the maturity of eligible liabilities, converting
                                                   them into shares or reducing the principal amount




30
                                                                                                 chapter 3




Central Securities Depositories (CSDs), nor to insurance companies. The
European Commission has, however, published a roadmap for future EU
legislative initiatives to establish a framework for the resolution of non-
bank financial institutions which will take account of sector-specific
considerations.

Finally, it is important to stress that the BRRD is a Directive of minimum
harmonization. Consequently, Member States must implement the mini-
mum harmonized set of resolution tools and powers of the BRRD into nati-
onal law, but may choose to go beyond these. In doing so, Member States
are able to introduce additional tools at national level to deal with crises,
as long as they are compatible with the resolution objectives and principles
set out in the BRRD, other EU legislation, and the EU state aid rules.

Objectives                                                                       Resolution objectives
The overarching objective of the BRRD resolution regime is to make sure          are much broader than
                                                                                 the objectives of regular
a bank can be resolved swiftly with minimal risk to financial stability.
                                                                                 insolvency proceedings
This should be achieved without negative impacts on the real economy             and aim to ensure an
and without the need to spend taxpayer money to stabilize a failing bank         orderly resolution of
(bail-in instead of bail-out). Resolution objectives are much broader than       failing banks while
the objectives of regular insolvency proceedings, which commonly focus           safeguarding financial
                                                                                 stability and with
on the interests of creditors and to maximize the value of the insolvency
                                                                                 minimum impact on
estate. The BRRD resolution regime aims to ensure overall financial stabi-       the real economy and
lity, ending the nexus between bank risk and sovereign risk. BRRD objec-         taxpayers’ money.
tives are explicitly defined in law as:

–	ensuring the continuity of critical functions;
–	avoiding significant adverse effects on the financial system;
–	protecting public funds by minimizing reliance on extraordinary public
  financial support for failing banks;
–	protecting insured depositors; and
–	protecting client funds and client assets.

These resolution objectives are of equal significance, and resolution
authorities have to balance them as appropriate to the nature and cir-
cumstances of each case. To achieve these objectives, the BRRD broadly
speaking regulates four key elements: i) the preparation and prevention
of resolution via recovery and resolution planning; ii) the taking of early
intervention measure by the supervisor; iii) the application of resolution
tools and powers in the case of an actual bank failure; and last but not least
iv) the cooperation and coordination between national authorities.

Liquidation vs Resolution
The key advantage of a resolution is that it allows for some continuity and
the maintenance of a bank’s critical functions. If a bank goes into liquida-
tion, all liabilities (except those exempted from the insolvency estate) fall
due and the insolvency estate is protected by the imposition of a collective

                                                                                                         31
Chapter 3




In contrast to liquidation,    stay of creditor action (no further enforcement by individual creditors).
resolution allows the          A trustee is appointed to dispose of the assets and distribute the proceeds
maintenance of a bank’s
                               among the creditors. The rationale in insolvency is that all creditors (with
critical functions and
not all liabilities fall due
                               some exceptions such as secured creditors) should be treated the same and
automatically.                 receive their pro rata share of the estate. However, this can result in stress,
                               interruptions, and contagion risks for financial systems. The “fire sale”
                               that liquidation entails may also be detrimental to the interests of credi-
                               tors. In terms of financial stability, as seen during the last financial crisis,
                               the application of bank insolvency rules has proven inadequate and poli-
                               tically unacceptable. Although covered depositors would be reimbursed
                               by deposit guarantee schemes, the risk of wider contagion was, in most
                               cases, deemed too great, especially for large and complex “too big to fail”
                               institutions (TBTF). Thus, public funds were used to keep struggling banks
                               open. In contrast to liquidation, not all liabilities fall due automatically
                               if a bank is placed under resolution. The resolution authority should be
                               able to cope with the crisis by allocating incurred losses among creditors
                               and restructuring the institution while maintaining uninterrupted access
                               to deposits and critical functions. Covered depositors have continuous
                               access to their deposits (instead of reimbursement). In return for ensuring
                               uninterrupted access to deposits, the deposit guarantee scheme is, under
                               certain circumstances, liable to make in lieu contributions in the context
                               of resolution (see chapter 22).

                               Unlike under insolvency proceedings, the BRRD explicitly stipulates that
                               resolution is not a reason for counterparties not to fulfill their obligations,
                               and it foresees the suspension of contractual termination rights. Central
                               clearing systems must not stop an institution under resolution from tra-
                               ding. On Monday after the "resolution weekend" the institution is assu-
                               med to resume operations as non-failing; counterparties are prevented
                               from closing out until midnight. These suspensions facilitate the transfer
                               of derivatives and other financial counteracts to solvent transferees.

The five resolution tools      Powers, Tools and other Measures
provided for under the         The resolution authority is given a broad range of powers to achieve the
BRRD are the:
                               objectives of resolution. The resolution regime of the BRRD assumes that
i)	 bail-in tool,
ii)	 sale of business tool,
                               the powers are applied as a “bundle”, called resolution tools, which may be
iii)	asset separation tool,    used individually or in any combination on a case-by-case basis (except
iv)	 bridge institution tool   the asset separation tool, which may only be applied together with ano-
     and, as a last resort,    ther resolution tool, see chapter 18). The five resolution tools provided for
v)	 government
                               under the BRRD are:
     stabilization tool.

                               The bail-in tool
                               –	The bail-in tool allows the resolution authority to allocate incurred
                                 losses to the owners and debt holders of the institution: the interests
                                 of existing shareholders are cancelled, diluted, or transferred, and the
                                 claims of unsecured creditors are written down and/or converted into
                                 equity to recapitalize the firm (see chapter 15).

32
                                                                                                chapter 3




Three transfer tools
–	The sale of business tool allows for a swift transfer of shares, assets,
  rights and liabilities of the institution under resolution to a purchaser
  “on commercial terms” (see chapter 16).
–	The bridge institution tool allows for a temporary transfer of shares,
  (good) assets, rights and liabilities to a (publicly owned) bridge bank in
  order to maintain critical functions of the problem bank (see chapter 17).
–	Under the asset separation tool (impaired) assets, rights and liabilities
  are transferred to a (publicly owned) asset management vehicle, also
  known as a “bad bank”. This allows for a value improving workout of
  assets and avoids possible value destruction caused by a fire sale under
  liquidation (see chapter 18).

In addition, government stabilization tools (which are technically not
defined as resolution tools) may be used as a last resort in the very extraor-
dinary situation of systemic crisis and after having exploited all resolution
tools. The resolution authority may seek funding from the government
either by way of temporary public ownership or public equity support (see
chapter 19).

The BRRD sets out in Article 63 a list of general powers required by reso-        The general powers of
lution authorities to prepare for the implementation and application of           the resolution authority
                                                                                  are the foundation for
resolution tools. The minimum set of “key powers” envisaged for authori-
                                                                                  implementing and giving
ties under the BRRD are:                                                          effect to the resolution
                                                                                  tools.
–	Accessing information to prepare resolution actions;
–	Taking control of a bank under resolution including the power to replace
  management. If the resolution authority decides to resolve a bank it will
  be crucial to gain control of the institution in order to effectively imple-
  ment the resolution actions. This is especially true if there is reasonable
  suspicion that fraudulent behavior may have led to the failure of the
  bank;
–	Exercising rights and powers conferred upon shareholders and the
  management body. To achieve the goal of gaining control, the resolution
  authority has the power to remove or replace the management body and
  senior management;
–	Transferring shares, rights, assets or liabilities;
–	Altering the maturity of eligible liabilities (as initially defined), conver-
  ting them into shares or reducing the principal amount;
–	Cancelling or reducing the nominal amount of shares or other instru-
  ments of ownership. To overcome obstacles relating to the ownership
  structure, an important power is the possibility of exercising all the
  rights and powers of the shareholders without their consent. This allows
  the resolution authority to swiftly substitute votes required by company
  law or to implement corporate law measures in order to create the tar-
  geted company structure.



                                                                                                       33
Chapter 3




The BRRD does not          The general powers are as important as the resolution tools. They are the
specify scope and nature   foundation for implementing and giving effect to the resolution tools and
of a moratorium
                           they ensure that the resolution authority is not facing procedural impedi-
                           ments to a resolution (for example, by giving the resolution authority the
                           power to override company law). The so-called ‘moratorium’, for example,
                           though not explicitly found in the list of resolution tools, was used in one
                           of the first resolution cases under the new BRRD regime. The BRRD merely
                           mentions the possibility of applying a moratorium without specifying its
                           scope and nature, for example no (maximum) duration is stipulated nor
                           type of liabilities and instruments specified. In the Heta case in Austria,
                           shortly after the national BRRD transposition law came into effect, the
                           national resolution authority (NRA) invoked the general power of altering
                           the maturity of eligible liabilities and applied a moratorium on the payout
                           of unsecured debt of two years (no depositors affected below EUR 100,000).
                           In this case the NRA needed time to prepare resolution actions for a failing
                           institution (an asset management vehicle) with no elaborated resolution
                           plans (see the Heta case study in accompanying publication “Bank resolu-
                           tion and bail-in in the EU: Selected case studies pre and post BRRD”).

                           Member States may decide to entrust resolution authorities with addi-
                           tional powers and tools. However, in this case the use thereof must be
                           consistent with the resolution principles and objectives, especially they
                           should not impinge on the effective resolution of cross-border groups (e.g.
                           through ring-fencing).

                           Relevant documents
                           –	EBA Report on the perimeter of credit institutions established in the
                             Member States, November 27, 2014
                           –	Directive 2013/36/EU on access to the activity of credit institutions and
                             the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms
                             (CRD IV)
                           –	Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit ins-
                             titutions and investment firms (CRR)
                           –	EU roadmap resolution other than banks i.e. insurers and financial mar-
                             kets infrastructures
                           –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
                             Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards spe-
                             cifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group reso-
                             lution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is to
                             assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the conditions
                             for group financial support, the requirements for independent valuers,
                             the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion powers, the
                             procedures and contents of notification requirements and of notice of
                             suspension and the operational functioning of the resolution colleges
                           –	EBA/RTS/2015/04, Final Draft Regulatory Technical Standards on proce-
                             dures and contents of notifications referred to in Article 81(1), (2) and (3)
                             and the notice of suspension referred to in Article 83 of Directive 2014/59/EU

34
                                                                                                   chapter 4




Chapter 4:
The Maintenance of
Critical Functions as
a Key Resolution Objective

By Christian M. Stiefmueller



Key questions                                                                     Art. 2 BRRD
–	 What are critical functions and who defines them?
–	 What is the difference between core business lines and critical economic
   functions?
–	 Are core business lines automatically saved and protected in case of
   failure?
–	 Are critical functions defined at group level or for each individual entity?



Defining Critical Functions and Core Business Lines for Recovery and              Critical functions are
Resolution Planning                                                               the activities, services or
                                                                                  operations of a financial
Continuity of critical functions is one of the five BRRD resolution objecti-
                                                                                  institution provided to
ves that govern all aspects of the resolution process and guide the resolu-       third parties that are
tion authority’s application of resolution tools and the exercise of resolu-      essential to the real
tion powers. The BRRD broadly defines critical functions as any structured        economy and/or for
set of activities, services or operations of a financial institution that are     preserving financial
                                                                                  stability.
provided to third parties and that are essential to the real economy and/or
for preserving financial stability. As such, a critical function may underpin
one or several of the institution’s products or services but does not need to
be a revenue-generating product or service in its own right.

Core business lines, by contrast, are defined as business lines and asso-
ciated services that the financial institution has developed as part of its
commercial offering to third parties and that represent a material source
of its revenues, profits or franchise value. The distinctive feature of a cri-
tical function is its importance for the functioning of the real economy
at large whereas a core business line is characterized by reference to its
importance for the business of the institution itself, specifically in terms
of profitability. The preservation of core business lines is not in itself a
resolution objective but understanding them plays a central role in the
recovery and resolution process by providing a framework for evaluating

                                                                                                           35
Chapter 4




Critical Services




                                                                        Function
                                                                        structured set of activities, services or operations
                                                                        delivered by the institution




                                                                        Delivered to third parties
                                                                        not affiliated with the institution or group?




                                                                        Systemic Relevance: Impact assessment
                                                                        –	Nature and reach of the activity




                                                                                                                                                   Financial institution/group (bottom-up) – Recovery Plan
                    Resolution authority (top-down) – resolution plan




                                                                        –	Relevance of the institution in providing the function to the market
                                                                        –	Customers and other stakeholders affected by the function
                                                                        –	Potential disruption of markets, infrastructures, customers and
                                                                          public services




                                                                        Substitutability: Supply-side analysis
                                                                        –	Market structure and availability of substitutes
                                                                        –	Market capacity, prerequisites for providing the function, barriers to
                                                                          entry/expansion
                                                                        –	Market attractiveness/incentives for alternative providers/new
                                                                          entrants
                                                                        –	Time required for customers to migrate/new providers to resume
                                                                          services, switching costs, risk of disruption




                                                                        Critical function
                                                                        –	information/reporting obligations under Annexes A–C of the BRRD
                                                                        –	Key input to Resolution Plan
                                                                        –	Continuity as a resolution objective




                                                                        Comprehensive assessment
                                                                        –	Mapping of critical functions, including potential interconnections
                                                                          between functions
                                                                        –	Review of criticality to the real economy and financial markets
                                                                        –	Prioritization of critical functions by relevance
                                                                        –	Review of resolution options




36
                                                                                                 chapter 4




the institution’s operations as a going concern. This ensures recovery and
resolution plans can be designed to preserve as much of the commercial
value of the business as possible and minimize losses incurred by the ins-
titution’s investors and other stakeholders.

The BRRD requires institutions to provide a detailed description of the
process for determining the value of their core business lines, together
with the value of the operations and assets of the institution, for the pur-
poses of drawing up its recovery plan (see chapter 6 and Annex A point 8
of the BRRD).

Critical functions must be identified and included in the recovery plan of
the institution to ensure that its viability can be restored without signi-
ficant adverse impact and while maintaining these critical functions. To
improve the resilience of core business lines and critical functions, the
competent authority may, as part of its review of the recovery plan, direct
the institution to make changes to its funding strategy, e.g. by strengt-
hening its capitalization, improving liquidity, or adjusting the maturity
profile of its liabilities (Article 6 BRRD).

Resolution authorities ask institutions to provide regular information
mapped specifically to the institution’s critical operations and core busi-
ness lines for the purposes of drawing up and maintaining a resolution
plan (see chapter 10a and Annex B of the BRRD). The objective of this map-
ping is to facilitate the legal and operational separation of these critical
functions and core business lines from the remainder of the institution’s
business in the event of failure

Resolution authorities are required, as part of their resolvability assessment
for the resolution plan, to consider how the institution’s “critical opera-
tions” are structured and organized (Annex C of the BRRD). This includes
alignment of critical operations with the institution’s legal and corporate
structures, the availability of (physical, financial and human) resources to
support these operations, and the adequacy of information provided by, and
the resilience of, the institution’s management information systems.

Defining Critical Functions Based On Systemic Importance and                     Critical functions are
Substitutability                                                                 first assessed by the bank
                                                                                 itself in its recovery
According to the European Banking Authority (EBA), the assessment of
                                                                                 plan (going concern
critical functions (and services) consists of two complementary exercises:       self-assessment) then
                                                                                 in a second step by the
–	financial institutions performing a (bottom-up) self-assessment of cri-        resolution authority
  tical functions (to third parties) and services (to entities of the group)     conducting a top-down
                                                                                 mapping exercise under
  as part of their obligations under the BRRD for recovery-planning and
                                                                                 resolution aspects
  providing information for resolution-planning; and                             (gone concern) .
–	competent authorities and resolution authorities conducting a
  (top-down) mapping exercise for the purposes of reviewing and

                                                                                                         37
Chapter 4




                               evaluating the firms’ assessments and from the perspective of preserving
                               system-wide financial stability.

                             a. Critical functions
                             A two-step test assesses the criticality of a function:
                             –	an impact assessment of the potential impact of a function’s sudden
                                discontinuance on third parties, focusing on systemic importance and
                                including:
                                -	 the nature and reach of the activity in terms of the type of function
                                   (product/service), the size (volume/number of transactions) and geo-
                                   graphic scope (global/national/regional) of the activity, the number
                                   of market participants involved (customers/counterparties) and the
                                   number of customers for which the institution is the only, or princi-
                                   pal, banking partner;
                                -	 the relevance of the institution/group for the relevant market at a
                                   global/national/regional level, in terms of market share, interconnec-
                                   tedness, complexity and cross-border activity;
                                -	 the number and type of customers (corporate/interbank/retail) and
                                   other stakeholders (e.g. central counterparties, public entities) affec-
                                   ted by the function; and
                                -	 the potential impact of the disruption of the function on markets, inf-
                                   rastructure, customers, and public services: in particular with respect
                                   to market liquidity; disruption to customers’ business and short-term
                                   liquidity needs; the perceptibility to counterparties, customers, and
                                   the public; the capacity and speed of customer reaction; the relevance
                                   to the functioning, liquidity, operations, or structure of other mar-
                                   kets; the effect on other counterparties related to the main customers;
                                   and the interrelation of that function with other services.
                             –	a supply-side analysis evaluating the market for the provision and “sub-
                                stitutability” of that function, including:
                                -	 the structure of the market for that function (e.g. in terms of num-
                                   ber and relative size of market participants, market shares and overall
                                   market capacity) and the availability of substitute providers;
                                -	 the ability of other providers in terms of capacity, the requirements
                                   for performing the function, and potential barriers to entry or expan-
                                   sion (e.g. legal and regulatory hurdles for potential new entrants or
                                   switching costs for customers);
                                -	 the incentive of other providers to take on these activities (i.e. the
                                   attractiveness of the business to other market participants or poten-
                                   tial new entrants); and
The Single Rulebook             -	 the time required by users to migrate to a new provider, the costs of
does not set any specific          that move, the time required for other market participants to take
quantitative benchmarks
                                   over the function, and whether that time is sufficient to prevent sig-
determining systemic
relevance and criticality.
                                   nificant disruption.

                             As part of the impact assessment, the institution and the resolution autho-
                             rity should take into account the size, market share, interconnectedness,

38
                                                                                                 chapter 4




complexity, and cross-border activity of the institution or the group.
So far, level 2 legislation (i.e. detailed implementation measures) does not
set any specific quantitative benchmarks for systemic relevance/criticality
based on these metrics. The European Banking Authority’s (EBA) Com-
parative Report briefly discusses indicative threshold levels for a limited
number of functions.

A function is substitutable if it can be replaced in an acceptable manner        No concrete timeframe
and within a reasonable timeframe without causing systemic problems              is foreseen for a function
                                                                                 to be considered
for the real economy and financial markets. So far, level 2 legislation does
                                                                                 substitutable and
not set any binding timelines as to when substitution has to be completed.       replaceable.
The assessment of substitutability needs to be made at the appropriate
level of granularity, e.g. local/national/regional, depending on the rele-
vant market.

As part of its “top-down” mapping exercise, the resolution authority
should conduct an evaluation of the institution’s own assessment (going
concern) against the specific characteristics of the institution, the market
for that function and the overall characteristics of the relevant economy
and financial market. Based on the mapping and aggregation of critical
functions, the resolution authority should be in a position subsequently to
prioritize these functions by order of criticality and to design and optimize
resolution strategies accordingly (gone concern).

b. Critical services
Critical services are the underlying operations, activities and services per-
formed for one (dedicated services) or more business units or legal entities
(shared services) within an institution/group which are required to pro-
vide one or more critical functions.

Identification of critical services, and where they are provided and used
within an institution/group, should enable institutions and regulators to
take organizational and structural steps to ensure their continued availa-
bility. This might be achieved by placing them into separate entities, which
could be carved out/transferred, or by entering into outsourcing arrange-
ments with external providers that provide for their continued supply in
the event of a crisis.

The process for the designation of critical services, as outlined by the EBA
in its Technical Advice Note, is based on the identification of critical func-
tions and consists of:

–	an analysis of the impact of the failure of a particular service on one or
  more critical functions (impact assessment). A service would be deemed
  critical only when its failure or malfunction would lead to the collapse
  of, or create a serious impediment to, the performance of one or more
  critical functions by the user of the service; and

                                                                                                         39
Chapter 4




                               –	an assessment of the substitutability of that critical service (supply-side
                                 analysis) considering, in particular, whether/how critical functions
                                 would be adversely affected, whether/how the service could be replaced
                                 and, if so, on what terms and within what time.

                               Critical services that are shared internally by several entities within the
                               institution/group (shared services) or provided to third parties should be
                               identified to the resolution authority as part of the resolvability assess-
                               ment (see chapter 10b) so that interconnections between critical functions
                               and associated services can be mapped and their criticality for the real
                               economy and the financial system can be properly assessed.

                               c. Core business lines
                               In line with the definition in Art. 2/1 (36) of the BRRD, the principal cri-
                               terion for identifying core business lines should be materiality. The EBA
                               suggests in its Technical Advice Note a number of quantitative indicators
                               including (actual and expected) revenues, profits, and assets attributable
                               to the business as well as its market share. However, the EBA recommends
                               against relying solely on quantitative indicators and that consideration
                               also be given to the internal organization of the institution in its entirety
                               to include, for instance, new, emerging businesses with significant growth
                               perspectives or unprofitable businesses that nevertheless contribute subs-
                               tantially to the institution’s franchise value.

                               Practical Considerations
                               –	For groups subject to consolidated supervision, the assessment of criti-
                                 cal functions will be conducted, in the first instance, by the parent com-
                                 pany and submitted to the consolidating supervisor as part of the group
                                 recovery plan.
For cross-border groups,       –	In the case of a cross-border group, the consolidating supervisor, in
the consolidating                co-operation with the supervisory college, will evaluate the criticality of
supervisor, in
                                 the group’s functions in respect of each relevant jurisdiction as well as
co-operation with the
supervisory college,
                                 for the group overall.
evaluates the criticality of   –	There is a distinct level of overlap between the assessment of critical
the group’s functions in         functions, governed by the BRRD, and the designation of systemically
respect of each relevant         important institutions under CRD IV (Art. 131) in that they both aim to
jurisdiction as well as for
                                 identify entities that are likely to pose a systemic risk to financial stabi-
the group overall.
                                 lity. Authorities need to ensure that relevant analysis is conducted and
                                 applied consistently.
                               –	Close cooperation between the competent supervisory authorities
                                 and resolution authorities in the assessment of critical functions will
                                 be paramount to ensure consistency between recovery and resolution
                                 planning and to provide for a seamless transition when resolution
                                 actions need to be taken.
                               –	In its Technical Advice Note, the EBA points out that supervisory and
                                 resolution authorities are usually better placed than the bank itself to
                                 assess and define its critical functions since they are able to draw on

40
                                                                                                 chapter 4




  information from multiple sources to form a consolidated view of the
  relevant market.
–	Banks are obliged to list their critical functions and core business lines
  in the recovery plan, but resolution authorities are not legally bound to
  guarantee their continued availability in resolution.
–	In recovery, the bank itself will usually be able to continue providing its”
  before critical functions. After its critical functions. After entering into
  resolution, decisions on these matters transfer largely to the resolution
  authority, whose primary concern will be the continuity of the function,
  not of the institution providing it.
–	The concept of critical functions, as introduced by the BRRD, is new in
  most Member States and there is little precedent so far. Best practice
  guidance has yet to be developed.

Examples
The FSB Guidance Note provides extensive examples of critical functions,
including payments, custody, certain lending and deposit-taking activi-
ties in the commercial or retail sector, clearing and settlement, limited
segments of wholesale markets, market-making in certain securities, and
highly concentrated specialist lending sectors. Examples of critical sha-
red services include the provision of information technology, given the
dependency of core banking processes on IT, and other services such as
facility management and administrative services.

The BRRD does not itself specify critical functions or services. The EBA pro-    The functions most
vides a (non-exhaustive) list of critical functions in its Comparative Report.   commonly considered
                                                                                 as critical include
The functions most commonly considered as critical include retail deposits
                                                                                 retail deposits (current
(current accounts), retail lending (incl. mortgages), payments, corporate        accounts), retail lending
lending and deposits, clearing and settlement, and derivatives. Other fun-       (incl. mortgages),
ctions considered as critical comprise, among others, secondary-market           payments, corporate
trading, debt capital markets, custody services, other retail products and       lending, and deposits,
                                                                                 clearing and settlement
services (credit cards, savings accounts), and trade finance.
                                                                                 and derivatives.

Relevant documents
–	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/778 of February 2, 2016
  supplementing Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to the circumstances
  and conditions under which the payment of extraordinary ex-post con-
  tributions may be partially or entirely deferred, and on the criteria for
  the determination of the activities, services and operations with regard
  to critical functions, and for the determination of the business lines and
  associated services with regard to core business lines
–	EBA Recovery Planning: Comparative Report on the approach to deter-
  mining Critical Functions and Core Business Lines in Recovery Plans,
  March 6, 2015
–	Financial Stability Board, Recovery and Resolution Planning for Syste-
  mically Important Financial Institutions: Guidance on Identification of
  Critical Functions and Critical Shared Services, July 16, 2013

                                                                                                         41
Chapter 4




            –	Financial Stability Board, Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes
              for Financial Institutions, October 15, 2014
            –	EBA/GL/2015/06, Final Draft Guidelines on the minimum list of ser-
              vices or facilities that are necessary to enable a recipient to operate a
              business transferred to it under Article 65(5) of Directive 2014/59/EU




42
                                                                                               chapter 5




Chapter 5:
The Resolution Authority:
Governance and Conflicts
of Interest

By Dieter Huber



Key questions                                                                    Art. 3 BRRD
–	Should the resolution authority be a separate body from the supervisory
   authority?
–	 How are responsibilities split between prudential supervision and the
   resolution authority?
–	 How can potential conflicts of interest between the resolution function
   and supervisory or other central bank tasks be managed?
–	Does the resolution authority need approval from the Ministry when
   taking resolution action?
–	 Is the resolution authority independent? Is it held accountable?



The financial crisis demonstrated that supervisors are not always best pla-
ced to deal with failing banks. The BRRD foresees the establishment of
an operationally independent “resolution authority” with the expertise,
resources, and operational capacity to effectively apply resolution actions
and exercise its powers with the speed and flexibility necessary to achieve
the resolution objectives.

A Separate Resolution Authority?                                                 The exception has
The BRRD envisages the resolution authority embedded within an institu-          become the rule: in most
                                                                                 countries a separate
tional framework for crisis management and bank resolution. This frame-
                                                                                 resolution unit has
work should provide for explicit mandates and roles for the institutions         been set up within the
involved, and provide a clear allocation of responsibilities, complemented       supervisory authority.
by an effective system for information exchange. The governance struc-
ture shall clearly lay out accountability rules for the authorities’ governing
bodies as well as rules of procedures.

One or, exceptionally, two or more resolution authorities that are empo-
wered to apply the resolution tools and exercise the resolution powers
should be designated. Resolution authorities may be national central

                                                                                                       43
Chapter 5




Resolution authority: governance, interplay with crisis management framework, conflicts of interest




                                                     Supervisory authority
                                                     –	Structurally separated from
                                                       resolution authority
                                                     –	Information exchange,
                                                       especially FOLTF assessment
                                                     –	Close cooperation in preparing,
                                                       planning, and applying resolution
                                                       decisions
                                                     –	Triggers FOLTF
     Central bank (CB)                               –	Prior opinions                                   Deposit guarantee scheme
     –	Function liquidity-related                    –	Function regarding government                    –	Contributes to resolution financing to
       (not solvency)                                  stabilization                                      absorb losses otherwise suffered by
     –	Function regarding                                                                                 covered depositors
       government stabilization                                                                         –	Authority supervising DGS represented
     –	Resolution college                                                                                 in resolution college
                                                      Resolution authority

     Ministry of Finance (MoF)                        –	CB, MoF, administrative Authority               Competition authority
                                                        appropriate (own) resources to
     –	Close involvement from an early stage                                                            Ensures compliance with state aid
                                                        ensure speed of action, expertize
     	 - Possible need for public funds                                                                 framework regarding
                                                      –	Clear powers, sufficient flexibility,
     	 - Information before decisions                                                                   – Any use of a resolution fund
                                                        robust governance
     	 - Prior approval if direct fiscal impact                                                         – Govt. stabilization tools
                                                      –	Accountability while respecting
     		 or systemic implications                                                                        – Precautionary recapitalization
                                                        professional secrecy
     		 (especially decision to resolve)                                                                   without triggering resolution
                                                      –	Operational independence,
     –	Leadership role in government stabilization                                                      – Valuation principles
                                                        public interest focus
     –	Resolution college                                                                               – Extraordinary exclusions from bail-in
                                                      –	Close informational link to MoF
                                                        (public funding aspect)
     Public entity stakeholder
     –	Interest in resolved bank as interest,
       guarantor or creditor
     –	Structurally separated from resolution
       authority
     –	Ensure equal treatment with other
       stakeholders
     –	Receives information of pending                                          Crisis management framework
       resolution                                                               –	Clear mandates, delineation of duties
                                                                                –	Conflict of interest management
                                                                                –	Efficient information framework

                                                                                Cross-border aspects
                                                                                –	Decisions to take into account potential impact on
                                                                                  other member states
                                                                                –	Resolution colleges




44
                                                                                                chapter 5




banks, competent ministries or other public administrative authorities or
authorities entrusted with public administrative powers. Exceptionally,
the authorities responsible for bank supervision may be designated the
resolution authority. However, this legal exception to the rule provided for
under Article 3 of the BRRD has, in practice, become the standard. In most
Member States the resolution authority is set up within the supervisory
authority (due to staffing reasons). For euro area countries, a single reso-
lution authority, the Single Resolution Board (SRB), was established sepa-
rated from the ECB as supervisor (see chapter 2). In some Member States,
the competencies attributed to the resolution authority under the BRRD
are split between two authorities. In Spain and Denmark, for example,
functions of a “preventive nature” and resolution planning are attribu-
ted to a separate body within the supervisory authority, with a different
resolution body responsible for the “executive phase” (the Fund for Orderly
Bank Restructuring (FROB) in Spain and the Financial Stability Company
(FSC) in Denmark).

Functional and Organizational Separation to Operate at Arm’s Length              Operational and
The aim is to ensure that sufficient mitigation, including structural arran-     functional independence
                                                                                 between the resolution
gements, is in place to adequately address possible conflicts of interest and
                                                                                 and the supervisory, or
allow operational independence within supervisory authorities, national          other, functions must be
central banks, competent ministries, or other authorities. Operational inde-     ensured by a minimum
pendence and separate reporting lines between the resolution function            set of structural
and the supervisory, or other functions, of the relevant authority should be     arrangements (separate
                                                                                 reporting lines, separate
ensured by structurally separating the staff involved in carrying out reso-
                                                                                 financing lines).
lution tasks. Such separation should, however, not hinder the exchange of
information and cooperation between the authorities and functions.

When the resolution function is set up as part of another authority, for
example the supervisory authority, the following minimum structural
arrangements should be in place:

1.	Separate reporting lines up to the highest possible level. A separate
   Board or a single Board Member, e.g. the Deputy Governor or a Director,
   should be ultimately responsible for taking resolution decisions.
2.	Separate financing lines. Resolution financing should be strictly sepa-
   rated. When central banks exercise resolution functions they should
   be strictly prohibited from financing resolution tools or the resolution
   fund via the central bank’s own risk.
3.	Clear allocation of responsibilities and ownership structures. If a “bridge
   bank” (see chapter 17) or an asset management vehicle (AMV) (see chap-
   ter 18) is created they should as a rule (depending on the expected period
   of existence) be operated at arm’s length from the resolution authority,
   but under its control. If the resolution authority partially owns shares
   in the bridge bank, day-to-day management should be the respon-
   sibility of the board of directors with only the limited involvement of
   shareholders. A separate public legal entity could be designated as the

                                                                                                       45
Chapter 5




                              shareholder. A similar outcome could be achieved if the resolution fund
                              is placed outside the resolution authority and given separate legal per-
                              sonality. Otherwise, conflicts of interests, which arise when the same
                              body licenses, supervises, manages, and owns a bridge bank, might
                              become difficult or impossible to manage.

                            Resolution tasks may thus be government tasks or, if so mandated, tasks
                            of the central bank. In the latter case, the central bank’s independence
                            should not be undermined. Specifically, aspects related to the solvency of
                            banks, e.g. the financing of resolution funds or other resolution financial
                            arrangements, remain a responsibility of the government. Liquidity-rela-
                            ted aspects, e.g., the provision of emergency liquidity assistance to solvent
                            credit institutions, are a central bank task. The central bank should also be
                            authorized to recover its expenses and costs incurred in carrying out reso-
                            lution measures from the institutions concerned. If tasks are entrusted
                            to the central bank, there should be acknowledgement of potential new
                            issues of institutional accountability and financial and political risk that
                            members of the central bank’s decision-making bodies may be exposed to.
                            The relevant authority may be exposed to various conflicts of interest
                            while performing resolution tasks:

Operational and             Intrinsic Conflicts of Interest
functional independence     Conflicts could arise if an existing authority (ministry of finance (MoF),
between the resolution
                            central bank, supervisory authority) is additionally entrusted with the
and the supervisory, or
other, functions must be
                            resolution function. Such conflicts could involve the predisposition not
ensured by a minimum        to question the work of the supervisory authority or favoring short-term
set of structural           fiscally beneficial solutions and thus delaying resolution decisions. Such
arrangements (separate      conflicts should be mitigated by the above mentioned structural arran-
reporting lines, separate
                            gements and ensuring that the resolution authority has the resources and
financing lines).
                            expertise necessary for a speedy and flexible exercise of its powers.

                            Extrinsic Conflicts of Objectives
                            Resolution authorities face potential conflicts and trade-offs in a number
                            of dimensions when applying resolution tools and exercising resolution
                            powers embedded in the objectives of bank resolutions. These are in part
                            mutually exclusive and include the following aims: to ensure the conti-
                            nuity of critical functions of a bank; to avoid a significant adverse effect
                            on the financial system, in particular by preventing contagion; to pro-
                            tect public funds by minimizing reliance on extraordinary public finan-
                            cial support, and to protect depositors and client assets (see chapter 4).
                            When pursuing the above objectives, the resolution authority should seek
                            to minimize the cost of resolution and avoid destruction of value unless
                            necessary to achieve the resolution objectives.

                            Inter-institutional aspects are relevant too. For example, where pub-
                            lic support is provided, the competent authority for executing the state
                            aid framework has a say in parallel with the resolution authority. The

46
                                                                                                chapter 5




legitimate interests of different authorities should be accounted for by
establishing balanced processes that envisage prior information, opinions
or approvals of the institutions concerned. Conflicts of interest could be
mitigated by clarifying the role of each authority involved in the resolu-
tion process and formalizing its interaction with other authorities (e.g. via
Memorandum of Understanding).

Accountability and Government Involvement                                        Operational and
When performing the tasks conferred on them, resolution authorities              functional independence
                                                                                 between the resolution
should act independently and in the general interest. The resolution fra-
                                                                                 and the supervisory, or
mework should clearly describe how the powers of the resolution autho-           other, functions must be
rity will be executed. At the same time, there should be sufficient flexibi-     ensured by a minimum
lity to deal with each individual resolution case. The resolution authority      set of structural
should be accountable to the national parliament, through participation          arrangements (separate
                                                                                 reporting lines, separate
in hearings and publishing annual reports.
                                                                                 financing lines).

Unless otherwise laid down in national law, ministry approval should
be given before the implementation of decisions that have a direct fiscal
impact or systemic implications. Where the resolution authority is not
the competent ministry it should inform the competent ministry, usually
the MoF, of decisions pursuant to the resolution regime. There should be
close cooperation with the MoF, including granting authorized employees
access to documents and information.

If the resolution authority is required to obtain the MoF’s prior approval
before taking resolution actions in a very broad range of circumstances –
beyond cases in which the resolution measures have a direct fiscal impact
– the question arises as to whether the MoF is considered to operate de
facto as a second resolution authority. This would require the MoF to
ensure operational independence of its resolution function. The responsi-
bilities of authorities involved in the resolution process should be precisely
defined to avoid any duplication or overlap of powers.

Conflicts of interest may also arise in situations where the government is
a shareholder or creditor of the bank under resolution or has guaranteed
its obligations: in such cases the function of resolution authority has to
be clearly separated from the public stakeholder function (ownership or
otherwise). This could gain relevance, for example, in the context of the
determination of the amount required for recapitalization, which in turn
informs the extent of write-down or dilution of ownership. Independent
valuations as a basis for such determinations help to avoid accusations of
preferential treatment of certain owners or creditors.

Cross-Border Interest Management
The cross-border dimension of decisions is of particular importance, not
only regarding the interests of banks, shareholders, or creditors in other
countries. Execution of powers by a resolution authority may affect the

                                                                                                       47
Chapter 5




                                            interests of taxpayers in other countries. For example, if certain liabilities
                                            are excluded from bail-in, the resolution fund may need to fill the gap,
                                            resulting in the resolution fund itself needing support from transnatio-
                                            nal sources. A framework for the coordination of resolution authorities
                                            in different countries should be established enabling the participating
                                            authorities to exchange information, including (parts of) resolution plans
                                            of banks, in a confidential manner. This could increase visibility of foreign
                                            operations and clarify whether foreign creditors might be beneficiaries of
                                            funds in the event that public support measures were undertaken, thus
                                            minimizing incentives to ring-fence along national borders. In general,
                                            the authorities involved should take into account the potential impact of
                                            their decisions on financial stability and the social and economic effects
                                            in other countries. This is precisely why crisis management groups and
                                            resolution colleges are being established to ensure coordination and con-
                                            sistency at all stages of the recovery and resolution process.

Overview of “resolution related key tasks” and the division of responsibilities
between supervision and resolution based on the BRRD framework                                                                       ✓ = formal responsibility


     Task                                               Responsibility of Supervisory Authority              Responsibility of Resolution Authority

     Early intervention and preparation for
     taking recovery and resolution action

     Recovery plan assessment + ordering a              	 ✓                                                  Information/consultation
     bank to remedy the identified deficiencies
     Early intervention: corrective and                 	 ✓                                                  Information
     enforcement measures to banks in (likely)
     breach of prudential requirements
     Conclusion of intra-group financial                	 ✓                                                  Assessment regarding the impact on financial
     support agreement                                  General review                                       stability and the resolvability of the entity
                                                                                                             providing the support
     Provision of intra-group financial                 	 ✓                                                  Re-assessment of resolution plan
     support in case of need                            Decision to prohibit or restrict support             if support is not given
     Recommendation within Supervisory Review           	 ✓                                                  Information/consultation
     and Evaluation Process (SREP)
     Definition of minimum requirement for eligible     Information/consultation                             	 ✓
     liabilities MREL (= loss absorbing capacity) for
     individual bank
     Resolution plan                                    Information/consultation                             	 ✓
     Resolvability assessment including     Information/ consultation                                        	 ✓
     removing impediments to resolvability1
     Ordering a bank to contact potential purchasers    Close cooperation                                    	 ✓ Upon information from the supervisor
     ex-ante resolution                                                                                      that early intervention measures are triggered
     Write-down and conversion of capital               Information/cooperation                              	 ✓
                                                        Information that a bank has reached the point
                                                        of non-viability (PONV) or is failing or likely to
                                                        fail will generally come from supervision2           	


48
                                                                                                                                                chapter 5




    Resolution phase

    Determining the fulfilment of conditions         Information/cooperation                             	 ✓
    for initiating the resolution process
    –	 failing or likely to fail (FOLTF)             Information that a bank is FOLTF
    –	 Public interest                               will generally come from supervision3
    –	 no private sector solution                                                                        	
    Appointment of independent valuer                Information                                         	 ✓
    to define the exact amount of losses,
    recapitalization needs and the hypothetical
    loss under liquidation4
    (incl. prescribing detailed conditions and
    manner of carrying out the valuation)
    Decision on and application of                   Information/cooperation                             	 ✓
    resolution tools and the use of
    Resolution Fund                                  Licensing and supervision of bridge bank,
    –	Bail-in (incl. prescribing the terms and       consent for acquirer in case of sale, continue
       manner of performing the write-down           supervision of restored bank etc.
       and conversion of liabilities)
    –	 Sale of business
       	(including bid selection etc.)
    –	 Bridge bank (transfer of assets,
    	 rights, liabilities, …)
    –	 Asset separation tool
    –	 Business reorganization plan
    	 of the restored bank
    	 (recapitalized via bail-in)
    –	 Possible appointment of temporary
       manager to replace the management body
    Revoking the license                             	 ✓                                                 	 ✓
                                                     Outside resolution: always;                         or request to Supervisor
                                                     Within resolution upon request of the
                                                     resolution authority
    Decision on the use of the deposit               Information                                         	 ✓
    insurance money for resolution                                                                       based on independent valuation
    Reporting                                        	 ✓                                                 Automatic predefined information by
                                                                                                         supervisor to the resolution authority or direct
                                                                                                         access.
                                                                                                         Plus additional reporting for resolution
                                                                                                         purposes
    Cooperation with foreign resolution              Information                                         	 ✓
    authorities (Colleges)
    Attendance at meetings of the bank’s managing 	 ✓                                                    	 ✓
    and executive board and participation in a
    bank’s assembly/ shareholder meetings

1
 	 Resolvability assessment may conclude (for small non interconnected banks) that a bank is resolvable by simple liquidation.
2
 	 The BRRD leaves it open if the Resolution authority or the competent authority decides if a bank is considered to reach the PONV, Article 59 (3) b.
   For the euro area Article 21 (2) holds that whether the entity is viable is decided by the Board under the SRM or the ECB PONV and FOLTF
3
 	 See Article 32 (2) BRRD: The resolution authority may decide it in addition (as a fallback).
4
 	 See chapters 11 and 20.

                                                                                                                                                            49
Chapter 6




Recovery Planning and
Early Intervention

Chapter 6:
Recovery Plans

                          By Emmeline van Heukelem



Art. 5–9 BRRD             Key questions
and section A             –	 Why are Recovery Plans needed for financial institutions?
of the Annex              –	 What is the role of supervisory authorities and resolution authorities in
                             the assessment of a Recovery Plan?
                          –	 What are key success factors for a Recovery Plan?
                          –	Do subsidiaries of banking groups need an individual plan as well?
                          –	Does the BRRD provide for exceptions to the Recovery Plan
                             requirements?



Recovery plans are both   Recovery Planning to Reduce the Impact of Bank Failures
a preparative and a       Regulators in several jurisdictions responded to the financial crisis by
preventive tool: They
                          asking banks to draw up a Recovery Plan before adoption of the BRRD.
have added value for
banks and supervisors,
                          Although there were some differences in the scope and content of these
also under business as    plans, they all sought to tackle a bank(ing) crisis at an early stage, promo-
usual conditions.         ting financial stability and trust in the banking sector and reducing the
                          societal impact of future bank failures.

                          Since then, enhancements have been made to the regulatory framework
                          that reduce the likelihood of future crises and improve the resilience of
                          institutions against a crisis. Still, one can never rule out the possibility that
                          an institution could get into difficulties. Recovery planning addresses this
                          specific point and serves both as a preparative and as a preventive tool.

                          With the implementation of BRRD, recovery planning is now accepted
                          as an important and recurring aspect of regular supervision, providing
                          valuable insights to both banks and supervisors, also under “business as
                          usual” conditions, as will be set out below.



50
                                                                                                                 chapter 6




Elements of a Recovery Plan




                                           Assessment by the supervisor,
                                          information to the resolution authority
                                            (examines impact on resolvability,
                                         possible recommendation to supervisor)




                                                   recovery plan




                              Approval by the board of the financial institution


        General          Strategic Analysis                   Scenarios
        Description of   Critical Functions                   (idiosyncratic,                  Communication
        the Group and    & Core Business                      systemic and          Recovery   Plan (external/
        Business Model   Lines                   Indicators   combined)             Options    internal)

                                              Crisis Management Governance
                                                 Management Information




                                                                                                                        51
Chapter 6




                        As supervisory authorities in all EU Member States now work on a com-
                        mon legal basis, banks are expected to deliver more structured and consis-
                        tent Recovery Plans that should also enable a more effective cross-border
                        approach.

                        Furthermore, the BRRD creates a solid basis for supervisory authorities
                        to share Recovery Plans with resolution authorities, enhancing coopera-
                        tion between the respective authorities. Resolution authorities can use the
                        Recovery Plan to identify whether any actions in the plan may adversely
                        impact the resolvability of the institution and make recommendations in
                        that regard to the competent authority.

                        Based on experiences from countries that requested Recovery Plans from
                        their national banks before the BRRD, the following aspects can be consi-
                        dered key success factors for a Recovery Plan.

Ownership by the bank   Recovery Plans: By and For Banks
is key for recovery     Recovery Plans are drawn up and maintained by the bank. This is very
planning.
                        different from resolution planning, where the authorities draft the plan.

                        In its Recovery Plan, the bank sets out how it monitors relevant negative
                        developments (early warning thresholds and recovery indicators) and how
                        it could steer away from severe stress should it occur. By using adverse
                        scenarios, including system-wide and idiosyncratic stress events, the
                        bank substantiates that it could take early action to handle a (progressi-
                        vely) deteriorating capital and/or liquidity position and, by doing so, is in
                        a position to independently return to “business as usual”. This requires the
                        application of certain recovery options, as well as a solid and timely escala-
                        tion process in which the decision-making body of the bank is involved.
                        The recovery planning and crisis management roles and responsibilities
                        should be clearly defined. Given the importance of senior management
                        involvement, the management body is required to formally approve the
                        plan before it is submitted to the competent authority.

Recovery planning       In addition, some banks have chosen to organize crisis simulation exer-
improves bank           cises to test their Recovery Plan in practice. This offered valuable insights
management’s
                        into the plans’ adequacy and effectiveness. In general, recovery planning
knowledge and
awareness.
                        provides a new perspective and as such yields additional insights. It also
                        increases awareness among the bank’s senior management of which of the
                        bank’s services are critical for the economy or could endanger financial
                        stability (for more details, see the guidelines produced by the European
                        Banking Authority and chapter 5). Although drawing up a Recovery Plan is
                        a resource-intensive task, feedback provided by banks is generally positive
                        and the Recovery Plan process helped improve banks’ crisis management
                        capabilities and led to internal quality enhancements.




52
                                                                                               chapter 6




Timely Information and Appropriate Trigger Setting                              Recovery indicators
For a Recovery Plan to be relevant, the bank should:                            should be aligned
                                                                                with the regular
                                                                                risk management
a)	Apply an appropriate set of early warning signals and Recovery Plan          framework.
   indicators that are both qualitative and quantitative and that include
   forward-looking aspects;
b)	Ensure indicators are an integral part of regular risk management pro-
   cesses and are seen as a continuous process. Banks need the IT in place
   to intensify their monitoring or to provide reliable management infor-
   mation on a frequent or ad hoc basis;
c)	Determine (relatively) “easy to hit” indicator levels. Triggering these
   initiates activation of the crisis management governance, which means
   more intense monitoring and informed discussion at the right manage-
   ment level without delay – which is the whole purpose of a Recovery
   Plan. This also gives management sufficient time to successfully inter-
   vene. It is worth noting, however, that the bank is not obliged to execute
   recovery options when indicators are met.

Focus on Recoverability                                                         Impact and feasibility
The bank should consider and describe a range of credible recovery options      of recovery options
                                                                                must be assessed in the
in the Recovery Plan and provide an assessment of their impact and fea-
                                                                                plan. The application of
sibility. This demonstrates not only the potential overall “recoverability”     recovery options in a real
but also the bank’s preparedness to address a variety of issues. The bank       recovery situation needs
should list and assess the actions necessary to successfully implement its      a case-by-case analysis
recovery measures.                                                              by the institution’s
                                                                                management (no
                                                                                automatism).
Good practice is not only to look at the quantitative impact but also take
operational considerations into account, for example the communication
obligations under the relevant national laws. Furthermore, systemic and
business model considerations are important, as are addressing effects on
customers and the wider market.

In assessing this part of the plan, the interplay between recovery options
and the calibration of the indicators is important. If the bank has only
limited options available and they take a long time to generate an effect
then indicators need to be set at an even more prudent level. Banks should
also consider what the impediments are to execute measures, and cri-
tically assess how and when to remove those. The more critical a quick
execution of a certain measure is, the more important it is to address the
related impediments beforehand (“preparatory measures”). For group
Recovery Plans, the assessment should also include an overview of subs-
tantial practical or legal impediments to the prompt transfer of own funds
or the repayment of liabilities or assets within the group.

Assessment by Supervisors – Part of “Robust Governance Arrangements”
A well-prepared and comprehensive Recovery Plan is a valuable source
of information for banks and their supervisors and should be part of the

                                                                                                       53
Chapter 6




                           regular risk management processes and existing policies of the bank. The
                           Recovery Plan should, for example, be aligned with the risk appetite frame-
                           work, business continuity plans and contingency funding plans.

                           Assessment of the Recovery Plan by the competent authority will feed into
                           the assessment of “internal governance and institution-wide controls”
                           under the supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP) pursuant to
                           article 74 Directive 2013/36/EU.

                           Furthermore, the BRRD introduces a new range of supervisory measures
                           that can be applied. Where an institution does not present an adequate
                           Recovery Plan, competent authorities can require material deficiencies or
                           material impediments to its implementation to be redressed. In extreme
                           situations, this may even result in requiring the bank to take measures that
                           the competent authority “considers to be necessary” including proportio-
                           nately limiting the freedom of the bank to conduct certain businesses.

Colleges of Supervisors    Group Recovery Plans and Cooperation Through Colleges of Supervisors
are the forum for          Recovery Plans should be developed for groups as a whole and the plan
information-sharing
                           should cover all material entities in a holistic way. This requires an
and cooperation for
group Recovery Plans.
                           in-depth understanding of the interconnectedness and dependencies
                           within a group. A group plan also facilitates coordination and consistency,
                           should the plan be executed. This means the Recovery Plan includes suffi-
                           cient information on its material entities in the different building blocks
                           of the plan (e.g. under governance, recovery indicators, recovery measures
                           and scenarios).

                           The BRRD obliges the parent undertaking to draw up the Recovery Plan
                           and submit it to the consolidating supervisor. Additional individual plans
                           are only needed if the supervisor of the subsidiary so requires and then
                           only after this has been the outcome of a Joint Decision process by the
                           ­
                           College of Supervisors, which is open to EBA mediation (Article 8(2) BRRD).

As an exception,           Exceptions to Recovery Plan Requirements
“simplified obligations”   The scope of the relevant regulatory framework can deviate based on the
or a waiver may apply.
                           characteristics of the institution. Based on certain restrictive criteria, inter
                           alia the systemic importance of the institution, “simplified obligations” or
                           a waiver may apply (article 4(5) BRRD).
                           	
                           Relevant documents
                           –	EBA/RTS/2014/12 Final draft regulatory technical standards on the
                              assessment of recovery plans under Article 6(8) of Directive 2014/59/
                              EU (BRRD)
                           –	EBA/GL/2014/06 Final draft technical standards and guidelines on the
                              range of scenarios to be used in recovery plans
                           –	EBA/Op/2015/05 Technical advice on the delegated acts on critical fun-
                              ctions and core business lines

54
                                                                              chapter 6




–	EBA/CP/2014/25 Guidelines on the application of simplified obligations
  under Article 4(5) of Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/GL/2015/16 Guidelines on simplified obligations, July 7, 2015
–	Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/962 of June 16, 2016
  laying down implementing technical standards with regard to the
  uniform formats, templates and definitions for the identification and
  transmission of information by competent authorities and resolution
  authorities to the EBA according to Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/RTS/2014/11 Final draft Regulatory Technical Standards on the
  content of recovery plans under Article 5(10) of Directive 2014/59/EU
  establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit insti-
  tutions and investment firms
–	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 of March 23, 2016
  supplementing Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory techni-
  cal standards specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans
  and group resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent
  authority is to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery
  plans, the conditions for group financial support, the requirements for
  independent valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and
  conversion powers, the procedures and contents of notification requi-
  rements and of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of
  the resolution colleges
–	EBA-GL-2015-02 Guidelines on the minimum list of qualitative and
  quantitative recovery plan indicators.




                                                                                    55
Chapter 7




Chapter 7:
Intra-group Financial
Support Agreements (IGFSAs)
                             By Georg Merc



Art. 19–26 BRRD              Key questions
                             –	 What are the advantages of entering into an intra-group financial
                                support agreement (IGFSA)?
                             –	 May IGFSAs include third country subsidiaries outside the EU?
                             –	 Who can restrict/prohibit the support?
                             –	 Must shareholders approve an IGFSA?
                             –	 Can the IGFSA lead to a temporary exemption from capital buffers,
                                liquidity provision or large exposure requirements?
                             –	 Are IGFSAs part of the recovery plan?



The adoption of an           Voluntary Cross-Border Support Agreements
IGFSA is voluntary and       Entering into an intra-group financial support agreement (IGFSA) is a pre-
forms part of an entity’s
                             paratory and preventive tool foreshadowed in the BRRD for cross-border
recovery plan. It may
cover not only entities
                             groups. IGFSAs may cover not only entities established within the EU but
established within the       also third country subsidiaries covered by consolidated supervision. Prior
EU but also third country    to the BRRD there was no specific EU legal framework for intra-group
subsidiaries covered by      financial support. As a result, the terms and conditions for intra-group asset
consolidated supervision.
                             transfers have been very diversely governed by national laws. During the
                             recent crisis, ring-fencing strategies were applied (see chapter 2 on Banking
                             Union). The BRRD provides a harmonized EU framework that specifies the
                             principles for IGFSAs. This framework includes details for the calculation
                             of the amount of intra-group financial support as well as the criteria that
                             will be assessed by the competent authorities when permitting an affiliated
                             entity to provide intra-group financial support to another group entity.
IGFSAs are entered on a
voluntary basis. These
agreements may cover the     There is no obligation for group entities to enter cross-border support
parent undertaking and       agreements. Group entities may conclude an agreement on a volun-
one or more subsidiaries     tary basis obliging each other to provide support in case one of the par-
of the group, provide for    ties meets the conditions for early intervention (preparatory step) (see
up-stream, down-stream,
                             chapter 7 on early intervention measures). These agreements may cover
or side-stream support
and may take the form of     the parent undertaking and one or more subsidiaries of the group, provide
a loan, guarantee or other   for up-stream, down-stream, or side-stream support, and may take the
collateral.                  form of a loan, guarantee or other collateral.

56
                                                                                                              chapter 7




 Approval process for intra-group financial support agreements



     Application                   Competent Authorities                           Shareholders           Info
        phase                          Review Phase                               Approval Phase        Sharing



           Group parent
                           Consolidating
                          supervisor (CS)
                                                 Other supervisory
                                                 authorities (hosts)



                            Assess if terms are consistent with
                            conditions and none of the parties
                            meets early intervention conditions
4 months




                          No joint decision      Joint decision
                                       (possible EBA
                                        assistance)


                            Own CS                     Hosts may refer
                            decision                    matter to EBA




                                              No EBA Action         EBA binding
                                                                      decision
1 month




                                                                                   Approval needed        Resolution
                                                                                  from shareholders       authorities
                                                                                     of every group
                                    Authorize                 Prohibit
                                                                                    entity proposing         EBA
                                                                                    to enter into the
                                                                                       agreement



                                                                                                                        57
Chapter 7




Following authorization   Complex Review and Approval Process
by the competent          Group entities apply for authorization of an IGFSA and transmit the rele-
authorities, the
                          vant documentation to the consolidating supervisor. Supervisors of each
shareholders of every
group entity need to
                          entity of the group then have four months to review the general agree-
approve the agreement     ment and reach a joint decision. During this process, the agreement must
and authorize their       also be assessed against the principles and conditions for financial support
management to provide/    as outlined in the BRRD. If no agreement can be reached, the consolida-
receive support if
                          ting supervisor (the European Central Bank (ECB) within the euro area)
required.
                          can make its own decision, taking the views and reservations of the other
                          competent authorities into account. If the matter is referred to the Euro-
                          pean Banking Authority (EBA) it must take a decision within one month,
                          which is then binding on the group level supervisor (this is different for the
                          actual granting of support where EBA has no binding mediation rights).
                          Following authorization by the competent authorities, the shareholders of
                          every group entity that proposes to enter the agreement need to approve
                          the agreement and authorize their management to provide/receive sup-
                          port if required.

The granting of support   Conditions and Safeguards to be Considered in the Actual Granting of
under a concluded         Support
IGFSA is decided on a
                          If early intervention is required, the actual granting of support based on
case-by-case basis and
can be prohibited by
                          the IGFSA must be decided on a case-by-case basis by the management of
the supervisor of the     the entity providing the support. The competent authorities again have
providing entity.         to agree/prohibit or restrict the proposed support by reasoned decision
                          within five days. Where the competent authority of the entity receiving
                          support has objections regarding the decision to restrict or prohibit sup-
                          port it may, within two days, refer the matter to the EBA for non-binding
                          assistance.

                          The final decision lies, however, with the competent authority of the pro-
                          viding entity. The prohibition/restriction of providing support may lead to
                          a reassessment of the recovery plan.

                          Before approving group support as an early intervention measure, super-
                          visors have to assess whether the following conditions and safeguards
                          have been considered.

                          –	The reasons for the financial distress of the receiving entity and the expec-
                            ted success of the support, as well as the prospect of reimbursement;
                          –	In terms of the providing entity, its compliance/non-compliance with
                            prudential requirements following the support, the interests of the pro-
                            viding entity and the group as a whole, the significance of the providing
                            entity for the financial system of one or more Member States, as well as
                            the effects of the support on the resolvability of the entity; and
                          –	The terms under which the support is granted (e.g. the consideration or
                            the maturity profile).



58
                                                                                               chapter 7




Competent authorities may authorize temporary non-compliance with               Competent authorities
prudential requirements (there are stricter assessment rules for upstream       may authorize temporary
                                                                                non-compliance with
support) if the providing entity does not meet the combined capital buffer
                                                                                capital buffers, liquidity
(CCB) requirement i.e. the capital conservation buffer, countercyclical buf-    provision, or large
fer and systemic buffer to be held as Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1).      exposure requirements.
In this case, the competent authority should decide whether to authorize
the provision based on the capital conservation plan for the providing
entity, thereby considering the purpose of the capital buffers concerned,
the significance of the shortfall, and the timeframe for the restoration. The
same procedure applies to a non-compliance with liquidity requirements,
whereupon the competent authority has to assess the plan for elimina-
ting non-compliance. Even the timely infringement of any large exposure
requirement may be authorized (intra-group transactions are limited to
25 % of the respective institution’s own funds).

In the case of upstream or side-stream support, the competent authorities
have to take additional aspects into account and may grant authorization
only under extraordinary circumstances (in particular the destabilization
of the group as a whole and adverse effects on financial stability).

Limited Regulatory Incentives to Enter Cross-Border Support
Agreements
Business-as-usual financial support agreements (such as guarantees, let-
ters of comfort) that do not confine financial support specifically to early
intervention scenarios as well as ad hoc support arrangements do not fall
under the scope of IGFSAs and the conditions and approvals stipulated
under the BRRD. Also a support agreement is not a condition for providing
liquidity within a group and the provisions do not affect liability arrange-
ments that protect the institutions through cross-guarantees or equiva-
lent arrangements. Furthermore, unlike the situation with institutional
protection schemes, there are no regulatory facilitations (e.g. waivers) or
benefits linked to such agreements.

However, an IGFSA can be stated in the recovery plan as a possible reco-
very measure, and the preparatory agreement is a significant step to avoid
ring-fencing and to ensure timely implementation since the support is
already approved by the shareholders. Competent authorities may require
the institution to make use of the support agreement during early inter-
vention. Due to the disclosure requirements (description of the general
terms) it might influence the creditworthiness of institutions. Finally,
cross-border support agreements may help to receive a liquidity waiver
(derogation from the application of liquidity requirements on an indivi-
dual basis) or fulfill the criteria for special treatment under the liquidity
coverage ratio (LCR) under the EU capital requirements (CRD IV/CRR)
framework.




                                                                                                       59
Chapter 7




            Relevant documents
            –	EBA/CP/2014/30 Regulatory Technical Standards and Guidelines spe-
              cifying the conditions for group financial support under Article 23 of
              Directive 2014/59/EU
            –	EBA/CP/2015/22 Regulatory Technical Standards on criteria for a pre-
              ferential treatment in cross-border intragroup financial support under
              LCR
            –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
              Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards
              specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group
              resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is
              to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the con-
              ditions for group financial support, the requirements for independent
              valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion
              powers, the procedures and contents of notification requirements and
              of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of the resolu-
              tion colleges
            –	EBA/ITS/2015/07 Final Draft ITS on Disclosure of Group Financial Sup-
              port Agreements
            –	Commission final C/2016/3440: Commission Implementing Regulation
              (EU) 2016/911 laying down implementing technical standards with
              regard to the form and the content of the description of group financial
              support agreements in accordance with Directive 2014/59/ establishing
              a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and
              investment firms




60
                                                                                                                                             chapter 7




 Approval process to provide support under the authorized agreement




                  Management body of                           Management body of
               the providing entity/entities,               the receiving entity/entities,
                   reasoned decision to                              decision to
                     provide support                               accept support



                                                notify




             EBA              Consolidating supervisor/competent                        Competent authority
                                  authority of providing entity                         of the receiving entity




                                                                                                            EBA
5 days




                                    No                                                       notify
                   Agree                                 Restrict      Prohibit
                                  reaction
                                                                                                             Competent authority of
                                                                                                               the receiving entity
2 days




                                                                                                Objects to decision,              May request a
                                                                                                 may request EBA               reassessment of the
                                                                                                    assistance                    recovery plan




                                                              Consolidating supervisor/competent
                                                                  authority of providing entity




                                                                                                                                                     61
Chapter 8




Chapter 8:
Early Intervention
Measures (EIM)
                              By Dominik Freudenthaler



Art. 27–30 BRRD               Key questions
                              –	 What are the conditions for taking early intervention measures?
                              –	 Are early intervention measures applied by the resolution authority or by
                                 the supervisory authority?
                              –	 How does the recovery plan intersect with early intervention?
                              –	 What is the relationship between early intervention and the supervisory
                                 review and evaluation process (SREP)?



Early intervention            Early Intervention to Avoid Banks Failing
measures empower              Early intervention measures give the competent supervisory authority an
supervisors – not the
                              effective toolset to help prevent an institution from failing. Early inter-
resolution authority –
to react to an escalation
                              vention measures empower supervisors, not the resolution authority, to
of financial problems         react to an escalation of financial problems at an early stage, well before
at an early stage, well       an institution fails. Hence the BRRD draws a clear line between ongoing
before an institution         supervision (which includes early intervention measures) and resolution
fails.
                              – although close cooperation between the authorities is of course indi-
                              cated in the early intervention phase. The resolution authority takes over
                              only if the failure of an institution seems inevitable and if resolution is in
                              the public interest, i.e. if such failure represents a risk to the system (see
                              chapter 13 on the conditions for triggering resolution).
                              ­

“Rapidly deteriorating        Triggers: Qualitative Indicators With Some Quantitative Elements
financial conditions” are     The BRRD establishes a set of qualitative triggers with some quantita-
assessed against a set
                              tive elements determining the application of early intervention measu-
of triggers including: a
deteriorating liquidity
                              res. This gives supervisors the discretion to take account of all available
situation, an increasing      information in deciding whether they should be applied. The generic
level of leverage, an         trigger in the BRRD for early intervention measures is a “rapidly dete-
increase of NPL portfolios,   riorating financial condition”. This is assessed against a specific set of
or a concentration of
                              triggers, which include a deteriorating liquidity situation, an increasing
exposures, and may
include a quantitative
                              level of leverage, an increase of non-performing loan (NPL) portfolios, or
trigger of own funds plus     a concentration of exposures. In relation to own funds, the BRRD sug-
1.5 %.                        gests that a trigger set 1.5 percentage points above the level of an ins-
                              titution’s own funds requirement may be provided for. This allows the

62
                                                                                                                              chapter 8




Early Intervention




                                 Early Intervention powers



   Conditions                                                                      EI own funds based*
   –	 Regulatory infringements (CRR)                                               National buffer            6,0 %
   –	 Significant deteriorating financial condition                                requirements
      i.e. liquidity, NPLs, leverage,                                                                                  1,5 % EI buffer
                                                                                   Conservation buffer        2,5 %    CET 1 quality
      own funds (+1,5)
                                                                                   Pillar 2

                                                                                   T 2	                         2%
                                                                                   AT 1	                      1,5 %
                                                                                   CET 1	                     4,5 %


                                               supervisor
                                               must act and
                                                may order




   Removal of senior                           Force
   management                                                          Change of              Convention of            Change of
                                          implementation
   & management body	                                                   business              shareholders            operational
                                            of recovery
   appointment of temporary                                             strategy                meeting                structures
                                                plan
   administrator


*	 The buffers figures in the “EI Own funds based” box are examples.


                                                                                                                                         63
Chapter 8




                           supervisor to act when infringement is likely in the near future before a
                           material breach occurs.

                           More generally, any infringement of EU capital requirements (CRR/CRD
                           IV) also triggers consideration of early intervention measures. Although
                           this is arguably vague and gives much discretion to the authority, it should
                           be seen in relation to the monitoring of key indicators under the super-
                           visory review and evaluation process (SREP) requirements. To increase
                           consistency of supervisory practices in relation to the application of early
                           intervention measures triggers, the EBA guidelines clarify requirements
                           that competent authorities should follow when setting thresholds related
                           to financial and risk indicators. The indicators are to be routinely moni-
                           tored under SREP. Hence, early intervention measures will intersect with
                           other supervisory measures and powers and will supplement, rather than
                           replace, the existing supervisory process.

The existing supervisory   Further defining the set of triggers, European Banking Authority (EBA)
process (e.g. the          guidelines stipulate that early intervention measures are to be applied if
monitoring of key
                           the institution is, or is soon likely to, infringe the requirements of relevant
indicators under SREP)
supplements the taking
                           EU (capital requirements CRR/CRD IV) and national implementing legis-
of early intervention      lation in the following circumstances:
measures.
                           –	 Triggers based on the outcome of the SREP. Early intervention measures
                              should be considered if the overall or individual institution SREP score
                              is 4; and also if the overall SREP score is 3 but individual elements for
                              internal governance and control, business models strategy, capital ade-
                              quacy or liquidity score 4.
                           –	Material changes or anomalies in the monitoring of the SREPs key
                              financial and non-financial indicators. EBA guidelines set out a 1.5 %
                              above the institution’s own funds trigger, including Pillar 2 require-
                              ments but excluding the capital buffers under CRD IV. In practice, the-
                              refore, the 1.5 % is an absolute minimum, mainly relevant for smaller
                              banks without additional set buffers.
                           –	Significant events. Early intervention measures may be triggered by
                              events that could have a significant prudential impact on the institu-
                              tion’s financial condition. For example, a major operational risk due to
                              rogue trading, fraud, natural disaster, major IT incidents, a significant
                              deterioration of the Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible
                              Liabilities (MREL), or rating downgrades.

                           EIM triggers may be defined in further detail by the national law transpo-
                           sing the BRRD. The supervisor always makes the final decision on the exact
                           configuration of triggers. An effective approach is to use mainly qualita-
                           tive indicators in the statute. Quantitative individual triggers applicable
                           to a specific institution should be included in the recovery plan indicators
                           (see chapter 6 on recovery plans). This enables the supervisor to take into
                           account the individual circumstances of the institution and to meet the

64
                                                                                                 chapter 8




requirements of the principle of proportionality. Hard triggers, once hit,
might also be linked to a concrete measure that has to be implemented.

No Automaticity in Applying Early Intervention Measures
Clearly defined triggers for early intervention measures increase legal
certainty for both supervised entities and authorities. The breach of
early intervention triggers should not, however, result in the automatic
application of early intervention measures. The authority should instead
be required to further investigate the situation to confirm the extent to
which triggers are met and to consider if early intervention measures are
required. If triggers are breached but the authority decides not to use early
intervention measures it should ensure that the reasoning and justifica-
tions are well documented.

If early intervention is triggered by material change or anomalies in the
monitoring of the SREPs, authorities might, in the interests of time and
depending on the concrete circumstances of the individual case, apply
early intervention measures without formally updating the assessment of
the respective SREP. In the case of significant events the supervisor will
regularly update the risk assessment and the SREP score. However, in cer-
tain circumstances a significant event may be used as a direct trigger for
the decision to apply early intervention measures.

The determination that conditions for EIM are met is also of relevance in
the context of triggering the application of intra-group support measures
(see chapter 8 on intra-group financial support agreements).

Early Intervention Measures                                                      If action under the
If early intervention has been triggered, a variety of measures are availa-      bank’s recovery plan
                                                                                 proves to be insufficient,
ble to supervisors to address the deterioration of an institution’s financial
                                                                                 the supervisor may
and economic situation. First and foremost, the supervisor may require           require changes to the
the management body of an institution to implement the appropriate               institution’s business
arrangements and measures set out in the dedicated recovery plan (see            strategy, its legal or
chapter 6, recovery plans). Hence this phase will be the acid test of the        operational structures,
                                                                                 or the negotiation of
ex-ante part of early intervention measures i.e. recovery planning. The
                                                                                 debt restructuring.
supervisor may require an immediate update of the recovery plan if, for
example, circumstances differ from the assumptions made in the existing
plan. If the recovery strategy is insufficient or inappropriate, the supervi-
sor may also instruct the management body to address identified prob-
lems by developing an appropriate action program, including a timetable
for implementation. The supervisor has the right to acquire all necessary
information, including through on-site inspections.

In some circumstances the supervisor may require more robust alternative
measures, e.g. changes to the institution’s business strategy, or to its legal
or operational structures. The supervisor may also demand the prepara-
tion of corporate actions to increase the institution’s own funds in order to

                                                                                                          65
Chapter 8




                           stabilize the institution. The management body may therefore be required
                           to convene a meeting of shareholders, set the agenda, and recommend
                           the adoption of certain decisions. The supervisor may also require the
                           management body to draw up a plan to negotiate debt restructuring with
                           some or all creditors (see chapter 15 on consensual bail-in).

Temporary                  In extreme situations where there are well-founded reasons for a lack of
administration replacing   confidence in the ability of one or more members of the management
management can be used
                           body or senior management to perform their duties, the supervisor may
as a simple supervisory
tool or to prepare and
                           indicate that those individuals are to be replaced. This measure might be
facilitate resolution      linked to the appointment of a temporary administrator (= conservator-
action.                    ship) if the supervisor concludes that the nominated replacement is
                           unable to remedy the situation or if no adequate replacement is found
                           in time. Conservatorship is, in principle, a tool in its own right and for its
                           own purpose but can also be used to prepare and facilitate resolution and
                           a transfer to a private purchaser or a bridge bank.

                           Early Intervention Measures Triggering Preparation For Resolution
                           Action
                           The supervisor should inform the resolution authority in all instances
                           when triggers are breached and the conditions for EIM are met, regardless
                           of the application of EIM. This information may trigger the power of the
                           resolution authority to require the institution to contact potential purcha-
                           sers in order to prepare for resolution (see chapter 16 sale of business tool).

                           Relevant documents
                           –	Financial Stability Board (FSB) Recovery and Resolution Planning for
                             Systemically Important Financial Institutions: Guidance on Recovery
                             Triggers and Stress Scenarios, July 16, 2013
                           –	BIS Guidelines for identifying and dealing with weak banks, July 2015
                           –	EBA/GL/2015/02 Guidelines on the minimum list of qualitative and
                             quantitative recovery plan indicators
                           –	Directive 2013/36/EU on access to the activity of credit institutions and
                             the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms
                             (CRD IV)
                           –	Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit
                             institutions and investment firms (CRR)
                           –	EBA/GL/2015/03 Guidelines on triggers for use of early intervention
                             measures pursuant to Article 27(4) of Directive 2014/59/EU




66
                                                                                                                                 chapter 9




Chapter 9:
Precautionary Public
Support – Exceptional
Public Recapitalization of
a Solvent Bank
By Dieter Huber



Key questions                                                                                                     Art. 32 BRRD
–	Under what conditions can a precautionary public recapitalization be
   undertaken?
–	 What form of prior private loss absorbance and recapitalization is
   required before allowing a precautionary public recapitalization under
   EU state aid rules?
–	 Which forms can precautionary public support take?
–	 Which authorities decide if the pre-requisites for a precautionary public
   recapitalization are met?



The bank recovery and resolution framework embodied in the BRRD pro-                                              A precautionary public
vides for instruments to deal with troubled banks at various stages of the                                        recapitalization is the
                                                                                                                  provision of temporary
early intervention1 and resolution process while avoiding threats to the
                                                                                                                  public financial support
financial stability, covered deposits or other critical functions of banks.                                       to an otherwise solvent
Recourse to public funds may only occur as a last resort and under strict                                         bank to cover the
conditions.                                                                                                       shortfall identified
                                                                                                                  under the adverse
                                                                                                                  scenario of a stress test
In general, the fact that a bank requires extraordinary public support
                                                                                                                  in order to remedy a
would typically indicate that the bank is failing or likely to fail (Art.                                         serious disturbance
32(4)(d) BRRD) and, provided the other prerequisites are met, should be                                           in the economy and
resolved (see Chapter 13). However, in exceptional circumstances pub-                                             preserve financial
lic financial support could be provided to an otherwise solvent bank                                              stability.
without triggering resolution. Whether a Member State avails itself of
this possibility depends on the transposition of the BRRD into national
law and possible Parliamentary restrictions on the use of public funds.2

1
 	 Compare also the early intervention measures according to Art. 104 of the Capital Requirements Directive
   (CRD) and Art. 16 SSM Regulation.
2
 	 In the SRM, the SRB (itself) may not use extraordinary public support instruments because this would impinge
   on the budgetary sovereignty of Member States.

                                                                                                                                         67
Chapter 9




Precautionary Public Support




                                 Public support                                   Public support
                               outside resolution                                under resolution
                                   Art. 32(4) d                                      Art. 56–58
                                                                                    (chapter 19)



               –	state guarantee of
                 newly issued liabilities          extraordinary public                government
               –	state guarantee to                  recapitalization               stabilization tools
                 back ELA



                  conditions                       conditions                      conditions




                     Solvent                          Solvent                            FOLTF
                      bank                             bank                              bank


                    Triggers WDCC
                       Art. 59(3)             AQR and stress tests; shortfalls
                                              from AQR reclassifications and
                                                at least stress test baseline        last resort, after
                                            scenario covered by private means        min. 8 % bail in


                    state aid rules                   state aid rules                 state aid rules




68
                                                                                                                   chapter 9




In order not to trigger resolution, Member States aid must fulfil the follo-
wing conditions stipulated in Article 32(4)(d)(iii) BRRD:
–	It is required to remedy a serious disturbance in the economy of a Mem-
  ber State and to preserve financial stability;
–	It is of a precautionary and temporary nature;
–	It is proportionate to remedy the consequences of the serious disturbance;
–	It is not used to offset losses that the bank has incurred or is likely to
  incur in the near future;
–	It is conditional on final approval under the state aid framework;
–	It is granted at prices and on terms that do not confer an advantage
  upon the institution;
–	It is confined to solvent banks and
  -	 Inter alia, the institution shall not have incurred or be likely to incur
     losses that will deplete all or a significant amount of its own funds
     (Art. 32(4)(a) BRRD),
  -	 No objective elements support a determination that the assets of
     the institution will, in the near future, be less than its liabilities,
     (Art. 32(4)(b) BRRD),
  -	 No objective elements support a determination that the institution
     will, in the near future, be unable to pay its debts or liabilities as they
     fall due (Art. 32(4)(c) BRRD) and
  -	 The institution shall not have reached the point for WDCC (i.e. when it
     is no longer viable unless capital instruments are written down or con-
     verted into equity and there is no reasonable prospect that any alter-
     native private sector measures or supervisory action (including early
     intervention measures) can remedy this situation (Art. 59(3) BRRD).

In terms of execution of the transaction, precautionary extraordinary
public financial support can take any of the following forms:
–	a state guarantee to back liquidity facilities (emergency liquidity assis-
  tance, ELA) provided by central banks according to the their conditions;
–	a state guarantee of newly issued liabilities; or
–	an injection of own funds or purchase of capital instruments.

Measures involving capital instruments shall be limited to injections
necessary to address a capital shortfall established in a national, EU, or
SSM-wide stress test, or by an asset quality review (AQR) or equivalent
exercises conducted by the European Central Bank (ECB), European Ban-
king Authority (EBA), or national authorities, and confirmed, where appli-
cable, by the competent authority. Typically, from the EU Commission’s
state aid3 perspective, only aid measures necessary to cover the capital


	 From an EU competition law perspective, qualification of a support measure as state aid incompatible with
3

  the internal market requires that the measure is imputable to the state, financed by state resources, grants
  a selective advantage to certain undertakings, threatens to distort competition, and potentially affects trade
  between Member States. A measure typically provides a selective advantage if no rationally acting private
  person operating under market economy conditions would accept the terms of the transaction which therefore
  cannot be justified on the basis of the market economy operator principle (MEOP).

                                                                                                                         69
Chapter 9




                            shortfall arising under the adverse scenario of a stress test will comply
                            with the above requirements and could be considered precautionary
                            recapitalizations. Capital shortfalls under the baseline scenario and asset
                            quality reviews should be covered by private means (or trigger resolution).
                            Contrary to loss absorbance under resolution (i.e. bail-in under Articles
                            43ff BRRD) no indication is provided that the 8 % prior bail-in require-
                            ment (see chapter 15) would have to be met before allowing precautionary
                            public recapitalization as such support is confined to solvent banks.

                            Regardless of the prerequisites for precautionary recapitalization, the EU
                            Commission’s Banking Communication of 2013, while not binding on
                            Member States, in general requires loss absorption and recapitalization
                            (“burden sharing”) by shareholders and junior creditors up to the level of
                            subordinated creditors whenever extraordinary public support is granted.
                            This ensures that state aid is limited to the minimum necessary and that
                            any distortions of competition in the internal market are limited.4 There-
                            fore, precautionary recapitalizations will require prior "burden sharing"
                            under state aid rules before they can be granted. In addition, state aid rules
                            require submission and approval by the EU Commission of a restructuring
                            plan for the bank before the precautionary recapitalization measure can
                            be implemented.

The provision of            Several factors have to be analyzed by various authorities to evaluate
precautionary public        whether a specific situation is suitable for extraordinary public support of
recapitalization requires
                            a precautionary nature. Diverse interactions exist between the decisions
coordination and
communication between
                            these authorities have to take. The supervisory authority or, as the case
supervisory and             may be, the resolution authority is responsible for determining that a bank
resolution authorities,     is failing or likely-to-fail thus ensuring the precautionary recapitalization
the Ministry of Finance     is only provided to a solvent bank.5 The EU Commission as competition
and the competition
                            authority in turn assesses in accordance with Art. 107 TFEU whether a
department of the
European Commission.
                            support measure constitutes state aid and, if so, its compatibility with the
                            internal market. As an additional twist, the competition authority can-
                            not deem a state aid measure compatible if it breaches intrinsically linked
                            provisions of the BRRD and SRM Regulation. Therefore, the EU Commis-
                            sion needs to verify whether the aid can be granted outside resolution,
                            thus also assessing its compliance with the conditions pursuant to Art.
                            32(4)(d)(iii) BRRD.

                            Another interdependence regarding the authorities’ decisions exists if
                            assistance takes the form of, for example, a public capital injection. In this


                            4
                             	 If a Member State undertakes a public recapitalization scheme which does not involve burden sharing by
                               private investors, such public aid would likely be declared incompatible with competition law by the EU
                               Commission unless justified in exceptional circumstances.
                            5
                             	 Within the SRM, the supervisor (after consulting the SRB) generally determines if a bank is FOLTF. The SRB can
                               conduct such an assessment itself should the supervisor fail to act within three calendar days of the request to
                               take action (Chapter 14).

70
                                                                                 chapter 9




context, the necessity and amount of the capital requirement needs to be
established in supervisory stress tests or asset quality reviews (AQR) whe-
reby the supervisor appraises the bank under various scenarios. If it detects
deficiencies in the capital position of the bank in the baseline scenario or
the AQR, the shortfall needs to be covered by private means. If private
capital or loss-absorption cannot be mobilized, the bank will generally be
considered likely-to-fail and placed under resolution (see chapter 14 on
the conditions for resolution). If the shortfall is identified in the adverse
scenario only (or in both scenarios but it will be covered by private means
to the extent it relates to the baseline scenario or the AQR), precautionary
recapitalization is in principle allowed provided that all other conditions
are met. The supervisor must evaluate the recapitalization plans submitted
by the bank, including the equity injection from public sources, and form
a supervisory view on the timing and the likelihood of state aid yielding
a positive outcome, thus informing the appropriate supervisory actions.
According to the BRRD, the precautionary recapitalization is conditional
on the final approval under the state aid framework. Still, in the interim
the supervisor may need to evaluate whether, forward looking, the public
capital injection can be qualified as equity for prudential purposes, thus
ameliorating the bank’s situation for the purpose of the failing-or-likely-
to-fail assessment or in the context of early intervention measures.

Coordination and communication between the different actors (authori-
ties responsible for state aid, supervision, and resolution, as well as the
Ministry of Finance) is important to ensure a smooth interplay between
the different roles of all the authorities involved. In practice, if a capital
shortfall is identified in an adverse stress test scenario and a precautio-
nary recapitalization is contemplated, all measures to minimise the public
support should be taken. The Member State involved will contact the EU
Commission as competition authority to discuss burden-sharing requi-
rements, the restructuring plan, and to ensure that the support measure
complies with the state aid rules. The basis for such pre-notification will
be a capital raising plan established by the Member State and the bank and
endorsed by the supervisor.

The capital shortfall to be covered by state aid is typically derived from the
(private) capital raising plan, making allowance for the results of the bank’s
AQR and a forward looking capital adequacy assessment. Private capital
raising and, potentially, liability management exercises (LMEs) should
cover the capital shortfall deriving from the stress test baseline scenario
and restatements due to AQR findings (if such shortfalls existed). Public
support measures may then serve to cover the remaining capital shortfall
only in the adverse scenario without triggering the failing or likely-to-fail
criterion under the BRRD. Such measures could not only take the form of
the simple acquisition of shares or CoCos (see chapter 13) by a public(ly
financed) body but also, for example, underwriting a capital increase.



                                                                                        71
Chapter 9




            Member States generally have to notify a restructuring plan to the EU
            Commission and obtain state aid approval before any recapitalization
            measure is taken. It may on occasion be unclear whether the private bur-
            den sharing will generate sufficient capital and the authorities still deem
            it necessary to provide state aid for financial stability purposes; it would
            be prudent to stipulate that in such case the residual amount of the capital
            shortfall will be allocated to the shareholders and holders of subordinated
            liabilities of the bank concerned prior to the injection of public money,
            thus contributing to fulfilling the requirements for state aid. In case the
            prerequisites for a precautionary resolution would not be present, both
            the conditions for extraordinary public support under resolution (derived
            from the BRRD) and the state aid framework requirements would have to
            be met if state aid were to be provided (including the prior 8 % bail-in, see
            chapter 15).

            Relevant documents:
            –	Commission Decision of 29 November 2015 in State aid SA.43364
              (2015/N), "Amendment of the restructuring plan approved in 2014 and
                                                                                     /
              granting of new aid to Piraeus Bank" (OJ C 104, 18.3.2016, p. 8). http:/
              ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/cases/261238/261238_1733314_8
              9_2.pdf
            –	Commission Decision of 4 December 2015 in State aid SA.43365 (2015/N),
              "Amendment of the restructuring plan approved in 2014 and granting of
              new aid to National Bank of Greece" (OJ C 220, 17.6.2016, p. 6). http://
              ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/cases/261565/261565_1733770_12
              1_2.pdf




72
                                                                                              chapter 10a




Resolution Planning

Chapter 10a:
Resolution Plans

By Georg Merc



Key questions                                                                   Art. 10–14 BRRD
–	 What is the resolution planning process?                                     and section B
–	Does the resolution plan build upon the recovery plan?                        of the Annex
–	 Is a resolution plan required for all banks? What if a bank is considered
   to be resolvable through liquidation?
–	 What is the difference between single point of entry and multiple points
   of entry?
–	 Are banks informed about the content of their resolution plan?



Objectives of Resolution Planning and the Information Gathering                 Liquidation is the rule
Process                                                                         and the application of
                                                                                resolution tools the
Resolution planning by resolution authorities is one of the preventive
                                                                                exception.
innovations of the BRRD. It better prepares for future crisis situations by
assessing the significance of a bank with a focus on its critical functions
and possible implications of a failure. Ensuring that resolution authori-
ties have all the information necessary is the first essential component of
effective resolution. Resolution authorities can request the information
they need to draw up resolution plans from institutions directly as well as
from supervisory authorities.

The SRB, for example, requests information from the institutions under
its remit via the Liability Data Template (which includes concepts and
categories of liabilities that do not correspond to those currently in use in
                                                                                Resolution authorities
the SSM) and exchanges information with NRAs.                                   are expected to clearly
                                                                                define the preferred
Key Elements of a Resolution Plan                                               resolution strategy and
Resolution planning starts with an assessment of the feasibility and cre-       the tools and powers
                                                                                required to implement
dibility of liquidation under normal insolvency proceedings. As outlined
                                                                                this strategy for banks
in chapter 10b, liquidation is the rule and the application of resolution       for which liquidation is
tools the exception. If resolution is neither necessary nor justified in the    not credible and feasible.


                                                                                                          73
Chapter 10a




Key elements of a resolution plan and interdependences



                                                                                                                       Information
                                                                                                                       from banks




                                      Information, assumptions and description

                                  Essential operations        Preserving                                Critical functions
         Description of the                                                          Critical
                                    and systems for            access to                              (possible separation     Scenarios
         Institution/Group                                                     interdependences
                                 maintaining functioning    infrastructures                                  of them)




                                                 Liquidation credible and feasible


                    Resolution                                                                                 Liquidation
                                                       NO                             YES




              Resolution strategy,
                tools and powers
              Estimation of the time frame


                                                                          Resolution financing                           Resolvability
                                                                          –		Private sources                             assessment
                                                                          –		Use of the resolution fund          1	 Identification of impediments
                                                                          –		Use of the DGS                      2	 Measures to address them




       Impact                 Communication
     assessment                   plan
                                                                                                          MREL
      Impact on                                                                                   Minimum requirements
      employees                                                                                    of eligible liabilities




                                                             Drawn up by resolution authority,
                                                             consultation of supervisor




74
                                                                                                                         chapter 10a




public interest and the failure of the institution would not have signifi-
cant adverse consequences for the financial system, resolution tools are
not available. This means that the institution should only be considered
resolvable through liquidation and simplified obligations for drawing up
a resolution plan would apply instead. Only where resolution authorities
conclude that a wind down may not be feasible and credible will the iden-
tification of a resolution strategy and a “full” resolution plan be required.
According to European Banking Authority (EBA) estimates, the vast majo-
rity of banks, especially small and non-systemic banks, will be considered
eligible for liquidation. Out of about 6000 credit institutions in the EU the
assumption is that about 420 will be subject to the full development of a
resolution plan (and 110 investment firms).1 Only for those banks must a
credible and feasible implementation of resolution strategies be ensured
and defined in the resolution plan.

The information provided in a “full” resolution plan covers at least:
i)	 A description of the resolution strategy, including tools and powers to
     be used;
ii)	 Arrangements to ensure operational continuity and information
     arrangements, including preparatory steps such as a valuation;
iii)	Financing arrangements;
iv)	A resolvability assessment (see chapter 10b); and
v)	 A communication plan with all stakeholders (internal and external,
     see annex 2).

The requirement to provide a full resolution plan does not exclude the
possibility of the application of proportionality to each and every item in
the list.

Resolution authorities are expected to clearly define the preferred reso-                                   Depending on the
lution strategy and the tools and powers required to implement this                                         structure and level of
                                                                                                            financial, legal, and
strategy. For groups, depending on the operational structure and busi-
                                                                                                            operational integration
ness model and taking into account the issuing legal entities’ minimum                                      of a group, the two
requirements for eligible liabilities (MREL), either a single point of entry                                stylized approaches for
(SPE) issued by the top parent or holding entity if a high level of integra-                                a group’s resolution
tion with management and services functions exists, or multiple points                                      strategy follow either a
                                                                                                            SPE strategy issued by
of entry (MPE) issued by more than one entity or sub-group where there
                                                                                                            top parent or holding, or
is low integration with financially, legally and operationally independent                                  a MPE strategy issued by
subgroups, may be appropriate.                                                                              resolution authorities of
                                                                                                            more than one entity or
A single point of entry resolution strategy means that resolution tools and                                 sub-group.
powers are exclusively applied by the resolution authority at the level of
the consolidating holding entity. This concept requires that the holding
company absorbs the losses of its subsidiaries which would need to be
ensured by structural subordination of its intragroup liabilities. Only if


	 EBA/CP/2014/16, on RTS on the content of resolution plans and the assessment of resolvability, page 33.
1




                                                                                                                                   75
Chapter 10a




                           losses cannot be absorbed by the holding company will the externally-is-
                           sued liabilities of the resolution entity be written down and/or converted
                           as necessary when using the bail-in tool. In contrast the multiple point of
                           entry strategy foresees different entities (typically parents of subgroups
                           along national borders) that will be subject to resolution. However, these
                           stylised concepts are mostly developed in the Financial Stability Board
                           (FSB) context and not legally stipulated for in the BRRD. The implemen-
                           tation of the SPE/MPE concept is closely interlinked with the differenti-
                           ation of internal and external total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) under
                           the FSB term sheet. Internal TLAC is given when TLAC resources are issued
                           to other entities within the group that are subordinated to the external
                           liabilities. External TLAC is issued by the consolidating holding entity to
                           the market.

                           Arrangements to ensure operational continuity of access to critical fun-
                           ctions should include critical shared systems and operations (such as
                           IT-systems or centralized risk management systems), payment systems
                           and other financial infrastructures, together with an assessment of the
                           portability of client positions.

                           The financing arrangements would be adapted to the resolution strategy
                           (bridge institution, asset separation tool, bail-in, etc.) and should include
                           a description of the potential sources of resolution funding, including
                           private sources, resolution financing arrangements, and the deposit gua-
                           rantee fund. Obviously, resolution plans should not assume access to ext-
                           raordinary public financial support and central bank emergency liquidity
                           assistance or expose taxpayers to the risk of loss.

                           The final two components of the resolution planning process are the
                           resolvability assessment and, based on this, the determination of the
                           minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL)
                           (see chapter 11).

Resolution planning is a   Updating the Plan and Sharing Information
fundamentally dynamic      Resolution planning is not a one-off but a fundamentally dynamic pro-
process and should
                           cess in line with changing business and fluctuating financial markets. The
be reviewed at least
annually and after any
                           resolution plan should be reviewed at least annually and after any material
material changes.          changes. This requires close cooperation between resolution authorities
                           and competent authorities. Competent authorities should transmit the
                           recovery plans and notify any changes to the relevant resolution autho-
                           rities, and the latter should transmit the resolution plans and notify any
                           changes to the former, to ensure that all relevant authorities are fully
                           informed.

                           However, even the best resolution plan will never consider all possible
                           scenarios and impediments that may have to be addressed in the actual
                           resolution of an institution. Resolution authorities should therefore take

76
                                                                                               chapter 10a




into account and follow the measures provided for in the resolution plans,
unless they assess that resolution objectives will be achieved more effecti-
vely in the circumstances of the case by taking actions that are not provi-
ded for in the resolution plans.

Cross-Border Resolution Planning Process                                          Within the EU, group
The resolution-planning process for banking groups that are operating on          resolution plans are
                                                                                  expected to be agreed
a cross-border basis and outside the SRM in non-euro area Member States
                                                                                  jointly by all involved
is very complex and requires coordination via resolution colleges. A range        resolution authorities,
of outcomes are possible for groups. Within the EU, the group-level reso-         at group-level and of
lution authority and the resolution authorities of subsidiaries are expec-        the subsidiaries, or
ted to reach a joint decision about the group resolution plan. The rele-          refer disagreements
                                                                                  to the EBA for binding
vant authorities should aim to achieve, to the extent possible, consistency
                                                                                  mediation.
with resolution plans for the rest of the group. However, there may be no
consistent plan for the whole group. In case of disagreement, the group           EBA mediation decisions
level resolution authority will adopt its own group level resolution plan         are not binding if a
                                                                                  resolution authority
and each subsidiary resolution authority will adopt an entity resolution
                                                                                  assesses the issue
plan. Both must set out the reasons for disagreement with the proposed            may impinge on the
group resolution plan. Other resolution authorities can go ahead with the         Member State’s “fiscal
group resolution plan, even if some subsidiaries choose to adopt their own        responsibilities”.
entity resolution plan. Any resolution authority may refer the decision of
the consolidating and subsidiary resolution authorities’ resolution plans
to the EBA for binding mediation. This means a deferral of the decision
taking by the consolidating resolution authority and the resolution autho-
rity of the subsidiary which is then held to take a decision in accordance
with the decision EBA may take. However, if a resolution authority argues
that the subject matter under disagreement may impinge on its “fiscal res-
ponsibilities” the issue is excluded from EBA mediation.

Third country resolution authorities may be involved in group resolution
at the discretion of the authorities involved and, for G-SIFIs, within the
crisis management groups (CMGs).

Proportionality and Waivers                                                       The content of a
The content of a resolution plan should be proportionate to the systemic          resolution plan should
                                                                                  be proportionate to the
importance of the institution or group. If an institution is permitted to go
                                                                                  systemic importance of
insolvent under normal insolvency procedures, then the resolution plan            the institution or group.
may be reduced to a description of the institution/group and a liquida-
tion assessment (see above). The BRRD provides for simplified obligations
regarding the content and details of resolution plans and the information
required from institutions as well as the level of detail for the resolvability
assessment. This may cover the range of scenarios or the variants of the
preferred resolution strategy to be considered in circumstances when the
preferred resolution strategy cannot be implemented.

Resolution authorities may waive the application of a resolution plan-
ning requirement only for institutions affiliated to a central body that are

                                                                                                            77
Chapter 10a




              wholly or partially exempted from prudential requirements in national
              law and apply the requirements on a consolidated basis to the central body
              and institutions affiliated to it (Article 4 (8) BRRD).

              Relevant documents
              –	EBA/RTS/2014/15 Regulatory Technical Standards on the content of
                resolution plans and the assessment of resolvability
              –	EBA/ITS/2015/06 Implementing Technical Standards on procedures,
                forms and templates for the provision of information for resolution
                plans under Article 11(3) of Directive 2014/59/EU
              –	EBA/GL/2015/16 Guidelines on the application of simplified obligations
                under Article 4 (5) of Directive 2014/59/EU
              –	EBA/GL/2015/16 Final Report Guidelines on simplified obligations,
                July 7, 2015
              –	Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/962 of June 16, 2016
                laying down implementing technical standards with regard to the
                uniform formats, templates and definitions for the identification and
                transmission of information by competent authorities and resolution
                authorities to the EBA according to Directive 2014/59/EU
              –	Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1066 of June 17,
                2016 laying down implementing technical standards with regard to
                procedures, standard forms and templates for the provision of infor-
                mation for the purpose of resolution plans for credit institutions and
                investment firms pursuant to Directive 2014/59/EU
              –	EBA/GL/2016/03 Final Guidelines on the provision of information in
                summary or collective form for the purposes of Article 84(3) of Directive
                2014/59/EU
              –	EBA/ITS/2015/06 Final Report Draft implementing technical standards
                on procedures, forms and templates for the provision of information for
                resolution plans under Article 11(3) of Directive 2014/59/EU
              –	EBA/CP/2015/01 Draft ITS on procedures, forms and templates for the
                provision of information for resolution plans
              –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
                Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards
                specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group
                resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is
                to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the con-
                ditions for group financial support, the requirements for independent
                valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion
                powers, the procedures and contents of notification requirements and
                of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of the resolu-
                tion colleges
              –	SRB, Data collection for resolution planning and the determination
                of the Minimum Requirement for own funds and Eligible Liabilities
                (MREL)
              –	FSB, Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Principles and Term Sheet



78
                                                                                                chapter 10b




Chapter 10b:
Resolvability Assessment
By Georg Merc



Key questions                                                                      Art. 15–28 BRRD
–	 Is the resolvability assessment different from the resolution plan?             and section C
–	 Is there a timeline for banks to become resolvable?                             of the Annex
–	 What are the contagion channels that need to be assessed?
–	 What are the consequences if a bank is considered unresolvable?



Assessment Steps                                                                   There are three different
The resolvability assessment is the beginning of the resolution-planning           consecutive stages in a
                                                                                   resolvability assessment:
process and uses the information provided by competent authorities and
                                                                                   i) assessment of the
the institutions. There are three different consecutive stages:                        feasibility and
                                                                                       credibility of
1	 Assessment of the feasibility and credibility of the liquidation. This con-         liquidation;
   siders the likely impact on financial systems through the four contagion        ii) if liquidation is
                                                                                       not credible, the
   channels: financial markets; infrastructures; other financial institu-
                                                                                       identification of the
   tions; and the real economy. Feasibility includes the ability to provide            preferred resolution
   information required by deposit guarantee schemes to ensure a timely                strategy; and
   payout. In case of liquidation the “resolvability assessment” should also       iii) assessment of
   identify and address the removal of impediments to the application of               the feasibility and
                                                                                       credibility of the
   normal insolvency proceedings.
                                                                                       resolution strategy.
2	 If liquidation is not credible and feasible then, as a second step, resolu-
   tion authorities identify the preferred resolution strategy for the insti-
   tution/group together with the resolution tools and power that would
   be used (see Chapter 10a for the content of a resolution plan).
3	 Finally, the feasibility and credibility of the resolution strategy/ies         The removal of
   provided for in the resolution plan need to be assessed. Impediments            impediments to
   to the implementation of the strategy are assigned to one of the fol-           resolvability is based
   lowing categories: (i) structure and operations; (ii) financial resources;      on an iterative process:
                                                                                   The resolution authority
   (iii) information; (iv) cross-border issues; and (v) legal issues. The likely
                                                                                   notifies institutions
   impact of the resolution strategy on the four contagion channels men-           about the outcome
   tioned above must also be considered.                                           of a resolvability
                                                                                   assessment and gives
Intrusive Powers to Address Resolvability Impediments                              them the opportunity
                                                                                   to propose possible
The key element introduced by the BRRD are the far-reaching powers
                                                                                   measures to address
resolution authorities may use to ensure the resolvability of a bank eit-          or remove substantive
her through the application of resolution tools or liquidation. Resolution         impediments.


                                                                                                          79
Chapter 10b




Key elements of a resolution plan and interdependences



                                                   resolvability assessment




                         Assessment of the feasibility and                          Assessment of the feasibility
                      credibility of liquidation under normal                            and credibility of
                              insolvency proceedings                                    resolution strategy




                                                   Avoiding significant material impact on
                                  Financial market       Financial market   Other financial        Real
                                     functioning          infrastructures    institutions        economy




                                         YES                                                     NO
                                                                                                     non
                                      resolvable                                              resolvable



                                No further steps needed,                           Identification of impediments
                           entity is assessed to be resolvable
                              via liquidation or resolution



                                          Measures to address impediments

     Intrusive   Financial measures                                 Structural measures                       Products/additional
                                                                                                              information requirements

       low       –	Restrict/prevent development/                    –	Revise intragroup financing             –	Impose additional information
                   sale of new business lines/products                arrangements                              requirements
                                                                    –	Draw up service agreements
                                                                      to maintain critical functions

                 –	Limit the maximum individual/                    –	Require that a parent holding
     middle
                   aggregate exposure                                 company or separate holding
                 –	Require that existing/proposed                     is set up
                   activities are limited/ceased
                 –	Require divestment of specific assets

      HIGH       –	Require that steps are taken to meet             –	Require changes to the legal/
                   the MREL                                           operational structure
                 –	Require issuance of eligible liabilities



80
                                                                                                 chapter 10b




authorities may intervene in an operating business independently of                Resolution authorities
any liquidity and capital ratios or other prudential supervisory indi-             may use intrusive and
                                                                                   far-reaching powers to
cators. Depending on the concrete exercise this could make them almost
                                                                                   ensure an institution’s
shadow-managers of the banks and potentially more powerful than                    resolvability. Possible
supervisory authorities. The process is however highly cooperative, and            measures include
closely involve the bank’s management and supervisory and other autho-             organizational or
rities. The resolution authority notifies institutions about the outcome           structural changes, the
                                                                                   restriction or prevention
of a resolvability assessment and gives them the opportunity to propose
                                                                                   of activities, business
possible measures to address or remove substantive impediments. Only               lines, or sale of products.
where the resolution authority assesses that the measures proposed do
not effectively reduce or remove the impediments in question shall they
require the institution to take alternative measures that may achieve
that objective. The resolution authority, after consulting the competent
authority and, if appropriate, the designated national macro-prudential
authority, must duly consider the potential effect of those measures on
the particular institution, on the internal market for financial services,
and on financial stability in other Member States and the Union as a
whole.

In case of groups, the group level resolution authority, in cooperation
with the consolidating supervisor and the EBA, shall analyze the subs-
tantive impediments and prepare a report that will be provided to the EU
parent undertaking and to the resolution authorities of the subsidiaries,
which will provide it to the subsidiaries under their supervision and to
the resolution authorities of jurisdictions in which significant branches
are located.

The authorities’ discretion should be limited to what is necessary in
order to simplify the structure and operations of the institution solely to
improve its resolvability. Measures should be neither directly nor indi-
rectly discriminatory on the grounds of nationality, and should be justi-
fied by the overriding reason of being conducted in the public interest of
financial stability. Furthermore, action should not go beyond the mini-
mum necessary to attain the objectives sought.

Possible measures can be grouped under the following three headings:
i)	 structural measures concerning the organizational, legal and business
     structure of an institution such as setting up a (separate) financial hol-
     ding entity within the Member State or a EU parent financial holding
     entity, or entering into or revising the Intra Group Financing Support
     Agreements (IGFSA, see chapter 7) or service agreements;
ii)	 financial measures relating to its assets and liabilities, e.g. to limit
     exposures, divest assets, limit/cease activities, restrict/prevent business
     lines, or sale of products, as well as to satisfy MREL and own funds;
iii)	products and additional information requirements.




                                                                                                            81
Chapter 10a




The BRRD does not          Resolvability Timeline
impose a strict timeline   The BRRD does not impose a strict timeline for banks to become resolvable.
for banks to become
                           Depending on the complexity of the institution/group and existing reso-
resolvable.
                           lution impediments it could be a long way from having the first draft of a
                           resolution plan, including the preferred strategy, to a positive assessment
                           that the bank is resolvable. The resolution authority cannot directly take
                           action to apply required measures during the assessment process, unlike
                           its powers in the application of resolution tools. However, banks with
                           impediments to be addressed will be requested to have a higher minimum
                           requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL, see chapter 11).
                           The resolution authority must notify the EBA in a timely manner where an
                           institution or group is deemed not resolvable.

                           Relevant documents
                           –	EBA/GL/2014/11 Guidelines on the specification of measures to reduce
                             or remove impediments to resolvability and the circumstances in which
                             each measure may be applied under Directive 2014/59/EU
                           –	EBA/GL/2015/16 Final Report Guidelines on simplified obligations
                           –	Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/962 of June 16, 2016
                             laying down implementing technical standards with regard to the
                             uniform formats, templates and definitions for the identification and
                             transmission of information by competent authorities and resolution
                             authorities to the EBA according to Directive 2014/59/EU
                           –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
                             Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards
                             specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group
                             resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is
                             to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the con-
                             ditions for group financial support, the requirements for independent
                             valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion
                             powers, the procedures and contents of notification requirements and
                             of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of the resolu-
                             tion colleges




82
                                                                                             chapter 11




Chapter 11:
The Minimum Requirement
for Own Funds and Eligible
Liabilities (MREL)
By Georg Merc



Key questions                                                                 Art. 45 BRRD
–	 What is the difference between bail-in and minimum requirement for
   own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL)? Which liabilities are not
   MREL eligible?
–	 Are the amounts and types of liabilities to be held by banks as
   loss-absorbing capacity the same for all banks? Once defined will
   MREL stay at the same level?
–	 Is MREL part of the resolution plan? May resolution authorities set
   a different loss-absorption amount from supervisors?
–	 What are the main differences between MREL and total loss-absorbing
   capacity (TLAC)? Do banks that have to comply with TLAC at the
   international level automatically fulfil MREL?
–	 What sanctions do authorities have if the Bank does not fulfil MREL
   (any more)?



The MREL Concept                                                              The BRRD introduces
The minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL)         the MREL as a new
                                                                              regulatory ratio set by
should ensure there is sufficient loss-absorption capacity by sharehol-
                                                                              the resolution authority
ders and creditors to enable an effective bail-in and an orderly resolution   to map the passive side
without creating further contagion and without recourse to public funds.      of credit institutions and
The BRRD introduces the MREL, a new regulatory ratio, as a highly loss        ensure enough bail-
absorbing buffer similar to the total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) con-     inable instruments are
                                                                              available at all times in
cept of the Financial Stability Board (FSB). The MREL is expressed as a
                                                                              case a bank fails.
percentage of the total liabilities and own funds of the institution, where
the numerator is composed of own funds and a specific type of liabilities
(the MREL-eligible liabilities). The BRRD does not provide for a harmoni-
zed minimum level, instead MREL is to be set by the resolution authority
for each individual bank on a case by case basis as part of the resolution
strategy.




                                                                                                      83
Chapter 11




Process to determine the MREL


                                                                                                                                           Resolution Authority assesses
Comb. buffer
requirement




                                                                      CET1                                                                 if all components of regulatory
                                                                                                                                           capital requirements and buffers
                                                                                                                                           are suitable for inclusion.
  Pillar 2




                                                                                                                  Loss absorption
                                                                                                 T2                   amount
                                                                      AT1
  Pillar 1




                                                      CET1




                                                                                                                                           Resolution Authority assesses
                                                                                                       T2                                  if all components of regulatory capital
                Deposits of corporates (> 100 TEUR)
confidence
  Market




                                                                                                                                           requirements and buffers are suitable
                                                                             Subordinated debt




                                                                                                                                           for inclusion. Default: min 8 % RWA
                           and financials

                                                        Senior Debt




                                                                                                      AT1
                                                                                                                                           capital for authorization.
                                                                                                                  Recapitalization         Depends on the resolution strategy
Authorization




                                                                                                                      amount               and the tools foreseen. Could be zero
   Capital




                                                                                                                                           for institutions if liquidation is possible.
                                                                                                      CET1
requirem.
  Addit.




                               CET1                                   AT1                         T2




                                                                                                             Capital adequacy criterion,
                                                                                                                possibly adjusted by:


                                                                                                                Exclusion of liabilities   Adjustments to take into account:
                                                                                                       T2
                                                                                                                                           –	Bail-in excluded liabilities
                (> 100 TEUR) and financials
                   Deposits of corporates




                                                                             Subordinated debt




                                                                                                                Financial stability        –	Adverse effects on financial stability
                                                        Senior Debt




                                                                                                      AT1
                                                                                                                                           –	Idiosyncratic features like size,
                                                                                                                                           	 business-model, funding risk
                                                                                                                SREP Adjustments
                                                                                                                                           	 profile (SREP)
                                                                                                      CET1
                                                                                                                                           –	Estimated contributions by the DGS
                                                                                                                DGS contribution




                                                                                                                   mrel
                                                                                                                                           Minimum 8 % total liabilities to use
                                                                                                                                           the resolution fund/public support



84
                                                                                                chapter 11




Not all bail-inable liabilities are eligible for MREL. MREL should consist
of liabilities that can be bailed-in with minimum legal and operational
risk and without endangering financial stability or creating contagion.
Equity and debt instruments have to fulfil the following criteria to qualify
as MREL under the BRRD:

–	Issued and fully paid-up;
–	Liabilities with a remaining maturity of more than one year;
–	Not a liability related to a derivative;
–	Not a liability that arises from deposits that benefit from preference in
  the insolvency hierarchy;
–	Not owed to, secured by, or guaranteed by, the institution itself.

Liabilities governed by the law of another country will regularly be requi-
red to include contractual recognition clauses in order to be accepted as
MREL, unless they are covered by statutory frameworks. TLAC stipulates
for eligible instruments issued by other global systemically important
banks to be deducted. In contrast, under the BRRD there are no specific
deduction rules or detailed provisions addressing contagion aspects, apart
from resolution authorities’ ability to limit the extent to which other ins-
titutions hold bail-in able eligible liabilities (excluding entities that are
part of the same group).

MREL: The Final Part of the Resolution Planning Process                         MREL is set by the
The MREL is based on the resolution strategy (multiple point of entry           resolution authority
                                                                                after consulting the
(MPE) or single point of entry (SPE)) and the resolvability assessment and
                                                                                competent authority
is a key element of the resolution plan. There is no common or minimum          for each individual
MREL; however, for banks that will be resolved, the prior 8 % bail-in           bank (Pillar II) as part of
requirement (see chapter 15) that applies before the use of the resolution      resolution planning.
fund or public support is to be considered. No provision for use of state
aid (including use of the resolution fund (RF) should be included when
drafting the resolution plan. MREL is set on a case-by-case basis by the
resolution authority, applying relatively wide discretionary power, follo-
wing the criteria below (outlined in the BRRD and further expanded by the
European Banking Authority (EBA)):

1.	The first element of MREL, the loss-absorption amount, is based on the       Institutions may fulfill
   definition of the prudential capital requirement. There is no binding        the MREL consisting
                                                                                only of own funds if the
   minimum level for loss-absorbing capital foreseen but the MREL level
                                                                                resolution strategy is
   set by the resolution authority is binding for the respective bank. The      liquidation.
   loss-absorption amount set by the national resolution authority (NRA)
   should, as a baseline default, be equal to the prudential capital requi-
   rements (including Pillar II and the combined buffers) as determined
   by the supervisory authority. NRAs in consultation with the supervisory
   authorities may, however, conclude that some capital components are
   not suitable for inclusion in loss absorption which in the end could
   be lower or higher than capital requirements. In terms of eligibility

                                                                                                         85
Chapter 11




                               of instruments, the loss absorption part of MREL should be satisfied,
                               mostly, with the same instruments as the capital requirements (CET1,
                               AT1, T2). By way of example, and depending on the specific firm and the
                               outcome of the liquidation assessment that is part of resolution plan-
                               ning, resolution authorities may set a lower amount if macro-risks are
                               not deemed relevant; or a higher amount if the need to absorb losses is
                               not fully reflected (as illustrated in the graphs for Bank A and Bank C).
                               In any case the amount determined needs to be sufficient to sustain
                               market confidence and ensure both the continued provision of critical
                               economic functions by the institution and access to funding without
                               recourse to extraordinary financial support other than contributions
                               from the financing arrangements. Despite the resolution authority’s
                               wide discretionary powers, it can be assumed that for banks that will be
                               liquidated (see chapter 10b for the resolvability assessment) the loss-ab-
                               sorption amount will be the only criterion, and MREL will be set equal
                               to the regulatory capital requirements (pillar 1 and pillar 2) (see the
                               example of Bank B in graphs at the end of the chapter).

 The recapitalization        2.	The second element of MREL, the recapitalization amount, should
amount ensures that             ensure that the institution meets the conditions for authorization
the resolved institution
                                (licensing requirements) after resolution (at a minimum 8 % of total
meets the conditions
for authorization after
                                risk exposure amount) and that the capital level is high enough to
resolution (min. 8 % RWA).      ensure market confidence following resolution. The appropriate level
                                could be determined in comparison with peer groups. The recapitali-
                                zation amount will regularly be zero for institutions that are expected
                                to come under liquidation. Though unlikely, resolution authorities
                                may require a recapitalization amount even for those banks that are
                                expected to be liquidated, to ensure that liquidation achieves the reso-
                                lution objectives (Bank D at the end of the chapter).

                             3.	MREL, calculated based on the capital adequacy criterion, may be further
                                increased if this is viewed necessary to support market confidence follo-
                                wing resolution. It may also be necessary to increase the MREL following
                                consideration of the potential adverse impact of an institution’s failure
                                on financial stability, or to allow for the exclusion of certain liabilities
                                (under the NCWOL test, see chapter 20). Though in principle applicable
                                to all institutions, adverse effects on financial stability may especially
                                be assumed for Global Systemically Important Institutions (G-SIIs) and
                                Other Systemically Important Institutions (O-SIIs) as determined by
                                competent authorities.

                             4.	Idiosyncratic adjustments, building on the Supervisory Review and
                                Evaluation Process (SREP) and determined by reference to the size,
                                business model, funding, and risk profile criterion may further influ-
                                ence the requirement in both directions (leading to an increase or
                                decrease).



86
                                                                                                                      chapter 11




5.	Finally, the possible deposit guarantee scheme (DGS) contribution may
   be considered as a source of financing for resolution depending on the
   share of covered deposits to total liabilities. An expected DGS contribu-
   tion would lower the MREL requirement.



Overview of deposits eligible for MREL and bail-in


                        Deposits of nat.    Deposits of                  Deposits of
 Amount     Maturity    persons & SMEs      corporates                   financial institutions


   < 100                No bail-in,         No bail-in,                  Bail-in, not MREL-eligible
             < 1 year
 thousand               not MREL-eligible   not MREL-eligible
             >1 year                                                     Bail-in and MREL-eligible
   euro                 (covered by DGS)    (covered by DGS)


   > 100
             < 1 year   Bail-in able,       Bail-in, not MREL-eligible   Bail-in, not MREL-eligible
 thousand
             >1 year    not MREL-eligible
   euro                                     Bail-in and MREL-eligible    Bail-in and MREL-eligible




MREL Compared to TLAC                                                                                 MREL and TLAC share
Both TLAC and MREL are defined as minimum amounts of own funds                                        the same purpose but
                                                                                                      are quite different in
and specific debt obligations required for banks to ensure that they can
                                                                                                      terms of scope, eligibility
be restructured or wound down in orderly ways. Despite having the same                                of instruments,
purpose, i.e. to facilitate private sector loss absorbency, they have signifi-                        method of sizing, and
cant divergences.                                                                                     adjustments.


In terms of the scope of application, MREL is addressed to all credit ins-
titutions while the TLAC covers only global systemically important banks
(G-SIBs). At the European level, MREL has been in force since the begin-
ning of 2015. Initial MREL target levels are expected in 2016 (with interim
targets during a transitional period). The Single Resolution Board (SRB)
has announced a MREL target of not less than 8 % of total assets for all
banks under its remit. MREL is set on a case-by-case basis with no diffe-
rentiation between pillar 1 and pillar 2 requirements.

TLAC is (formally) based on RWA instead of total assets and defines a man-                            According to the BRRD
datory minimum pillar 1 requirement equivalent to 16 % of risk-weigh-                                 framework, mandatory
                                                                                                      subordination of MREL
ted assets (18 % from 2022) and at least 6 % of the leverage ratio denomi-
                                                                                                      liabilities is not required
nator from 1 January 2019 (6.75 % from 2022), with scope for resolution
authorities to set additional firm-specific requirements on top of this (as
per pillar 2 requirements). Contrary to MREL, capital buffers (typically
ranging from 2.5 to 6 % of risk-weighted assets) are not included in TLAC
so that Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital cannot count simultaneously
towards both TLAC and regulatory capital buffers.

                                                                                                                               87
Chapter 11




                                               Regarding the eligibility criteria, the FSB TLAC term sheet requires sub-
                                               ordination of TLAC eligible instruments, excluding operational liabilities
                                               (e.g. such as short term debt) thereby ensuring that liabilities within the
                                               same rank are treated equally and minimizing legal risks (esp. the risks
                                               of breach of the no-creditor-worse-off principle). According to the BRRD
                                               framework, mandatory subordination of MREL liabilities is not required
                                               and pari passu liabilities can be excluded on an ad hoc basis from bail-in
                                               or simply not qualify for bail-in (e.g. due to maturity reasons). Resolution
                                               authorities may, however, require that MREL eligible liabilities should be
                                               subordinated on a case-by-case basis, depending on the resolution stra-
                                               tegy and the structure of a bank’s liabilities.

     The European                              Finally, TLAC provides for a resolution entity concept and distinguishes
     Commission plans to                       between an external and internal TLAC requirement with different eli-
     issue a legal proposal
                                               gibility criteria. Resolution entities should generally act as a source of
     by the end of 2016 to
     transpose the FSB TLAC
                                               loss-absorbing capacity for their material subgroups and are subject to an
     term sheet into EU                        external TLAC requirement. Therefore, the other entities of the material
     legislation.                              subgroups are subject to an internal TLAC requirement of 75 % to 90 % of
                                               the external minimum TLAC requirement.

                                               The European Commission plans to issue a legal proposal by the end of
                                               2016 to implement TLAC within the BRRD MREL concept.

     MREL/TLAC comparison

                            EU – MREL                                                TLAC
     Scope                  All institutions                                         G-SIBs
     Amount                 No minimum, institution individual: Sum of loss          Minimum 16 % RWA or 6 % leverage (whatever is higher) as of 2019.
                            absorption amount and recapitalization amount            Minimum 18 RWA/6.75 LRE as of 2022. Individual firm Pillar II add on
                            plus adjustments as of 2016 (with phasing in)
     Deductions             Not specifically regulated                               Deduction of TLAC eligible instruments issued by other GSIBS
     (to limit contagion)
     Buffer                 Capital buffers count to fulfill MREL                    Regulatory buffers do not count as TLAC
     Eligible liabilities Included: Capital, debt, liability or other item that is   Included: Capital, debt, liability or other item that is paid in, unsecured,
                          paid in, unsecured, 1y minimum maturity, …                 1 year minimum maturity, not funded (in)directly by the resolution entity
                          Excluded: Derivatives, covered deposits, …                 or related party, …
                                                                                     Excluded: Operational liabilities on which the performance of critical
                                                                                     functions depends. Liabilities that give raise to material risks of NCWOL
                                                                                     claims; structured notes, derivatives, covered deposits.
     Subordination          Subordination is not explicitly required                 Formal subordination to excluded liabilities is required (exceptions)
     Entity or              Each legal entity (solo) plus on consolidated level;     Each “resolution group” to hold external TLAC; Material subgroups to
     group level            not specified if internal or external                    hold internal TLAC of 75–90 % to the external TLAC that would apply to
                                                                                     the material subgroup if it were a resolution group
     Jurisdiction           Possible recognition of third country instruments        Instruments must be issued under the law of the jurisdiction where the
     (Public)                                                                        “resolution entity” is located (as of 2022)
     Disclosure             –                                                        Amount, maturity and composition of external TLAC by each resolution
                                                                                     entity, plus internal TLAC issued by each material subgroup to the
                                                                                     resolution entity; Liabilities that rank pari passu or junior to TLAC must
                                                                                     also be disclosed, at a minimum the amount, nature, and maturity

88
                                                                                                chapter 11




MREL: No Group Resolution Concept                                               The MREL concept
Within a banking group, the individual requirement for each individual          does not provide any
                                                                                guidance on how
subsidiary should be assessed separately from the consolidated group
                                                                                the consolidated
level. Parent undertakings must comply with the minimum requirements            requirement set for
on a consolidated basis and also – unless a waiver has been granted – on an     the group should be
individual basis. The BRRD MREL concept does not provide any guidance           taken into account
on how the consolidated requirement set for the group should be taken           when determining an
                                                                                appropriate level for the
into account when determining an appropriate level for the subsidiary.
                                                                                subsidiaries.
The BRRD leaves it to the resolution authority to decide on the resolution
strategy (single or multiple point of entry (SPE/MPE)) and does not expli-
citly provide for internal arrangements regarding loss-absorbing capacity.
It requires each institution to meet its own MREL individually and at a
consolidated level, such that each entity is able to absorb losses and can be
recapitalized. It is not specified whether loss-absorbing instruments can
be internal, i.e. from within the banking group, or must be external, i.e.
issued on the market.

Determining MREL: Interaction Between Resolution Authority and
Competent Authority
The MREL is set by the resolution authority after consulting the competent
authority. Resolution authorities should not be seen as shadow supervi-
sors and should not duplicate their work, but they have to rely on supervi-
sory assessments as a starting point. The supervisory judgments of unex-
pected losses, the classification of a bank as a G-SII or O-SII, and the SREP
score are elements that need not be replicated by resolution authorities.
Resolution authorities may conclude, in consultation with the competent
authority, that some components of the loss-absorption amount are not
suitable. Differences in judgment between the competent and resolution
authority may be appropriate, but should be clearly reasoned.

The MREL is updated in parallel with the resolution plan. The BRRD does
not provide for a strict timeline for all banks to set an initial MREL, just
that decisions should start to be made. Resolution authorities may set an
MREL requirement that increases over time to reflect the need for a tran-
sition period as the final definition of MREL will substantively impact on
institutions’ funding policy and the market will need time to adjust.

Third Country MREL                                                              Liabilities governed
Liabilities governed by the law of another EU Member State automatically        by the law of a non-EU
                                                                                Member State do not
count as MREL. Liabilities governed by the law of a non-EU Member State
                                                                                (normally) count as MREL
do not count as MREL unless the resolution authority is satisfied that the
bail-in of this instrument decided by an EU resolution authority will be
effective under the law of the third country.

Exclusion from the MREL
Mortgage credit institutions financed by covered bonds which are not
allowed to receive deposits are excluded from the MREL. Group level

                                                                                                        89
Chapter 11




The BRRD does not        resolution authorities may waive the application of an individual mini-
provide for a common     mum requirement to a EU parent institution, and the resolution authority
sanctioning regime in
                         may waive the application to a subsidiary, provided that certain conditions
case of non-compliance
with MREL. Resolution
                         are fulfilled (e.g. the EU parent fulfills the MREL on a consolidated basis or
authorities have         the subsidiary and parent are subject to authorization and supervision by
powers to address        the same Member State). It is not finally determined whether such exemp-
non-compliance with      tion concerns the setting of MREL at individual rather than at the conso-
the MREL under their
                         lidated level.
powers to address
impediments to
resolvability.           Sanctioning Non-Compliance With MREL
                         The BRRD does not provide for a common sanctioning regime in case of
                         non-compliance with MREL. Member States are required to lay down rules
                         on administrative penalties and measures. However, resolution authorities
                         have powers to address impediments to resolvability and non-compliance
                         with the MREL may be considered as such an impediment (see chapter
                         10b). As a consequence, resolution authorities may direct the institution to
                         issue eligible liabilities to become resolvable and to fulfil MREL.

                         Relevant documents
                         –	EBA/RTS/2015/05 Regulatory Technical Standards on criteria for deter-
                           mining the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities
                           under Directive 2014/59/EU
                         –	Financial Stability Board, Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Princip-
                           les and Term Sheet, 9 November 2015
                         –	EBA/RTS/2015/05, Final Draft Regulatory Technical Standards on cri-
                           teria for determining the minimum requirement for own funds and
                           eligible liabilities under Directive 2014/59/EU
                         –	EBA/Op/2016/02 09 Opinion of the EBA on the Commission’s Intention
                           to Amend the Draft Regulatory Technical Standards Specifying Criteria
                           Relating to the Methodology for Setting Minimum Requirement for
                           Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities According to Article 45(2) of Directive
                           2014/59/EU
                         –	Commission Delegated Regulation 2016/1450 supplementing Directive
                           2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard
                           to regulatory technical standards specifying the criteria relating to the
                           methodology for setting the minimum requirement for own funds and
                           eligible liabilities




90
                                                                                                                     chapter 11




Examples for determining MREL for banks coming under liquidation




      Bank A                        Bank B                        Bank C                      Bank D
     wind-down;                    wind-down;                   wind-down;                   wind-down;
     macro-risks                  no adjustment             need to absorb losses        liquidation does not
     not relevant                                             not fully reflected    achieve resolution objectives
     CAR > MREL                     CAR = MREL                   CAR < MREL                  CAR < MREL




Examples for determining MREL for banks coming under resolution




   Bank e                           Bank F                        Bank G
  resolution;                      wind-down;                     wind-down;
 Part of buffers                  No adjustment              Higher LAA to address
  not relevant                        to LAA                resolution impediments
  CAR < MREL                        CAR < MREL                   CAR < MREL




        Total capital requirement                unlikely


        Recapitalization amount                  CAR


        Loss absorption amount




                                                                                                                             91
Chapter 12




Preparation and
Conditions for Taking
Resolution Action

Chapter 12:
Valuation in Advance
of Resolution

                           By Dieter Huber



Art. 36, 44 BRRD           Key questions
                           –	 What valuations are required for resolution purposes?
                           –	 Who undertakes valuations for resolution purposes?
                           –	 Is there a difference between accounting value/regulatory reporting and
                              valuation for resolution purposes?
                           –	Does the resolution value depend on the resolution tools?
                           –	 Are derivatives liabilities exempt from bail-in?



                           All key decisions taken by the resolution authority are informed by valua-
                           tions of the bank’s assets and liabilities. These valuations ensure that the
                           resolution authority’s powers are exercised in line with the resolution
                           objectives, particularly to reduce risks to the public by minimizing reli-
                           ance on extraordinary public financial support and prevent contagion,
                           while also preserving value for stakeholders, and – crucially to avoid
                           litigation – respecting the property rights of affected shareholders and
                           creditors.

Mandatory valuations       Valuation: An Integral Part of the Resolution Decision
are undertaken by an       Valuation is an integral part of the decision to apply resolution tools or
independent valuer
                           exercise resolution power; or the decision to exercise the write-down or
at the request of the
resolution authority
                           conversion power of capital instruments. From a procedural point of view,
before, at the point of,   the valuation itself is not subject to a separate right of appeal but may be
and after, resolution.     subject to an appeal together with the decision itself.



92
                                                                                                                chapter 12




Ex-ante Resolution Valuation



                                                                                 –	Informs resolution authority
                                                                                   decisions
                   Ex-ante resolution valuation
                                                                                 –	Preserves value for stakeholders
                                                                                   and public


                                     Independent
                                        Valuer                                   Valuation 1
                                                                                 –	Updated accounting valuation
                                                                                    with regulatory adjustments
      If conditions met (ponv)                     If conditions met (FOLTF)     –	 Provisional valuation with
                                                                                    buffer if (due to urgency)
        Write-down/conversion                                                       final valuation not possible
                                                             Resolution
         of capital instruments

                                                                                 Valuation 2
                                                                                 –	Prudent assumptions
                                                                                 –	Assess economic value of assets
                 Extent of write-down/conversion of capital instruments             and liabilities
                                                                                 –	May imply departure from
                                                                                    pure prudential or accounting
                                                                                    perspective
             Rate of conversion/dilution based on equity value of new shares     –	Future resolution actions to be
                                                                                    taken into account
                                                                                 –	No assumption of public support
                                                                                    measures
                                              Appropriate resolution strategy:
                                                                                 –	Outline key assumptions for
                                              –	Extent of bail-in
                                                                                    valuations
                                              –	Financing aspects of transfer
                                                                                 –	Include breakdown of creditors
                                              	 of critical functions
                                                                                 –	Respect state-aid principles
                                              –	Estimation of hypothetical
                                                                                 –	 Provisional valuation with
                                                insolvency treatment
                                                                                    buffer if (due to urgency)
                                              –	Extent of DGS contribution
                                                                                    final valuation not possible




               Ex-post definitive valuation (if ex-ante was provisional)
                                                                                 Valuation 3
                                                                                 –	Is resolution treatment worse
                                                                                   than hypothetical insolvency
               Ex-post insolvency valuation of difference in treatment             treatment?
                  (no creditor worse off than under liquidation test)            –	Hypothetical net payout amount


                                                                                               Yes




                                                                                       Resolution financing
                                                                                     mechanism compensation



                                                                                                                       93
Chapter 12




                          The valuation must be without prejudice to the state aid framework,
                          which indicates that the economics underlying the application of resolu-
                          tion tools need to meet those requirements as well. State aid limitations
                          would apply if, for example, in the context of a transfer of assets bad loans
                          were valued too generously.

                          Valuations, as a rule, undertaken by an independent valuer at the request
                          of the supervisor or resolution authority, are required at various stages in
                          the context of bank resolutions:

                          i.	 Before resolution action is taken to decide if a bank is actually failing or
                               likely to fail (as a default, to be performed by the supervisory authority,
                               the resolution authority may perform such an assessment if provided
                               for under national law);
                          ii.	 At the point of resolution, to ensure losses are fully recognized and
                               inform the right application of resolution tools;
                          iii.	After taking resolution action, to compare the treatment of sharehol-
                               ders and creditors under resolution with the losses that would have
                               occurred under a hypothetical liquidation scenario (see chapter 20 on
                               NCWOL).

An updated accounting     Initial Valuation of a Struggling Institution: “Valuation 1”
valuation with            Valuation 1 is to determine whether the conditions for resolution (FOLTF)
regulatory adjustments
                          or point of non-viability (PONV) are met (see chapter 12). The key determi-
determines if an
institution is FOLTF.
                          nant for this is whether a bank’s balance sheet is (in)solvent and whether
                          there is a breach or likely breach of conditions for authorization. Hence,
                          the measurement basis must be consistent with the one used for ongoing
                          supervision; i.e. an updated accounting valuation with regulatory adjust-
                          ments. The valuer must adequately support the valuation with evidence,
                          thereby reviewing and challenging accounting and regulatory information
                          and representing the bank’s financial position fairly. The impact of actions
                          taken by the resolution authority is not taken into account at this stage.

Prudent assumptions       Resolution Valuation to Inform the Resolution Decision: “Valuation 2”
are used and the          If the resolution authority concludes that the bank meets the conditions
economic value of
                          for resolution based on the financial statements using the valuation prin-
assets and liabilities
are assessed to ensure
                          ciples detailed above under Valuation 1, a so-called “Valuation 2” is reques-
that losses are fully     ted to inform the appropriate resolution action to be taken and to provide
recognized at the point   an estimate of the hypothetical liquidation value (for the decision on the
of applying resolution    final hypothetical liquidation value (see chapter 20)). A resolution strategy
measures. This implies
                          can then be developed and measures applied to best serve the resolution
a departure from a pure
accounting and going-
                          principle and objectives, while also resulting in the highest value for the
concern perspective.      bank’s shareholders and creditors.

                          Valuation 2 seeks to:
                          –	ensure that any losses on the assets are fully recognized at resolution;
                          –	inform bail-in and recapitalization needs;

94
                                                                                                  chapter 12




–	determine asset values for the application of resolution tools, e.g. a
  potential sale of business, or transfer to bridge institution or asset
  management vehicle;
–	list creditors according to the insolvency hierarchy.

The valuation includes ascertaining the appropriate extent of an eventual
write-down or conversion of capital instruments (see chapter 13) and,
where necessary, eligible liabilities to restore compliance with regulatory
requirements and sustain market confidence in the institution under reso-
lution. Prudent assumptions are used and the economic value of assets
and liabilities are assessed to ensure that losses are fully recognized at the
point of applying resolution measures. This implies a departure from a pure
accounting and going-concern perspective as the underlying principles may
no longer be valid once the conditions for resolution are met. It is justified as
transactions connected with the application of certain resolution tools (e.g.
sale of business) are based on commercial terms. Asset values may therefore
significantly differ from book values. The principle of equal treatment of all
creditors must be respected, for example, in the transfer of certain assets or
liabilities (see chapter 15 on bail-in for exemptions).

All circumstances known at the valuation date, together with the possible           The choice of resolution
impact of future resolution actions need to be taken into account. Pub-             tools may affect the
                                                                                    estimation of the timing
lic support measures may not be assumed. The choice of resolution tools
                                                                                    and amount of future
may affect the estimation of the timing and amount of future cash-flows,            cash-flows.
e.g. yields from assets in a run-off entity with the aim to maximize value
may be very different from assets disposed of right away. The valuer must
outline the key assumptions underlying the valuation, apply judgment to
identify the salient factors arising from different resolution actions that
have a bearing on the value of assets, liabilities and equity and indicate
where uncertainty is significant.

Valuation 2 should list creditors, broken down into classes based on their          Resolution authorities
ranking in the insolvency hierarchy, and should estimate their treatment if         take the principle of
                                                                                    “no creditor worse
the institution were wound up under normal insolvency proceedings. This
                                                                                    off” into account
allows resolution authorities to take the principle of “no creditor worse           when determining the
off than under liquidation (NCWOL)” into account when determining the               resolution strategy
resolution strategy. The final hypothetical/fictitious liquidation value will       and an estimate on the
be measured ex-post resolution under Valuation 3 (see chapter 20 and                hypothetical liquidation
                                                                                    amount is provided
the Danish and Austrian case studies in accompanying publication “Bank
                                                                                    under V2.
resolution and bail-in in the EU: Selected case studies pre and post BRRD”
for practical examples on the hypothetical loss calculation). The valuation
also informs the decision on the eventual contribution of a deposit gua-
rantee scheme (see chapter 22 on the use of DGS for resolution purposes).

Cancellation or Dilution of Shares?
If the going-concern value determined in Valuation 2 is zero or nega-
tive, a full cancellation or full transfer of shares or other instruments of

                                                                                                          95
Chapter 12




                           ownership is necessary as well as a write-down of liabilities according to
                           the creditors’ hierarchy. A write-down of liabilities would however not be
                           appropriate as long as shareholders retain some value.

                           If the institution has a positive net asset value, both on the basis of the
                           assessment of its assets and liabilities under Valuation 2 and according
                           to the fictitious liquidation valuation, a dilution of existing shareholdings
                           would suffice. In that case creditors could be given new equity shares and
                           participate in any upside potential. In this case, the valuation serves to
                           determine the rate of conversion of debt to equity and estimate the equity
                           value of the newly issued shares (estimated market price). This ensures
                           that holders of converted claims receive sufficient value to satisfy the
                           NCWOL principle.

                           If the institution has an asset value of zero according only to the fictiti-
                           ous liquidation valuation, authorities may choose from the whole set of
                           options and decide which option is best operationally.

The resolution authority   The Valuation of Derivatives for Bail-In
has discretion to          In principle, derivative liabilities fall under the scope of the resolution
exclude derivative
                           authority’s bail-in power. However, certain exceptions may apply: specifi-
liabilities from bail-in
under exceptional
                           cally, the exclusion of secured liabilities from bail-in to the extent that the
circumstances.             value of the liability does not exceed the value of the collateral. Further-
                           more, the resolution authority may use its discretion to exclude derivative
                           liabilities from bail-in under additional exceptional circumstances, e.g.,
                           when it is not possible to bail-in that liability within a reasonable time
                           or when application of the bail-in tool would cause destruction in value,
                           increasing losses borne by other creditors.

                           Valuation in the context of the bail-in tool entails some special features
                           related to a liability arising from derivatives. The write-down and conver-
                           sion powers (see chapter 15 on bail-in) should be used only upon closing
                           out the derivatives. Where derivative transactions are subject to a netting
                           agreement, the resolution authority or the independent valuer should
                           determine the liability arising from those transactions on a net basis in
                           accordance with the terms of the agreement.

                           The liability will normally be assessed as an early termination amount
                           based on the replacement cost of the contract. The valuation also informs
                           the comparison that the resolution authorities need to undertake before
                           actually closing out derivative netting sets: in this context, the gain in
                           terms of increase in loss-absorption capacity through bail-in needs to be
                           contrasted with the destruction in value resulting from closing-out the
                           derivative contract. To the extent that liabilities to central counterparties
                           (CCPs) are not exempt from bail-in, the valuation processes used by the
                           authorized CCPs may typically serve to establish a proper valuation.



96
                                                                                              chapter 12




Ensuring Fair and Prudent Valuations by an Independent Valuer                   Independent valuers
The valuation should be carried out by a person independent of any public       must not have
                                                                                completed a statutory
authority, including the resolution authority, and the institution under
                                                                                audit in the year
resolution. Regulatory technical standards (RTS, see relevant documents         preceding the resolution
below) set out what constitutes independence in this regard. Anyone who         action, nor have
has completed a statutory audit of the entity under resolution in the year      conflicting interests as
preceding the resolution year is automatically ineligible. Independence         shareholders, board
                                                                                members, or creditors.
can also be compromised by material common or conflicting interests in
the institution or entity such as shareholding, board membership or where
the valuer is a significant creditor. Similarly, personal relationships could
represent a material interest and exclude a firm as an independent valuer.

Provisional Valuations                                                          In case of urgency the
Where an independent valuation is not possible, for example due to the          resolution authority
                                                                                may itself carry out a
urgency of the situation, a provisional valuation can be carried out (e.g.
                                                                                provisional valuation.
by the resolution authority). In this case a buffer for additional losses
must be applied if there is evidence supporting their existence or where
the amount of the likely losses cannot be reliably estimated. The ex-post
definitive valuation must be carried out as soon as practicable after taking
resolution action, either separately or together with the ex-post valuation
used to compare the difference in the treatment of shareholders and cre-
ditors under valuation 3 (see chapter 20) and may be done by the same
independent person.

Differences between the provisional valuation and valuation 2 should
be settled accordingly and any remaining funds (if any) in the buffer for
additional losses must be distributed to the claimants in the order of the
priority of their claims.

Bank Valuation Support                                                          Banks are expected to
It is a practical challenge to produce prudent, reliable valuations in a very   support the valuation
                                                                                process using their
short time frame. Banks are expected to support the valuation process
                                                                                own staff, systems and
using their own staff, systems and processes.                                   processes.

Valuation for Direct Recapitalization Under the ESM
Valuation may also be required in the context of the European Stability
Mechanism (ESM), which could as one funding line provide a direct bank
recapitalization instrument under certain circumstances (see chapter 21a
resolution financing). A valuation of the bank’s assets is conducted under
the guidance of the ESM, in liaison with the European Central Bank (ECB)
and European Commission. This is used to determine the contributions of
the requesting ESM Member and the ESM under a burden-sharing scheme.

International Consistency in Valuation For Resolution Purposes
The International Valuation Standards Council (IVSC), an independent,
not-for-profit organization, set up a special working group in 2014 to
develop guidance on valuations for resolution and recovery in accordance

                                                                                                         97
Chapter 12




             with the Financial Stability Board’s “Key Attributes of Effective Resolu-
             tion Regimes for Financial Institutions”. The project should lead to a new
             Application Standard setting out common principles for the valuation of
             FOLTF businesses, with accompanying guidance on specific applications
             including the resolution of financial institutions.

             Relevant documents
             Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing Direc-
             tive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying
             the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group resolution plans,
             the minimum criteria that the competent authority is to assess as regards
             recovery plans and group recovery plans, the conditions for group finan-
             cial support, the requirements for independent valuers, the contractual
             recognition of write-down and conversion powers, the procedures and
             contents of notification requirements and of notice of suspension and the
             operational functioning of the resolution colleges




98
                                                                                              chapter 13




Chapter 13:
Write-down or
Conversion of Capital
(WDCC) Instruments

By Dominik Freudenthaler



Key questions                                                                  Art. 47, 59–62 BRRD
–	 What is the difference between write-down or conversion of capital
   (WDCC) instruments and bail-in?
–	 Who determines whether an institution has reached the point of non-
   viability? Is it different to the conditions for resolution?
–	 Who may trigger a write-down or conversion outside resolution?
–	To which liabilities are the write-down or conversion powers applicable?
–	 What is the role of CoCos (contingent convertible bonds) under the
   statutory WDCC powers?



At first glance, the power of resolution authorities to require write-down
or conversion of capital instruments (WDCC) seems to share many com-
monalities with the bail-in power and therefore its purpose may seem
rather puzzling and opaque. But a detailed analysis shows that WDCC is
not just a bail-in of relevant capital instruments but evinces considerable
differences.

WDCC Within and Outside of Resolution                                          Unlike bail-in, WDCC
Unlike bail-in which, generally speaking, applies to all unsecured liabili-    powers apply only
                                                                               to relevant capital
ties (see Chapter 15) the WDCC powers (as indicated by the name) apply
                                                                               instruments (i.e. AT1
only to relevant capital instruments i.e. Additional Tier 1 (AT1) and Tier 2   and T2 instruments),
(T2) instruments. These instruments may be written down or converted           may take place in
to Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) instruments, after CET1 instruments are         advance or instead of
written down first.                                                            any resolution action,
                                                                               and have less stringent
                                                                               conditions for their use.
WDCC is not, strictly speaking, a resolution action as it should take place
in advance of any resolution action1. The conditions under which WDCC
powers may be applied are quite similar to the resolution triggers. WDCC


	 EBA Q&A 2015_1781
1




                                                                                                      99
Chapter 13




WDCC



                                   WDCC                              coco bond


      instrument
                                     CET1




                                      AT1                                     AT1




                                      T2




      trigger
                                   Conditions                       CoCo Bonds condition
                    Institution reaches point of non-viability     If CET 1 falls below 5,125 %
                                without WDDC i.e.                (other/higher triggers possible)
                   –	Failing or likely to fail
                   –	No other action but WDCC available
                     to prevent failure of institution
                   –	(no public interest test required)


                        Terms governing the instrument
                        should recognise WDCC powers




      nature
                              Statutory power                     Contractual CoCo Bonds
                     to write down or convert AT1 and T2           Conversion or write down
                          instruments, determination                on a contractual basis of
                   –	Either by supervisory or resolution          hybrid perpetual AT1 bonds
                      authority
                   –	In combination with or independent
                      of resolution action

                   –	Waterfall regime (bail-in) applies
                   –	Authority may require institution to
                     issue CET1 instruments




100
                                                                                                 chapter 13




may be appropriate if the institution is deemed to be no longer viable, if         It is the resolution
it is failing or likely to fail, and if there is no reasonable prospect that any   authority that applies
                                                                                   WDCC, however the
action other than WDCC would prevent its failure. The point of non-vi-
                                                                                   BRRD does not specify
ability (PONV) should be understood as the point at which the relevant             who shall determine
(supervisory or resolution) authority determines that the institution              whether an institution
meets at least the first two conditions for resolution, or the point at which      has reached the point of
the authority decides that the institution would cease to be viable if capital     non-viability and trigger
                                                                                   WDCC.
instruments were not written down or converted.

No public interest justification is required if WDCC is conducted outside
resolution. WDCC can be exercised by the resolution authority indepen-
dently of resolution actions as a sort of in-between measure if the require-
ments for WDCC are met and if the write-down and conversion of capital
instruments is sufficient to restore the bank.

WDCC has to be applied by the resolution authority, but the BRRD does
not explicitly specify whether the supervisor, the resolution authority,
or another appropriate authority is to determine whether an institution
has reached the point of non-viability (instead, it is left open for national
implementing law).

Under the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) (Article 21 SRMR), it is
indicated that the Single Resolution Board (SRB) may determine the point
of non-viability (PONV) if it has informed the European Central Bank
(ECB) of its intention to do so and the ECB does not make such an assess-
ment within 3 days (for the determination of FOLTF see chapter 14).

If WDCC is deployed, the bail-in waterfall comes into effect. In this res-         The point of non-
pect there is no substantive difference in the legal technique between the         viability is when the
                                                                                   relevant (supervisory
WDCC and bail-in tool: existing shares are cancelled and either transfer-
                                                                                   or resolution) authority
red or, in the case of a positive net value, diluted by converting WDCC eli-       determines that the
gible debt into equity. Like a bail-in, WDCC should be carried out on the          institution meets
basis of valuation under Article 36.2 However, one noticeable difference           the conditions for
is that WDCC does not allow for any exceptions: capital instruments can-           resolution, or decides
                                                                                   that the institution
not be excluded from write down or conversion. In contrast, under bail-in
                                                                                   would cease to be viable
certain liabilities may be excluded or partially excluded in exceptional cir-      if capital instruments
cumstances (see chapter 15) the same as under the state aid framework,             were not written down
when the implementation of the write down or conversion would lead to              or converted.
disproportionate results or would endanger financial stability.

Not regulated under the BRRD: CoCo Bonds – Contractual Obligations
for Write Down Or Conversion of AT1 Instruments Under the CRR
The contractual conversion or write-down of contingent convertible
bonds (CoCo Bonds), i.e. AT1 instruments, is in the hands of the institution
and not regulated in the BRRD. Statutory WDCC as described above can


	 EBA Q&A 2015_1781
2




                                                                                                         101
Chapter 13




                           be seen as a safety net – if the point of non-viability is reached and the
                           management of the institution is unresponsive, the resolution authority
                           can trigger WDCC including CoCo Bonds with sovereign public autho-
                           rity. The scope of WDCC is broader, able to convert or write down Tier 2
                           instruments, which are not necessarily issued as CoCos i.e. under a con-
                           tractual obligation stipulating that the instrument may be converted or
                           written-down in a crisis scenario.

                           CoCo Bonds are essentially convertible debts that fulfil the regulatory
                           requirements for AT1 instruments. CoCo Bonds aim to protect financial
                           stability in times of crisis by converting when the bank's capital ratio falls
                           below a certain point – i.e. in a crisis scenario – while investors earn above
                           average interest during times of financial soundness. This is somewhat
                           different from plain vanilla convertibles, which give the holder the ability
                           to receive stock in exchange for the bond at a time when the stock price is
                           going up against lower interest payments than traditional debt.

The contractual            Under the EU Capital Requirements Regulation (Article 52 CRR), AT1 inst-
conversion or              ruments are issued with a contractual obligation stipulating that the inst-
write-down of AT1
                           rument can be converted or written-down in a crisis scenario. The trigger
going-concern capital
instruments (such as
                           for conversion or write-down of AT1 instruments is incorporated in the
CoCos) is triggered by     bond terms and can be set quite freely. The minimum requirement is the
the institution and is     CET1 capital ratio of the institution falling below 5.125 %.
likely to happen before
a WDCC is deployed.
                           The trigger should ensure that conversion or write-down takes place suf-
By contrast, WDCC is
a statutory power of
                           ficiently early (on a going-concern basis) to contribute to the continued
resolution authorities     viability of the institution. A contractual conversion or write-down of AT1
and has a broader scope    instruments is therefore likely to happen before a WDCC is deployed. This
(i.e. ability to convert   applies particularly to AT1 instruments that stipulate a trigger above the
or write down Tier 2
                           minimum requirement, i.e. a CET1 capital ratio above 5.125 % (so called
instruments).
                           high-trigger CoCo Bonds). As a quid pro quo for the conversion risk, inves-
                           tors are offered higher yields, which are indeed the main source of returns
                           as CoCo Bonds are perpetual3.

                           WDCC Instead of Resolution if T2 is Sufficient to Stabilize the Institution
                           The WDCC powers offer a “milder bail-in” option, with less stringent con-
                           ditions for their use (no public interest test if conducted outside resolu-
                           tion) and are applicable to capital instruments. In practice, WDCC will
                           be used in place of formally starting resolution if incurred losses can be
                           covered by AT1 and T2 instruments and a bail-in of other liabilities is not
                           required to stabilize and recapitalize the institution. AT1 instruments
                           should be converted or written down ahead of any resolution autho-
                           rity decision to step in with sovereign public authority at the point of
                           non-viability.



                           	 Article 52(1)(g) CRR
                           3




102
                                                                               chapter 13




The CoCo Bond market has grown rapidly and substantively in recent years
and considerable growth is expected ahead. The future will show if CoCos
work smoothly and contribute to stable financial markets by converting
into equity or writing down principal. Doubts have already emerged fol-
lowing rumors about a case of a CoCo-coupon shattering confidence in
one of the biggest EU banks. A concern is that rather than providing reas-
surance that potential issues will be identified early and swift action will
be taken to address them, WDCC may instead be seen as a signal of trouble
ahead and contribute to a mood of crisis.

Relevant documents
–	EBA Report on the monitoring of Additional Tier 1 (AT1) instruments of
  EU institutions – second update, 11 July 2016
–	EBA Final Report on the monitoring of Additional Tier 1 (AT1) instru-
  ments of EU institutions, 29 May 2015
–	Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit
  institutions and investment firms (CRR)
–	CoCos: a primer, BIS Quarterly Review, September 2013/43
–	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
  Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards spe-
  cifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group reso-
  lution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is to
  assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the conditions
  for group financial support, the requirements for independent valuers,
  the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion powers, the
  procedures and contents of notification requirements and of notice of
  suspension and the operational functioning of the resolution colleges
–	EBA/CP/2014/29 Draft Guidelines concerning the interrelationship bet-
  ween the BRRD sequence of write down and conversion and CRR/CRD IV
–	EBA/CP/2014/40 Draft Guidelines on the treatment of shareholders in
  bail-in or the write-down and conversion of capital instruments




                                                                                      103
Chapter 14




Chapter 14:
Conditions for Taking
Resolution Action
and the Adoption of
a Resolution Scheme

Art. 32–34 BRRD                 By Dominik Freudenthaler and Pamela Lintner



                                Key questions
                                –	 What are the conditions for taking resolution action?
                                –	 Who determines if a bank is likely to fail and will enter resolution?
                                –	 What does the public interest test check? What happens if there is no
                                   public interest?
                                –	 Who decides on a group resolution scheme if more than one entity of a
                                   group is likely to fail?



The three main conditions       Conditions for Resolution
for taking resolution           Article 32 of the BRRD sets out a cascade of cumulative conditions that
action are:
                                determine whether resolution authorities should take resolution actions
1.	the institution is failing
   or likely to fail;
                                (rather than applying regular insolvency law to a failing bank). There are
2.	no alternative private       three main requirements. First, it must be determined that the institution
   sector measures would        is failing or likely to fail (FOLTF). Second, there must be no reasonable pro-
   prevent the failure; and     spect that alternative private sector measures would prevent the failure.
3.	resolution action is in
                                Third, resolution action must be in the public interest.
   the public interest and
   fulfils the resolution
   objectives to at least       The supervisor determines if an institution is failing. The BRRD additio-
   the same extent as           nally allows Member States to empower the resolution authority, given its
   liquidation.                 access to the relevant information, to carry out the assessment in addition
                                or as a fallback instead of the supervisor.

The supervisor determines       An institution shall be deemed to be failing or likely to fail if one of the
if an institution is failing.   following four legal prerequisites is met:
Member States may
empower the resolution
authority to carry out this
                                –	the institution infringes the requirements for continuing authorization
assessment instead of the         in a way that would justify the withdrawal of the authorization;
supervisor.                     –	the liabilities exceed the assets (“balance sheet” insolvency);

104
                                                                                                                                                             chapter 14




      Overview of SRB decision making process




                                          3 resolution conditions:
                                          –	Failing or likely to fail (ECB or SRB if no action by ECB)               negative                     NO resolution
                                          –	No alternative private sector measures (SRB or NRA+ECB)                                             (orderly wind-down
24 hours for Council decision




                                                                                                           (autonomous assessment by SRB)       under national law)
                                          –	Public interest (SRB)

                                                                          positive



                                                          SRB: resolution scheme
                                    Executive: Fund < 5 billion/bn (10 bn Li)/Plenary: Fund > 5 bn (10 bn Li)


                                                         With regard to discretionary aspects



                                                                  Commission             Proposal to
                                                                                         –	approve or object a modification of amount of fund
                                                                                         –	object due to public interest
8 hours to modify




                                Endorsement                        Objection                         Council




                                                                                               Objection                           No               Objection
                                                                                        (= modify amount of Fund)               Objection         (public interest)




                                                    SRB: modified resolution scheme                                                               NO resolution
                                                            Executive/Plenary                                                                   (orderly wind-down
                                                                                                                                                under national law)
32 hours




                                                            COM State aid decision
                                                                 condition




                                                     Enforcement of the resolution
                                                            scheme by NRA




                                                                                                                                                                      105
Chapter 14




                           –	the institution is unable to pay its debts as they fall due (illiquidity or
                             “cash flow” insolvency); or
                           –	extraordinary public financial support is required (except in the case
                             of explicitly listed exceptions if confined to a solvent institution under
                             Article 32 (4)(d), see chapter 9).

The FOLTF definition       The FOLTF definition used under the BRRD is rather vague (and it will
used under the BRRD is     be difficult in practice to define the point of non-viability) but gives the
rather vague but gives
                           required discretion to intervene early enough. Hard capital ratio trig-
required discretion to
intervene early enough.
                           gers might be an additional safeguard but are generally said to be slow
                           in reflecting problems, and institutions may be tempted to underesti-
                           mate and under-report risk weights. The European Banking Authority
                           (EBA) further elaborates on the circumstances in which an institution
                           will be considered as failing or likely to fail. The EBA guidelines (EBA/
                           GL/2015/07) set out objective elements relating to the capital and liqui-
                           dity position of the institution as well as governance arrangements and
                           operational capacity.

Resolution action must     The Public Interest Test
be justified by public     If an institution fulfils the conditions for resolution, the application of
interest as regularly it
                           resolution actions is likely to affect the fundamental rights of sharehol-
will affect fundamental
rights of shareholders
                           ders and creditors. The most prominent provision of the Charter of Fun-
and creditors.             damental Rights of the European Union that will be invoked is the right to
                           property (Article 17 of the Charter). The right to an effective remedy and
                           to a fair trial (Article 47 of the Charter) may also be relevant. A clear and
                           overriding objective is therefore necessary to justify any interference with
                           fundamental rights through the application of resolution tools. In Slove-
                           nia, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) held that burden
                           sharing (bail-in) when required by the European Commission during state
                           aid procedures does not infringe fundamental rights of investors (right to
                           property) when loss absorbance is based on valuation rather than on actual
                           liquidation (see case study in accompanying publication “Bank resolution
                           and bail-in in the EU: Selected case studies pre and post BRRD”). This
                           assessment, one can argue, applies mutatis mutandis to bail-in decision
                           under the BRRD. The BRRD addresses this by two main safeguards – the
                           NCWOL test and the public interest test:

                           Firstly, through the concept that no creditor should be worse off than in
                           liquidation (NCWOL), the BRRD ensures that no creditor incurs a loss gre-
                           ater than if the institutions had gone into liquidation (see chapter 20).

                           Secondly, the BRRD provides that resolution action must be necessary
                           in the public interest. The conditions of resolution specify that the reso-
                           lution authority must conduct a public interest test before a resolution
                           measure can be deployed. The public interest test is benchmarked against
                           BRRD targeted resolution objectives. Resolution action is deemed to be
                           in the public interest only if winding-up the institution under normal

106
                                                                                             chapter 14




insolvency proceedings would not meet those resolution objectives to the
same extent (Article 32 (5)).

The objectives of resolution under the BRRD are manifold, comprehen-           The rather generic
sive, and mainly of a generic qualitative nature: to ensure the continuity     resolution objectives are
                                                                               open to interpretation
of critical functions; to avoid significant adverse effects on the finan-
                                                                               and make it challenging
cial system; to avoid, or at least minimize, reliance on extraordinary         to assess ex-ante if they
public financial support (i.e. taxpayer money); and last but not least,        can be met to the same
to protect deposits, investments and other client funds and assets (see        extent through normal
chapter 4). These objectives set the bar high and make it challenging          insolvency proceedings.
to assess, ex-ante and under considerable time pressure, if they can be
met to the same extent through normal insolvency proceedings. For a
concrete example of how the public interest test is specified by way of
comparing the achievement of individual selected resolution objectives
under resolution and liquidation see the HETA case study in accompa-
nying publication “Bank resolution and bail-in in the EU: Selected case
studies pre and post BRRD”. Authorities will also have to consider the
impact of not taking resolution action when assessing whether to apply
special resolution tools.

The threshold to meet the conditions for resolution set in the public
interest test is relatively low and open to interpretation. Resolution
authorities may use the discretion provided by the rather abstract and
generic definition of public interest under the BRRD and tend towards
determining that resolution actions are justified in the public interest.
The Bank of England (BoE), for example, has stated that discontinuity of
access to transactional deposit accounts or current accounts could alone,
in certain cases, substantiate public interest. The BoE argues that certain
account holder’s reliance on daily access to their funds may mean that
even a payout within seven days, as provided for by the deposit gua-
rantee scheme, would constitute a serious problem and could justify the
taking of resolution action. Following such reasoning and wide interpre-
tation of the public interest test, resolution actions for deposit-taking
banks would be justified in the public interest even if the failure of the
institution was not considered a risk to the (national) financial system
if the seven day payout period is considered not to ensure the same
adequate protection of depositors as the taking of resolution action.
For an example how the public interest was justified in one of the first
resolution cases under the BRRD framework see the Heta case study (in
accompanying publication “Bank resolution and bail-in in the EU: Selec-
ted case studies pre and post BRRD”) where resolution was considered
appropriate inter alia because essential services could not be ensured
to the same extent and with the same legal certainty under liquidation;
the bankruptcy would have likely had considerable negative effects on
financial stability in Austria as well as two other EU countries because the
objective of protecting public funds could not be achieved to the same
extent in a bankruptcy proceeding.

                                                                                                     107
Chapter 14




                            Depending on the practical interpretation and application of the “public
                            interest” definition, it seems credible that resolution could be deemed to be
                            in the public interest as a general rule in line with the BRRD. Under a wide
                            interpretation of the public interest test, only the smallest banks (if at all)
                            may be determined not to fulfil the conditions and be wound down under
                            normal insolvency proceedings. Serious care must therefore be taken in
                            order to justify resolution actions, and potential consequential interference
                            with fundamental rights, and the use of resolution financing arrangements.

If an institution is        Further Specifying Public Interest
deemed not to be in the     A slightly alternative approach to limit and more concretely define the
public interest during
                            public interest test would have been to provide that the winding-up of
the ex-ante planning
phase this should, as
                            an institution under normal insolvency proceedings must not endan-
a rule, indicate that       ger financial stability and that resolution is in all cases required to pro-
resolution is not deemed    tect financial stability, a concept used in other contexts in the BRRD. For
to be in the public         example, the resolution authority may only justify an exception from
interest. The BRRD’s
                            marketing requirements under the sale of business tool if, inter alia,
flexible approach,
however, allows ad hoc
                            the marketing requirements would undermine one or more resolution
circumstances to justify    tools, plus if otherwise a material threat to financial stability would arise
public interest in the      (Article 39 (3)). The EBA concludes that the concept of ‘material threat’
actual case of crisis.      corresponds to the public interest test and provides an indicative list of
                            circumstances to give further guidance to resolution authorities.

                            Another approach to the public interest test relates to resolution planning.
                            Article 4 of the BRRD refers to the possibility of winding up an institution
                            under normal insolvency proceedings. Resolution planning and public
                            interest should match. If an institution is deemed not to be in the pub-
                            lic interest during the ex-ante planning phase, and is therefore eligible
                            for simplified obligations or a low level of detail in contingency planning,
                            this should, as a rule, indicate that resolution is not deemed to be in the
                            public interest and this judgment should hold when it comes to a failure
                            of the institution. The BRRD’s flexible approach however allows for ad hoc
                            circumstances, not foreseeable in the planning phase, which justify public
                            interest in the case of crisis.

If no agreement can be      Adoption of a Group Resolution Scheme
found each resolution       In principle under the BRRD each resolution authority is responsible
authority may apply its
                            for the entity under its jurisdiction and takes an individual decision on
own resolution action
for the respective entity
                            whether to start the resolution process or not and which resolution tools
under its jurisdiction.     to apply. The taking of resolution action in one jurisdiction could impact
                            other parts of a group, with the result that they may also be likely to fulfill
                            the conditions for taking resolution action. In this case, within 24 hours
                            of receiving notice from the national resolution authority of impending
                            resolution action the group level resolution authority must decide on and
                            share a group resolution scheme with all supervisory college members. A
                            group resolution scheme outlines the resolution actions to be taken by the
                            relevant national resolution authorities (or the SRB) in relation to the EU

108
                                                                                             chapter 14




parent and or particular group entities. A group resolution plan will nor-
mally have been reached ex-ante (see chapter 10a). Ideally also a common
understanding on burden sharing arrangements and a financing plan is
already in place (chapter 21). The general principles on cross-border reso-
lution laid down in Article 87 BRRD oblige the authorities concerned to
cooperate closely. There is however no legal certainty provided under the
BRRD that a group resolution plan will be enacted as foreseen and that a
common cross-border resolution strategy will be applied. The adoption
of a group resolution scheme decision is not guaranteed. Cooperation in
the supervisory college is stipulated when either a subsidiary or when a
group parent company meets the conditions for resolution, and EBA may
assist in reaching a joint decision on the group resolution strategy. In the
end, however, each resolution authority may take its own decision for rea-
sons of financial stability, and is obliged to provide a detailed reasoning.
Obviously, the resolution authorities which reach a joint decision may go
ahead covering the part of the group under their respective jurisdictions
(Articles 91 and 92).

Adoption of a Resolution Scheme Under the SRM                                   The SRB, being
Within the euro area under the SRM, it is normally for the ECB to decide if     responsible for all
                                                                                entities of a group
a bank is considered FOLTF, after consulting the SRB. The SRB may excep-
                                                                                within the euro area,
tionally also determine that a bank is considered FOLTF if it has informed      adopts a resolution
the ECB of its intention to do so and the ECB has not reacted within three      scheme within the
days (Art 18 SRMR).                                                             SRM. Veto powers
                                                                                are attributed to the
                                                                                Commission and the
The SRB decides first if the conditions for taking resolution action are ful-
                                                                                Council. Implementation
filled (without veto powers in case of negative assessment, see below) and      is the responsibility
second on the application of a resolution strategy. Only the SRB can deter-     of national resolution
mine that all conditions for resolution are met, the European Commission        authorities applying
and the Council of the European Union have no powers in this regard. If         national law.
the SRB makes an initial positive determination that resolution is in the
public interest and should go ahead it is, however, then possible for the
European Commission to propose that the Council object to the propo-
sed resolution scheme. The European Commission and the Council have
power to veto approval of the SRB’s resolution strategy. The proposal is
transmitted to the Commission, which can within 24 hours either endorse
the resolution scheme, object to it, and/or amend it “with regard to the
discretionary aspects of the resolution scheme”. The Council’s involvement
depends on the Commission’s proposal to act and it may object or approve
the SRB Boards positive assessment on the public interest and/or the use
of the Resolution Fund. In case of an objection, the SRB has eight hours to
modify the resolution scheme. If the Council objects because it considers
taking resolution action not to be justified in light of the public interest
test, the procedure is stopped and the entity wound down under regular
national insolvency procedure. If there are no objections, the resolution
scheme enters into force (see graph for an outline of the decision making
process under the SRM above).

                                                                                                    109
Chapter 14




             Once approved, the implementation phase starts. The local national reso-
             lution authorities (NRAs) are responsible for implementing the tools set
             out by the resolution scheme. A proper and comprehensive transposition
             of the BRRD into national law is key to enabling local authorities to act
             with full powers and ensure coherent application of resolution tools (the
             NCWOL test for example is based on the respective national insolvency
             laws, see chapter 20).

             Relevant documents
             –	EBA/GL/2015/07 Guidelines on the interpretation of the different cir-
               cumstances when an institution shall be considered as failing or likely
               to fail under Article 32(6) of Directive 2014/59/EU
             –	EBA/GL/2015/04 Guidelines on the sale of business tool
             –	EBA/GL/2014/09 Guidelines on the types of tests, reviews or exercises
               that may lead to support measures under Article 32(4)(d)(iii) of the Bank
               Recovery and Resolution Directive
             –	HM Treasury, Banking Act 2009: special resolution regime code of
               practice, March 2015



             Cumulative conditions for resolution actions



                                 1    Institution is failing or likely to fail.
                                      Liabilities exceed assets
                                      Institution is failing if
                                      –		 Infringement of requirements
                                          for continuing authorization;
                                      –		 Liabilities exceed assets (insolvent);
                                      –		 Inability to pay debts (illiquid); or
                                      –		 Extraordinary public financial
                                          support required (save extraordinary precautionary
                                          recapitalization


                               2      No alternative private sector
                                      measures available



                               3      Resolution action necessary
                                      in the public interest
                                      Public interest test
                                      Winding up under normal insolvency proceeding would
                                      not meet resolution objectives to the same extent



                                      resolution actions

                   If one of the three conditions is not met:
                   Winding up of institution under regular insolvency procedure or other crisis management tools


110
                                                                                               chapter 15




Resolution Tools
and Legal Safeguards

Chapter 15:
The Bail-in Tool

By Jeremy Jennings-Mares



Key questions                                                                   Art. 43–55 BRRD
–	Does bail-in apply to each and every resolution case?
–	 Can all creditors/instruments be bailed-in? Will insured deposits be
   bailed-in?
–	 Are there any exemptions from bail-in?
–	 Who defines the amount of bail-in?



Bail-in is the most innovative of the tools given to resolution authorities     Under bail-in, losses
by the BRRD in the context of bank resolution. Under bail-in, losses are        are imposed on owners
                                                                                and creditors of a failing
imposed on owners and creditors of a failing bank, rather than on tax-
                                                                                bank, rather than on tax
payers under a “public bail-out”. The bail-in tool achieves loss absorption     payers under a “public
by either converting the liability into a common equity instrument, such        bail-out”.
as a share, or by writing down or writing off the principal amount of the
liability (both are a form of a “bail-in”).

Why and How the Bail-In Tool Is Used                                            The bail-in tool achieves
Bail-in can be defined as the statutory imposition of losses on liabilities     loss-absorption by either
                                                                                converting the liability
of a financial institution where such liabilities are not designed, by their
                                                                                into a common equity
terms, to absorb such losses outside of an insolvency procedure. The first      instrument, such as
possible use of the bail-in tool under the BRRD is to capitalize an institu-    a share, or by writing
tion under resolution (“open bank bail-in”). The recapitalization amount        down or writing off the
would equal the aggregate amount according to the resolution valuation          principal amount of the
                                                                                liability.
(see chapter 12) necessary to absorb all losses and also restore and main-
tain the institution’s compliance with its authorization conditions for at
least one year, as well as sustain market confidence in the institution. The
second possible use of the bail-in tool is to reduce the principal amount
of, or convert into equity, claims or debt instruments transferred to a
bridge institution (in order to provide capital for that bridge institution),

                                                                                                        111
Chapter 15




Example of loss absorption and recapitalization in a bail-in




                                          Step 1:
                    Bank                write-down                Step 2:                        Bank
                before bail-in           to absorb            recapitalization               after bail-in
                                            loss



                                        € 1 of the subordinated
                                        debt layer is written down

                                        The original € 9 equity
                                        is wiped out
                                                                                                  Unsecured senior debt
                                                                                                  layer is smaller than
                                                               € 2 subordinated                   it was before the bail-in
                                         Loss on assets        debt and senior
      Loss on assets     Equity € 9      € 10
      € 10                                                     debt converted                     Firm’s capital position
                                                               to equity                          is restored
                         Sub-debt € 3
                                         Sub-debt € 2       Sub-debt € 2
                         Unsecured       Unsecured          Unsecured                               Equity € 9
                         senior          senior             senior
                         liabilities     liabilities        liabilities
                         € 10            € 10               € 10                                    Unsecured € 3



                         Deposits        Deposits           Deposits                                Deposits
                         € 120           € 120              € 120                                   € 120
      Assets                                                                      Assets
      € 290                                                                       € 290



                         Secured         Secured            Secured                                 Secured
                         liabilities     liabilities        liabilities                             liabilities
                         € 158           € 158              € 158                                   € 158




                          Liabilities     Liabilities       Liabilities                              Liabilities
        Assets               and             and               and                  Assets              and
                            capital         capital           capital                                  capital




112
                                                                                                    chapter 15




or claims or debt instruments that are transferred under the sale of busi-
ness tool or the asset separation tool. It is worth noting that, as their debt
claims are converted into equity instruments, the holders (in principle)
will benefit from future profits of the relevant entity, whether from the
payment of dividends or an increase in value of the equity instruments.

The conversion to equity could be achieved, in practice, by the following
steps: i) the resolution authority could issue certificates of entitlement to
creditors holding liabilities subject to bail-in; ii) the title to all the existing
shares could be transferred to a depository to hold on behalf of the certi-
ficate holders; iii) once the resolution valuation has been completed, and
the final terms of the conversion/write-down have been determined, the
certificates of entitlement would be exchanged for the new shares. One
possible result of such a bail-in is a change of control of the bank in resolu-
tion, in which case the approval of the bank’s supervisory authority would
be required, following an assessment of whether the new owner is a “fit
and proper” person to have control of a bank.

See example illustrated above for a theoretical example of the loss-absorp-
tion and recapitalization elements of a bail-in action.

Scope of Bail-In Tool                                                                 All liabilities not
The BRRD provides that the bail-in tool can be applied to all liabilities that        expressly excluded by
                                                                                      law are in principle
are not expressly excluded from the scope of bail-in. The following liabili-
                                                                                      bail-inable.
ties are expressly excluded:

–	covered deposits, i.e. deposits up to the amount covered by a deposit
  guarantee scheme (DGS) (the DGS pays in lieu, see chapter 22 on use of
  a DGS);
–	liabilities in respect of holding client assets or client money, where the
  client is protected under applicable insolvency law;
–	liabilities resulting from a fiduciary relationship, where the beneficiary
  is protected under applicable law;
–	liabilities to other financial institutions (outside the group of the insti-
  tution in resolution) with an original maturity of less than seven days;
–	liabilities with a remaining maturity of less than seven days, owed to
  payment or securities settlement systems or their participants;
–	employee remuneration or benefits (other than variable remuneration);
–	liabilities to commercial or trade creditors relating to the provision of
  critical goods or services;
–	liabilities to tax and social security authorities that are preferred by law;
–	liabilities for contributions to deposit guarantee schemes; and
–	liabilities to the extent they are secured, including covered bonds and
  hedging instrument liabilities of the covered bond issuer.

Deposits and secured liabilities both have only partial exemption from the
bail-in tool. Deposits are excluded only to the extent that they are covered

                                                                                                              113
Chapter 15




                           by a DGS. Any amount of the deposit liability in excess of the amount
                           covered by the scheme could, therefore, potentially be bailed-in. Secured
                           liabilities are only excluded from bail-in to the extent of the value of the
                           collateral securing the liability. If the liability has a greater value than the
                           collateral securing it, the difference in value could potentially be bailed-in.

In exceptional             In addition to the above list of excluded liabilities, the BRRD provides that,
circumstances,             in exceptional circumstances, the resolution authority may wholly or par-
bail-inable instruments
                           tially exclude certain liabilities from bail-in, where:
(within the same
creditor hierarchy rank)
might be excluded          –	it is not possible to bail-in the liability within a reasonable timeframe
upon the decision of the     (this could potentially apply to derivatives liabilities, which can be very
resolution authority.        difficult to value in a short space of time); or
                           –	the exclusion is necessary and proportionate to achieve continuity of
                             critical functions and core business lines; or
                           –	the exclusion is necessary and proportionate to avoid widespread con-
                             tagion that would disrupt the functioning of financial markets, in par-
                             ticular as regards deposits held by individuals and micro, small and
                             medium size enterprises; or
                           –	bailing-in the liability would cause higher losses to other creditors than
                             not bailing it in.

                           Where a resolution authority decides to exclude all or part of an eligible
                           liability from bail-in, it may increase the level of write-down or conver-
                           sion applied to other bail-inable liabilities to take account of such exclu-
                           sion, provided that the other creditors would not suffer greater losses
                           than they would have under normal insolvency proceedings. This provi-
                           sion (the no creditor worse off than under liquidation (NCWOL) principle,
                           see chapter 20) represents one of the key principles that must be obser-
                           ved by resolution authorities when applying resolution tools. Following
                           application of the bail-in tool and any other applicable resolution tools, a
                           further valuation (separate from the resolution valuation carried out for
                           the purpose of determining the extent to which resolution tools should be
                           applied) will be carried out in order to determine whether any creditor has
                           in fact suffered losses greater than they would have incurred in a normal
                           insolvency proceeding.

                           Prior Bail-In Before the Use of Resolution Financing Arrangements and
                           Public Support
                           Where an otherwise bail-inable liability is excluded by the decision of
                           the resolution authority (see above), and the consequential non-absor-
                           bed losses are not fully passed on to other creditors, a contribution can
                           be made by the resolution financing arrangement to cover any unabsor-
                           bed losses and restore the net asset value of the institution to zero, and/
                           or to purchase shares or capital instruments in the institution in order
                           to recapitalize it sufficiently to restore its Common Equity Tier 1 capital
                           ratio.

114
                                                                                                chapter 15




Both government support (see chapter 21b) and use of the resolution               Government support
financing arrangement (see chapter 21a) are conditional inter alia upon           and the use of the
                                                                                  Resolution fund are
prior 8 % bail-in. Loss-absorption for an institution under resolution is
                                                                                  conditional on prior 8 %
only allowed where the institution’s own funds, capital instruments and           bail-in
eligible liabilities have together already absorbed losses of at least 8 % of
the institution’s total liabilities (including own funds) measured pursuant
to the valuation triggering resolution (Valuation 1).

It may not always be clear-cut what is “loss absorbance” (direct or indirect)
and for which purposes the resolution financing arrangement could be
allowed to contribute without fulfilling the prior 8 % bail-in requirement.
The relevant issue is whether losses are absorbed, no matter if directly or
indirectly (whether in the present or in future). The principles of Article 44,
including the prior 8 % bail-in obligation, should therefore be a prerequi-
site also in the context of impaired asset measures including guarantees,
for example, used to bridge a valuation gap on off-market terms to the
bridge bank or an acquirer.

The 8 % over total balance sheet has to be measured when the resolution
is initiated (based on Valuation 1), i.e. at the point of failing or likely to
fail (FOLTF). The 8 % is calculated against “total liabilities including own
funds”, which are always the same as assets, except where there is negative
equity; in such case a calculational limit at zero own funds would have to
be drawn in order to exclude distortive effects. Another aspect to consider
(including when setting MREL, see chapter 11) is to account for potential
deteriorations: as the balance sheet at the point of taking resolution action
will “count”, the bail-inable base will likely be reduced (and the equity to
assets ratio will have dropped). This could for example have an effect on
the feasibility of excluding certain liabilities from bail-in as planned.

It is also worth noting the difference between equity instruments and debt
instruments under bail-in. While the value of the equity instruments may
change (i.e. because of accounting losses) the value of hybrid debt instru-
ments with loss-absorbing capacity will usually not change (unless they
are fair-valued, which is theoretically possible according to IAS39 but
unlikely). Hence, Tier 2, unsecured debt instruments and also Additional
Tier 1 (AT1) instruments would preserve their book value pre-resolution.
This could be an argument in favor of issuing more debt instruments in
addition to equity (as required under the TLAC rules).

Loss-Absorption Priorities and Bail-In Hierarchy                                  The loss absorption
Now that the bail-in provisions of the BRRD are fully in effect, an institu-      order is aligned with
                                                                                  the priority applicable
tion under resolution will potentially have a large variety of instruments
                                                                                  in normal insolvency
that can be used to absorb losses, but it is a key principle of the BRRD          proceedings, in order to
that losses are imposed on capital instruments and eligible liabilities in        adhere to the NCWOL
a prescribed order. Shareholders must bear the first loss and thereafter          principle.
creditors must bear losses according to the priority that would apply in

                                                                                                        115
Chapter 15




             normal insolvency proceedings. The prescribed order is intended to be
             aligned with the priority applicable in normal insolvency proceedings in
             order to adhere to the NCWOL principle. However, it is worth noting that
             the insolvency laws of the different EU member states are not harmonized.
             Therefore, it is important that each member state takes action to ensure
             that its laws regarding the priority of claims in an insolvency proceeding
             are not inconsistent with the provisions of the BRRD. A specific example of
             this is provided in Article 108 of BRRD. This Article mandates Member Sta-
             tes to ensure that deposits of individuals and micro, small, and medium
             enterprises that would be eligible for coverage under a DGS if they did not
             exceed the relevant coverage level, will have a preferred status above other
             unsecured non-preferred creditors. This ensures that if such deposits are
             excluded from a bail-in (as they are reasonably likely to be), the exclusion
             would not automatically give rise to potential claims from other unsecu-
             red non-preferred creditors under the NCWOL principle.

             Therefore, regulatory capital instruments (Common Equity Tier 1, Additio-
             nal Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruments) will be written down or converted first (to
             the extent these were not already written down prior to the resolution see
             chapter 13 on WDCC), followed by other subordinated debt instruments,
             and finally those senior unsecured liabilities subject to the bail-in tool.

             Table: Bail-in Cascade




                                                             Tier 1 (CET1 then AT1)


             WDCC                                                     Tier 2
             (also outside Resolution-PONV)
             Bail-in (Resolution only)
                                                   Subordinated liabilities (junior creditors)

                                                                                                      NCWOL
             State aid
                                                                                                      test
                                                   Other eligible liabilities (uncovered senior
                                                     debt incl. rest of uncovered deposits


                                                 Uncovered deposits Natural + SMEs > 100,000


                                                 DGS contribution in lieu of insured despositors


                                              Secured instruments; Short term interbank liabilities
                                                     and clearing claims; Tax, salaries, …




116
                                                                                                  chapter 15




Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL)                   The setting of MREL by
To deter institutions from structuring their borrowings to be immune                the resolution authority
                                                                                    could be influenced
from the bail-in tool, the BRRD provides that resolution authorities must
                                                                                    by the desire to limit
set a minimum required level of loss-absorbing liabilities (MREL) to be             any contagion effects
held by each institution (in its jurisdiction), expressed as a percentage of        and negative impact of
the aggregate of an institution’s own funds and total liabilities. MREL             the bail-in on non-
will consist broadly of own funds (i.e. regulatory capital) and bail-inable         professional creditors.
liabilities. That said, some liabilities theoretically eligible for bail-in (such
as derivative liabilities and structured securities) are likely not to count
towards an institution’s MREL, due to doubts as to how easily those liabi-
lities could be bailed-in in an actual resolution scenario (see chapter 11).
The specifications by each resolution authority of the required characteri-
stics of MREL could be influenced by the desire to limit systemic instability
and any contagion effects of the bail-in, as well as to limit the negative
impact on non-professional creditors.

Cross-Border Contractual Recognition of Bail-In                                     Where the liability is
Where a bail-inable liability is governed by the laws of one of the EU              governed by non-EU law,
                                                                                    its terms must contain
Member States, the courts of that governing law jurisdiction should
                                                                                    provisions by which the
support and enforce a resolution action (including a bail-in) of the                creditor agrees to be
institution’s resolution authority. However, there is some doubt as to              bound by bail-in and any
whether the courts of the governing law jurisdiction would necessarily              resulting conversion or
give effect to the resolution actions of an EU resolution authority where           reduction in principal
                                                                                    amount of the liability.
that governing law jurisdiction is outside the EU and therefore not auto-
matically bound to give effect to such action. Even within EU Member
States, past cases have shown that courts are reluctant to recognize reso-
lution decisions not fully covered by the scope of the BRRD (for examples
see accompanying publication “Bank resolution and bail-in in the EU:
Selected case studies pre and post BRRD”). As a result, the BRRD provides
that where the liability is governed by non-EU law, it must contain in
its terms provisions by which the creditor acknowledges that the liabi-
lity may become subject to bail-in action and agrees to be bound by any
resulting conversion or reduction in principal amount of the liability.
Such contractual recognition is however not a prior requirement for EU
authorities to apply bail-in.

Bail-In Treatment of Unsecured Debt Instruments
In a bail-in action, unsecured debt instruments would usually repre-
sent the majority of the liabilities being bailed-in, particularly if regu-
latory capital liabilities had already been converted or written down
(see chapter 13 on WDCC). Such bail-in could be imposed on the rele-
vant creditors by the resolution authority or might be effected by the
exercise of rights embedded in the terms of the instrument itself,
such as contingent convertible (or CoCo) bonds, to the extent that the
loss absorption provisions of these instruments had not already been
triggered.



                                                                                                          117
Chapter 15




                            Bail-In Treatment of Shareholders
                            In a bail-in action, any existing shares are to be cancelled or transferred to
                            bailed-in creditors. Where, under the resolution valuation, the institution
                            has a positive net asset value, existing shareholders are to be severely dilu-
                            ted by conversion of existing capital instruments or conversion of eligible
                            liabilities.

The BRRD gives              Bail-In Treatment of Derivatives
resolution authorities      A derivative liability may be bailed-in (to the extent that it is not secured
the power to terminate
                            by collateral) only once the derivative contract has been terminated and
and close out derivative
contracts and apply
                            closed out, and the BRRD gives resolution authorities the power to do this.
bail-in.                    Assuming that it is subject to a netting agreement, such as the Interna-
                            tional Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) Master Agreement, the
                            liability should then be valued on a net basis (as part of the resolution
                            valuation) and otherwise in accordance with prescribed regulatory techni-
                            cal standards on the methodologies and principles for valuing derivatives
                            liabilities. These technical standards, whilst respecting the netting sets
                            established by the institution’s derivatives contracts, prescribe a uniform
                            approach to establishing the replacement cost of the terminated transac-
                            tions, irrespective of the terms of the individual contracts.

Resolution authorities      Whether a derivative contract is ultimately bailed-in or not, the BRRD
must have powers            provides the resolution authority with the power to suspend the termi-
to complete all
                            nation rights of parties to contracts with the institution under resolution
administrative
procedures and
                            until midnight on the business day following official notice of the reso-
remove any procedural       lution action. This power will apply as long as all obligations regarding
impediments to bail-in.     payments, deliveries and collateral exchange are up-to-date. This power
                            is intended to ensure that a resolution authority’s attempts to achieve an
                            orderly resolution are not thwarted by a market panic, sparked by deri-
                            vatives counter-parties attempting to protect their positions with the
                            institution.

                            The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) has also pub-
                            lished the ISDA 2015 Universal Resolution Stay Protocol which achieves,
                            for those parties adhering to it, a contractual agreement to be bound by
                            such a suspension of termination rights by a resolution authority. This
                            Protocol therefore represents an international solution to the problem of
                            recognition of suspension action by the resolution authorities of foreign
                            jurisdictions.

A business reorganization   Reorganization
plan must be prepared       A business reorganization plan must be prepared for the recapitalized
for the recapitalized
                            institution by its management body, or other person appointed by the
institution within one
month of the application
                            resolution authority, and submitted to the resolution authority within
of the bail-in tool.        one month of the application of the bail-in tool. Within one month after
                            such submission, the resolution authority and the relevant supervisory
                            authority must assess and agree whether implementation of the business

118
                                                                             chapter 15




plan would restore the long term viability of the institution, or whether
amendments are needed to the plan in order to achieve this.

Ancillary Bail-In Provisions
Resolution authorities have also been given powers by the BRRD to com-
plete all administrative procedures needed to give effect to the exercise
of the bail-in tool including amending registers, delisting securities,
admitting new securities to trading and relisting any debt securities that
have been written down (without the need for an EU Prospectus Directi-
ve-compliant prospectus). They also have powers to remove any procedu-
ral impediments to bail-in, for example by ensuring that an institution
maintains at all times a sufficient amount of authorized share capital to
give effect to any conversion.

This enables new shares to be issued without the need for a shareholder
resolution or any change to the bank’s constitutional documents. Several
Member States have also provided in their national implementing laws
that a resolution authority may override or ignore corporate law and cont-
ractual requirements, such as registration requirements and pre-emption
rights, in relation to the issue of new shares in a bail-in action.

Relevant documents
–	EBA/RTS/2015/06 Draft Regulatory Technical Standards on the cont-
  ractual recognition of write-down and conversion powers under Article
  55(3) of Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/CP/2014/39 Consultation on Guidelines on the rate of conversion
  of debt to equity in bail-in
–	EBA/CP/2014/29 Draft Guidelines concerning the interrelationship bet-
  ween the BRRD sequence of write-down and conversion and CRR/CRD IV
–	EBA/CP/2014/40 Draft Guidelines on the treatment of shareholders in
  bail-in or the write-down and conversion of capital instruments
–	EBA/RTS/2015/12 Final Report Draft Regulatory Technical Standards
  and Guidelines on business reorganization plans under Directive
  2014/59/EU
–	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
  Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards
  specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group
  resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is
  to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the con-
  ditions for group financial support, the requirements for independent
  valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion
  powers, the procedures and contents of notification requirements and
  of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of the resolu-
  tion colleges
–	EBA/RTS/2015/06, Final Report Draft Regulatory Technical Standards
  on the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion powers
  under Article 55(3) of Directive 2014/59/EU

                                                                                    119
Chapter 15




             –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/860 specifying further
               the circumstances where exclusion from the application of write-down
               or conversion powers is necessary under Article 44(3) of Directive
               2014/59/EU establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution
               of credit institutions and investment firms




120
                                                                                                 chapter 16




Chapter 16:
The Sale of Business Tool
By Maria Hormaeche Lazcano



Key questions                                                                      Art. 38, 39 BRRD
–	Under what conditions is the sale of business tool applied?
–	 Is a public bidding process required in all cases? Is a fit and proper
   assessment needed?
–	 What phases will be implemented in a standard sale of business
   process?
–	 What types of sale are possible?



The sale of business tool enables resolution authorities to sell the institu-      The sale of business
tion (or parts of its business) to one or more purchasers with or without          tool enables resolution
                                                                                   authorities to sell the
the consent of shareholders. The resolution authority has the power to
                                                                                   institution (or parts of
transfer shares or other instruments of ownership issued by an institution         its business) to one or
under resolution; and all or any assets, rights or liabilities of an institution   more private purchasers
under resolution to a purchaser that is not a bridge institution. The sale         (without the consent of
of business tool may be applied individually or in combination with other          shareholders).
tools (Article 37 of BRRD). As with the use of any resolution tools, its use
must promote the resolution objectives (Article 31 of BRRD).

The price of the entity will be based on a fair, prudent and realistic valua-
tion of the assets and liabilities (see chapter 12). The sale proceeds shall
benefit either the owners of the entity in resolution or cover the cost of
resolution as appropriate. The former would mean that if shares were
sold and bail-in was applied, the transfer price would minimize losses for
shareholders and creditors. If assets (and liabilities) are transferred, the
residual entity under resolution will receive the proceeds.

When the sale of business tool is used to transfer parts of assets, rights
and liabilities, the residual entity shall be wound down under normal
insolvency proceedings. This should be completed within a reasonable
timeframe taking into account the need: i) for the institution to provide
services or support to the purchaser to meet the resolution objectives,
especially to maintain the continuity of critical economic functions; ii)
to ensure assets or liabilities chosen for sale do not adversely impact the
financial system or contribute to contagion in any way; and iii) to protect
depositors, client funds and client assets.

                                                                                                         121
Chapter 16




Sale of Business Tool




                                                       Perimeter selection




                                                                                    Portfolios
                                       Shares                                       of assets/
                                                                                     liabilities




                                                  All/control
                        Part                                                           Portfolio
                                                      stake
                                                                                      perimeter
                                                                                      selection




                       Listed?             Take over            M&A




               No                Yes
                                                                       Valuation


              IPO?

                                                                        Need of
                                                                      guarantees?


             Private              Market
              sale                 sale
                                                                       Potential
                                                                       bidders




                                                                         Sale
                                                                        process




                                                                      Winner
                                                                        bid



122
                                                                                               chapter 16




The Sale of Business Process and Practical Considerations                       To achieve the highest
When applying the sale of business tool, authorities should arrange to          possible sale price
                                                                                within the allocated
market the whole or the saleable part of the institution in an open, trans-
                                                                                timing, a competitive
parent, and non-discriminatory process with the aim to maximize, as             tendering process
much as possible, the sale price.                                               open to all relevant
                                                                                potential domestic and
Transparency is important. All relevant information on the sale process         international investors
                                                                                is expected. However, if
and the institution under resolution must be given in the same way and at
                                                                                urgency prevents a full
the same time to potential purchasers, for example vendor due diligence         sale process, preselected
and information regarding the entity, decisions to be taken, and changes        potential buyers must
adopted during the sale process. To achieve the highest possible sale price     have passed a fit and
within the allocated timing, the sale might be promoted as a competitive        proper assessment and
                                                                                the sale will occur once
tendering process open to all relevant potential domestic and internatio-
                                                                                the entity has been
nal investors. The process should clearly define the phases and conditions      declared failing or likely
to fulfil and give potential investors the same opportunities, tools, and       to fail.
access to information to assess possible investment in the institution in
resolution.

If, for reasons of urgency or potential effects on financial stability (e.g.
flow of deposits, loss of franchise value), a full marketing process is not
possible, authorities should take steps to redress detrimental effects on
competition and on the internal market. This applies even during the
resolution weekend. If urgency prevents a full sale process, preselected
potential buyers must have passed a fit and proper assessment and the
sale will be materialized once the entity has been declared failing or likely
to fail.

Preparations for marketing should not increase the risk of the entity ente-
ring resolution. European Banking Authority marketing requirements
guidelines determine the extent to which deviation/non-compliance
can be justified in order not to undermine the effectiveness of the sale
of business tool (see chapter 16) and the achievement of the resolution
objectives. To maintain confidence and trust in the market, and in light
of contagion risks, a shortened and simplified process can be applied. For
example, the bidding can be restricted to pre-selected potential purcha-
sers considered more likely to ensure financial stability due to their mar-
ket size, structure, business model etc. than others. Incentivizing purcha-
sers and limiting their risk, for example by providing guarantees (via
the resolution fund) should also be considered to help achieve a timely
transaction.

Contacts with potential purchasers may be initiated in advance to pre-
pare the entity for resolution, subject to the conditions laid down in
Article 39(2) and the confidentiality provisions in Article 84. Authorities
should have pre-prepared sale of business draft contracts available to
ensure fast decision-taking in case of need.



                                                                                                       123
Chapter 16




A standard sales process     Phases of the Sale Process
will generally take          In the case of a lean entity, whose information facilitated in the data-
several months.
                             room is adequately proven to be true, which has a clear value of assets and
Only for lean institutions
where no due diligence
                             liabilities, and no anticipated contingencies (and therefore no expected
may be required could        granting of guarantees), due diligence may not be required and the sale
the sale possibly be         could possibly be completed during ‘the resolution weekend’.
completed during the
resolution weekend.
                             In most cases the process will take several weeks or even months. Depen-
                             ding on the specific situation, including the complexity and size of the
                             bank, the following different phases could be considered (although each
                             case is unique and not all will be appropriate in each case):

                             1.	Due diligence: commonly undertaken by a contracted auditor;
                             2.	Preliminary survey of potential investors: to help determine interest
                                and generate momentum for the sale;
                             3.	Virtual data room: the more comprehensive this stage, the better for
                                competitiveness and sale price;
                             4.	Expressions of interest: potential purchasers will be invited to express
                                their interest and demonstrate their compliance with the prequalifica-
                                tion criteria;
                             5.	Non-binding offers phase: potential prequalified purchasers are invi-
                                ted to submit a non-binding offer. This should include reference to any
                                guarantees, for example: legal contingencies, court rulings, breaking
                                bank-assurance joint-ventures, mis-selling products, financial guaran-
                                tees, Asset Protection Schemes, or liquidity facilities. It is very difficult to
                                sell a big entity with no guarantees so the valuation of the offers recei-
                                ved, with different schemes and proposals, give an additional challenge
                                to the process and particularly to the valuation of offers;
                             6.	Binding offers: potential purchasers whose non-binding offers were
                                selected in the previous phase will be invited to submit binding offers
                                which may be in a number of rounds and may include negotiations. The
                                opening of more than one round in order to receive improved offers
                                may maximize the price and ensure that the sale is conducted under a
                                transparent and competitive process;
                             7.	Final decision: this supposes the selection of preferred offer(s), negotia-
                                tion by the institution and signature of a Sale and Purchase Agreement.
                                The actual transfer price will, in practice, eventually diverge from Valua-
                                tion 2 which informs the decision on the use of the resolution tool and
                                provides an indicative transfer price (see chapter 12);
                             8.	Enforcement of the final decision: this would include formal notifica-
                                tion to the European Commission under the competition and state aid
                                rules, if applicable (see chapter 14 regarding the Commission’s invol-
                                vement in a decision of the Single Resolution Board).

                             Specific circumstances of the individual case and time constraints will
                             determine which and how many phases of the sale process are necessary
                             and achievable. While the sale process should be initiated in an open and

124
                                                                                                  chapter 16




transparent manner, it is of utmost importance that the process takes into
consideration confidentiality concerns to preserve financial stability and
the value of the entity under resolution. In this sense, all potential purcha-
sers and their advisors should sign a non-disclosure agreement (NDA).

Types of Sales                                                                     The resolution authority
The resolution authority can choose to develop various types of sales. A           can choose to develop
                                                                                   various types of sales: a
specific structure might be designed for selling a portfolio of assets and
                                                                                   special purpose vehicle;
liabilities, for example a special purpose vehicle (SPV). The sale of owners-      the creation of shares;
hip of the entity can be achieved through shares. Full control of the entity       M&A transaction; etc.
can be sold via a merger and acquisition transaction; or partial ownership
with the provision that if in the future it is listed or goes through an initial
public offering there will be a market sale or a future corporate transaction.

A reverse transfer can be provided for and assets (and liabilities) moved          The resolution financing
back to the entity under resolution or to the bridge bank if, following            arrangements can
                                                                                   include reverse transfer
the sale, additional details come to light on the quality of the transferred
                                                                                   guarantees to the buyer
assets. This reverse transfer option will increase the entity’s salability and     in the sale contract.
the chance of finding a private sector purchaser within a short(er) period
of time. The resolution financing arrangements can include reverse trans-
fer guarantees to the buyer in the sale contract.

Relevant documents
–	EBA/GL/2015/04 Guidelines on the effectiveness of the sale of business
  tool on factual circumstances amounting to a material threat to finan-
  cial stability and on the elements related to the effectiveness of the sale
  of business tool under Article 39(4) of Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/GL/2015/06 Guidelines on the minimum list of services or facili-
  ties that are necessary to enable a recipient to operate a business trans-
  ferred to it under Article 65(5) of Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/Op/2015/15 on Article 76 BRRD (protected arrangements), Techni-
  cal advice by the European Banking Authority on classes of arrange-
  ments to be protected in a partial property transfer




                                                                                                          125
Chapter 17




Chapter 17:
The Bridge Institution
Tool (Bridge Bank)
                            By Maria Hormaeche Lazcano



Art. 40, 41 BRRD            Key questions
                            –	 When is a bridge institution created?
                            –	 How is one created?
                            –	 Is there a maximum duration of a bridge institution?
                            –	 How are bridge institutions financed?
                            –	 Can a bridge institution be (fully) owned by private shareholders and
                               creditors?



The bridge institution      The bridge institution tool aims to bridge time until a private sector solu-
tool is controlled by the   tion is found, preserving the critical functions of the failing bank. The tool
resolution authority
                            allows for the transfer of: a) instruments of ownership issued by one or
and authorized by the
supervisors. It aims to
                            more institutions under resolution (share transfer); and/or b) all or any
bridge time (up to two      assets, rights or liabilities of one or more institutions under resolution
years) and preserve the     (property transfer) – depending on the corporate structure of the entity
critical functions of       under resolution – to a bridge institution.
the failing bank until a
private sector solution
is found.
                            A temporary bridge institution (also known as a bridge bank) is created and,
                            for up to two years, critical functions will be maintained while a sale to a
                            private purchaser, of either the whole or part, can be concluded. Any residual
                            part of the bank that has not been sold is then wound down in an orderly
                            manner. A bridge institution may be created in advance as a “shelf corpora-
                            tion” in order to respond more quickly to critical situations in case of need.

                            The bridge institution must be wholly or partially owned either through
                            direct state ownership or the resolution financing arrangement (see chap-
                            ter 21a), or one or more public authorities, and will be controlled by the
                            resolution authority. If the resolution authority is owner and sharehol-
                            der of the bridge bank possible conflicts of interests could potentially be
                            reduced by creating a subsidiary for the (partial) ownership, especially
                            in cases where the resolution authority is also the supervisory authority.
                            The requirement that the bridge institution is wholly owned by public
                            authorities is not relevant if the institution has been fully recapitalized by
	 see EBA Q&A 2015_1781
1
                            shareholders and creditors.1

126
                                                                                                     chapter 17




Bridge Institution Tool




                                         Pre-resolution Bank

                                Performing            Senior              Senior
                                assets                Liabilities         debts

                                                      Subordinated debt
                                Bad assets

                                Losses
                                                      Equity




                                              Loss absorption

                                Losses                Subordinated debt
                                                      Equity




                                                               Residual entity to be
                          Bridge Bank                              wound down

                                                      Bad assets                   Senior
            Performing          Senior                                             debts
            assets              Liabilities
                                                      Participation                Equity
                                New Equity                                         (post- Bail in)
                                                      in Bridge Bank



                                                                                                            127
Chapter 17




                             The resolution authorities should always maintain control over the bridge
                             bank. If bail-in creditors are converted into shareholders of the bridge
                             bank it must be ensured that they cannot overrule decisions of the resolu-
                             tion authorities (e.g. by suspending voting rights).

The bridge institution       Implementation of the Bridge Institution
shall be wholly (or          Once the assets and liabilities have been correctly valued, the first step
partially) owned by
                             in creating a bridge institution is to update the balance sheet of the
public authorities
(either through:
                             entity under resolution. This must determine: a) the real losses of the
i) direct state ownership;   entity (to assess the amount of capital and other eligible liabilities that
ii) the resolution           might be needed to recapitalize the entity); and b) the real value of
financing arrangement;       the assets, rights and liabilities to be transferred to the bridge bank
or iii) one or more public
                             (see chapter 12).
authorities) except
when the institution has
been fully recapitalized     The assets, rights and liabilities need to be clearly defined. Particular atten-
by shareholders and          tion must be paid to: a) the mapping of critical functions within the scope
creditors.                   of the resolution plan; b) the core business lines necessary to preserve the
                             daily business of the entity; and c) safeguards for counterparties and for
                             trading, clearing and settlement systems in case of partial transfer.

No losses should be          The total value of liabilities to be transferred must not exceed the total
transferred to the bridge    value of the rights and assets and will be the basis for recapitalization of
institution. Losses should
                             the entity. This means that no losses should be transferred. To ensure the
be absorbed in advance
via bail-in or financed by
                             transfer of an adjusted balance sheet, known losses should be absorbed
new debt issuance.           via bail-in or financed by a new debt issue by the bridge institution (which
                             may be guaranteed by the resolution financing arrangement). The reso-
                             lution scheme must define the classes and conditions for the transfer of
                             shares or other instruments of ownership, assets, rights and liabilities.
                             Publication of the ‘opening balance sheet’ of the bridge institution and
                             the external audit of those accounts are essential to provide investors and
                             other stakeholders with objective information on its financial situation. If
                             the estimated long term recovery value is above market price, it may entail
                             state aid and therefore require approval under EU state aid rules.

The resolution authority     Capitalization of the Bridge Institution
may use the resolution       Capitalization of the bridge institution depends not only on the minimum
financing arrangement
                             regulatory capital requirements but also additional capital requirements
to recapitalize or make
a loan to a bridge bank,
                             related to the specific nature of the bridge institution, the transfer process,
and/or to guarantee          and the future business model of the bridge bank. The resolution authority
assets or liabilities        may use the resolution financing arrangement to recapitalize or make a
transferred from the         loan to a bridge bank, and/or to guarantee assets or liabilities transfer-
entity under resolution
                             red from the entity under resolution into the bridge bank (see chapter 15
into the bridge bank.
                             on the prior 8 % bail-in requirement). It will be critical to determine the
                             risk-weighted assets of the bridge institution; its immediate and medi-
                             um-term liquidity needs; and the minimum regulatory capital needs
                             as well as any additional capital considered appropriate for the bridge
                             institution.

128
                                                                                                chapter 17




Authorization of the Bridge Institution
The bridge institution must be authorized by the supervisor. Given its tem-
porary nature, the supervisor should advise in advance the type of license
that should be sought. The bridge institution must, in principle, fulfil
authorization and supervisory requirements as any other bank, although
short-term exemptions are possible; the bridge institution may be estab-
lished and authorized without fully complying with EU Capital (CRD IV/
CRR) and investment services requirements (MiFID) for a short period of
time at the beginning of its operation. The resolution authority submits an
exemption request to the competent authority which, if granted, indicates
the period for which the bridge institution is exempted from complying
with the requirements of those Directives and regulations.

Relevant corporate issues that will have to be defined by the resolution
authority, taking into account the expected period of time and particular
circumstances for the creation of the bridge institution, should include: a)
appointment of the management body (Board), including the approval of
the remuneration of the members of the management body and determi-
nation of their responsibilities; b) the fit and proper assessment (carried
out by the supervisory authority; c) definition and approval of the strategy
and risk profile; and d) ensuring key management functions are in place
and effectively staffed.

The transfer of assets and rights to another entity implies the need to
update the property registration of certain assets (real estate assets and
movable property). The National Registration Office may require a full list
of individually identified assets which can be time-consuming to prepare.

Terminating the Bridge Institution                                               If no solution is found
Proceeds achieved from the sale or disposal of the bridge institution busi-      within two years the
                                                                                 bridge bank shall be
ness may be paid to: a) the owners of shares of the entity under resolution;
                                                                                 wound down under
or b) the residual entity of the failing bank (the entity under resolution).     normal insolvency
They may even be paid to compensate the resolution authority or the reso-        proceedings.
lution financing arrangement for the resolution costs incurred. This is
likely to happen in an insolvency procedure, which means that the net pro-
ceeds of the resolution will constitute an asset of the insolvency estate and
be used to the benefit of creditors in accordance with normal insolvency
priorities (the same applies to the sale of business tool, see chapter 16).

If no private sector solution can be found within two years (with a pos-
sible extension), the bridge bank, or its residual parts of assets, rights and
liabilities, should be wound down under normal insolvency proceedings
(national insolvency law). This should happen within a reasonable time-
frame and having regard to the need to provide services or support to the
purchaser to meet the resolution objectives or comply with the general
principles of Article 34 of the BRRD.



                                                                                                           129
Chapter 17




             Relevant documents
             –	Directive 2013/36/EU on access to the activity of credit institutions and
               the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms
               (CRD)
             –	Directive 2014/65/EU on markets in financial instruments (MiFID)
             –	EBA/GL/2015/06 Guidelines on the minimum list of services or facili-
               ties that are necessary to enable a recipient to operate a business trans-
               ferred to it under Article 65(5) of Directive 2014/59/EU
             –	EBA/Op/2015/15 on Article 76 BRRD (protected arrangements), Techni-
               cal advice by the European Banking Authority on classes of arrange-
               ments to be protected in a partial property transfer.




130
                                                                                                chapter 18




Chapter 18:
The ASSET SEPARATION
TOOL- ASSET MANAGEMENT
VEHICLE (AMV)

By Maria Hormaeche Lazcano



Key questions                                                                     Art. 42 BRRD
–	 When is the creation of a public asset management vehicle (AMV)
   justified?
–	 What aspects should be assessed when creating an AMV?
–	 What challenges arise when creating and managing an AMV?
–	 Why can’t the asset separation tool be implemented on a stand-alone
   basis?



Improper valuation of impaired assets was the cause of many financial             Assets and liabilities of
institutions’ problems during and since the most recent global financial          one or more institutions
                                                                                  under resolution (or from
crisis. In response, some authorities established asset separation schemes
                                                                                  a bridge institution) are
(“bad banks”) to relieve distressed bank’s balance sheet of “bad” assets and      transferred to a separate
their associated risks.                                                           publicly owned asset
                                                                                  management vehicle
The BRRD asset separation tool aims to assist in a similar way. It allows         (AMV) whose goal is to
                                                                                  maximize their value
for parts of a distressed bank that do not need to be maintained perma-
                                                                                  for an eventual sale,
nently to be wound down in an organized and measured way. The asset               or an orderly gradual
separation tool is used to transfer assets and liabilities to a separate asset    wind-down.
management vehicle (AMV). The AMV is wholly or partially owned by one
or more public authorities including the resolution authority, or the reso-
lution financing arrangements (see chapter 21b). It is temporarily created
to receive the assets, rights and liabilities of one or more institutions under
resolution or from a bridge institution. These are managed by the AMV
with a view to maximizing their value for an eventual sale, or an orderly
gradual wind-down if immediate liquidation would be disadvantageous
at that point in time.

The Legal Framework
The asset separation tool acts to wind down and sell the elements trans-
ferred in an orderly manner while maintaining the continuance of the

                                                                                                        131
Chapter 18




Asset Separation Tool




             Resolution                                                            Identify
             Authority                                                            potential
                                                                                  investors




                                                          Transfer process
      Preparatory steps                                                                       AMV (art. 42)
                                                          (art. 42 BRRD)

       1      Market situation
              (Art. 42.5 BRRD, EBA/GL/2015/05)
                                                             Compensation
                                                             to transferors
                                                                                                  Funding
                                                                                                  structure

       2      Identification of potential assets/rights
              to be transferred (Art. 42.5 BRRD)
                                                             Calendar                             Financing
                                                                                                  structure
                                                             Categorization/
       3      Transfer pricing
              (Art. 42.6 and 42.7)
                                                             classification                       Governance

                                                             IT issues

                                                             Identification of
                                                             transfer issues

                                                             Contingencies
                                                             (tax issues; third
                                                             party claims …)




132
                                                                                               chapter 18




institution’s critical functions. It must always be applied together with        The AMV must always
another resolution tool (sale of business, the bridge institution tool and/      be applied together
                                                                                 with another resolution
or the bail-in tool).
                                                                                 tool (sale of business,
                                                                                 the bridge institution
The resolution authority must ensure that it has the power to transfer           tool and/or the bail-in
assets, rights, or liabilities of an institution under resolution, or a bridge   tool) and is only
institution, to one or more AMVs. In line with the general resolution pow-       justified if immediate
                                                                                 liquidation would be
ers of the resolution authority to take over shareholder rights, the trans-
                                                                                 disadvantageous at that
fer may take place without the consent of shareholders of the institution        point in time.
under resolution or any third party other than the bridge institution, and
without complying with any procedural requirements under company or
security law.

The AMV should operate under the control of the resolution authority and
subject to the following provisions: a) the content of the AMV’s constitu-
tional documents are approved by the resolution authority; b) the resolu-
tion authority either appoints or approves the AMV’s management body; c)
the resolution authority approves the remuneration of the members of the
management body and determines their appropriate responsibilities; and d)
the resolution authority approves the strategy and risk profile of the AMV.

The Transfer Process and Assets to be Transferred                                “Bad assets” to be
The identification of assets for transfer is of particular importance. The       transferred should: have
                                                                                 no further strategic
focus should be on assets of no further strategic value; that are related to
                                                                                 value; be related to
a specific impaired market; that contain risks considered to be no longer        a specific impaired
acceptable; that are too capital-intensive; and/or that may be unsuitable        market; contain risks
for obtaining future long-term funding.                                          considered to be no
                                                                                 longer acceptable; be
                                                                                 too capital-intensive;
Article 42(5) of the BRRD provides that the resolution authority may only
                                                                                 and/or be unsuitable for
use the asset separation power to transfer assets, rights, and liabilities in    obtaining future long-
one of the following three scenarios:                                            term funding.

1.	The market for those assets is such that their liquidation under normal
   insolvency proceedings could have an adverse effect on one or more
   financial markets and impact financial stability. European Banking
   Authority Guidelines sets out three specific categories of elements that
   should be considered: a) whether the market for these assets is impaired;
   b) the impact of the disposal of these assets on the markets where they
   are traded; c) the situation of the financial markets and the direct and
   indirect effects of an impairment of the markets for these assets;
2.	The transfer is necessary to ensure the proper functioning of the insti-
   tution under resolution or bridge institution; or
3.	The transfer is necessary to maximize the liquidation proceeds and pre-
   serve the value of the assets.

A range of criteria and attributes should help inform the selection of assets
to be transferred to the AMV. The legal threshold for a transfer set out in

                                                                                                       133
Chapter 18




Issues encountered when      Article 42(5) of the BRRD must be met and the assets transfer should help
transferring assets to       to ensure that the resolution objectives can be achieved and that the insti-
the AMV might include
                             tution in resolution can continue to perform critical economic functions.
compensation to the
transferors, differences
                             Consideration should also be given to: i) the funding that can be secured
between the value of         by pledging the assets; ii) the current price of the assets; iii) the long-term
the assets at the “value     economic value of the assets; iv) the strategic value of the assets to the
date” vs. their value at     institution in resolution; v) the nature of the market for the assets, inclu-
the “date of transfer”,
                             ding any impairment in that market; and vi) the riskiness of the assets and
incorrect classification,
IT and tax issues, third
                             appropriateness of the assets in the context of the strategy of the institu-
party claims and consent     tion in resolution.
requirements.
                             Transfer issues could slow down the process. These might include certain
                             impediments and removals, compensation to the transferors, differences
                             between the value of the transferred assets at the “value date” vs. their
                             actual value at the “date of transfer”, incorrect classification, IT and tax
                             issues, third party claims and consent requirements.

                             The Transfer Price
                             A realistic valuation/pricing of assets based on market pricing, sound
                             accounting norms, strong loan classification and provisioning standards,
                             and/or discounted present values, is crucial to the success of the AMV. The
                             determination of the transfer price can be done by portfolios or individual
                             assets.

                             The AMV should purchase the assets at market value, or the estimated
                             long-term recovery value, following independent valuation under “Valua-
                             tion 2” (see chapter 12).

The resolution authority     Funding the AMV
will face various            The funding structure of the AMV will depend on the value and charac-
challenges when
                             teristics of the assets transferred. The amount of bail-in has to take into
transferring assets to an
AMV. The most common
                             account a prudent estimate of the capital needs of an AMV. Any considera-
will be: determining the     tion paid by the AMV in respect of the assets, rights or liabilities transfer-
transfer price, servicing    red directly from the institution under resolution may be paid in the form
the assets retained by the   of debt issued by the AMV which may carry the guarantee of the resolution
entity under resolution,
                             financing arrangement.
dealing with corporate
governance issues and
potential conflicts of       The Challenges of Transferring Assets to an AMV
interest, as well as         While preparing for a potential transfer of assets should form part of the
designing a credible         resolution planning process, the resolution authority is still likely to face
business plan and the
                             various challenges if they need to put these into action. The most com-
strategy for divestment
channels.
                             mon will be determining the transfer price, servicing the assets retained
                             by the entity under resolution, dealing with corporate governance issues,
                             and potential conflicts of interest, as well as designing a credible business
                             plan, and the strategy for divestment channels. Authorities need to pro-
                             perly consider the operational and reputational risks of managing an AMV
                             to ensure they can sell the transferred assets.

134
                                                                               chapter 18




Relevant documents
–	EBA/GL/2015/05 Guidelines on the determination of when the liquida-
  tion of assets or liabilities under normal insolvency proceedings could
  have an adverse effect on one or more financial markets under Article
  42(14) of Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/GL/2015/06 Guidelines on the minimum list of services or facili-
  ties that are necessary to enable a recipient to operate a business trans-
  ferred to it under Article 65(5) of Directive 2014/59/EU
–	EBA/Op/2015/15 on Article 76 BRRD (protected arrangements), Techni-
  cal advice by the European Banking Authority on classes of arrange-
  ments to be protected in a partial property transfer




                                                                                      135
Chapter 19




Chapter 19:
The Government
Stabilization Tools
                               By Dieter Huber



Art. 56–58,                    Key questions
32(4)(d), 37(10) BRRD          –	 What are the conditions for using taxpayers’ money?
                               –	Does the government provide public support only if the money in the
                                  resolution fund is not sufficient?



The use of public funds        A key principle underlying post-crisis resolution frameworks, in line with
is not fully excluded          the Financial Stability Board (FSB) Key Attributes of Effective Resolution
under the BRRD but
                               Regimes for Financial Institutions, is that use of public funds should be
is strictly regulated to
reduce reliance on public
                               avoided or at least minimized as far as possible. Use of public funds is
financial support.             not excluded under the BRRD but is strictly regulated to reduce reliance
                               on extraordinary public financial support. Resolution authorities should
                               instead have a credible set of tools to intervene in an unsound or failing
                               institution sufficiently early and quickly to ensure the continuity of the
                               institution’s critical functions, while minimizing the impact of an insti-
                               tution’s failure on the economy and financial system. Shareholders should
                               bear losses first, followed by creditors (see chapter 15).

                               In exceptional circumstances, however, the greater good of financial and
                               economic stability may require “amendments” to this general principle.
                               These amendments may apply in the process of resolution of a problem
                               bank or for precautionary purposes.

In the exceptional situation   Government Funding as a Last Resort in Case of Systemic Crisis
of a systemic crisis, the      In the exceptional situation of a systemic crisis, after exhausting resolution
government may, subject
                               tools to the extent practicable while maintaining financial stability, the
to prior approval under the
EU state aid framework,
                               resolution authority may seek funding from public sources of financing
provide funds through the      (notwithstanding the role of central banks in providing liquidity to the
government stabilization       financial system even in times of stress). The government may, subject to
tools of temporary public      prior approval under the EU state aid framework, provide funds through
ownership and public
                               the government stabilization tools of temporary public ownership and
equity support.
                               public equity support.




136
                                                                                                                               chapter 19




Government Stabilization



                                                                                                       Assessment criteria
                                                                                                         (cumulative):
                                                            Principle:                                 –	Systemic crisis: „intervention
                                                                                                         required to remedy serious
                                                                                                         disturbance in economy and
                                                      protection of public funds,                        preserve financial stability OR
                                               shareholders/creditors to bear losses first               to protect public interest where
                                                 Means: resolution authority powers                      prior extraordinary ELA or public
                                                         and resolution tools
                                                                                                         equity support was given“
                                                                                                       –	Last resort (determined by
                                                                                                         government, res. Authority; CB,
                                                                 However,                                supervisor to be consulted)
                                                                   if …                                –	Minimum private loss
                                                                                                         absorption
                                                                                                       –	State aid approval



                                                         Exceptional
                                                          situation
                                                            justifying public                          Assessment criteria
                                                              intervention?                            (cumulative):
                                                                                                       –	support is precautionary,
Usual assessment criteria:                                                                               temporary, proportionate to
–	FOLTF                                               and                       and                      remedy disturbance
–	public interest                                                                                      –	bank otherwise solvent
–	no private solution                                                                                  –	not to offset losses
(chapter 13)                                                                                           –	state aid framework observed


                                      Conditions                                PrerequisitEs
                                       for resolution                            for precautionary
                                          present?                                 support given?




                         Instruments of public                              Instruments for
                         intervention                                       precautionary support
                         –	govt. financial stabilization tools              –	public guarantees
                         	 (recapitalization, temp. ownership)              –	injection of own funds
                         –	resolution fund (national/SRF)
                         –	alternative financing sources
                                                                            no burden-sharing
                         –	European Stability Mechanism
                                                                            by senior creditors

                         prior 8 % bail-in




                                                                                                                                             137
Chapter 19




In these cases a minimum       These instruments may only be used as a last resort to balance the finan-
loss absorption (bail-in) of   cial stability objective with the general aim to minimize taxpayer support.
not less than 8 % of total
                               The justification of public support is determined by the government or the
liabilities, including own
funds of the institution
                               competent ministry together with the resolution authority (after consul-
under resolution,              ting the central bank and the supervisory authority). A case for protecting
is required from               the public interest could also arise, for example, if extraordinary liquidity
shareholders and creditors     assistance from the central bank or equity support has previously been
before government
                               given to the institution. In all cases a minimum loss absorption of not
support is allowed.
                               less than 8 % of total liabilities, including own funds of the institution
                               under resolution, is required from shareholders and other eligible liabi-
                               lities through write-down or conversion before government support is
                               allowed under the BRRD (Article 37 (10)). EU state aid principles must also
                               be respected.

                               The intervention should be carried out under the leadership of the compe-
                               tent ministry or the government, in close cooperation with the resolution
                               authority, only if the conditions for resolution of the institution are met.
                               In case they avail themselves of these tools, Member States must ensure
                               that the competent authorities have both the necessary tools and the bud-
                               getary capacity and powers to administer them.

                               Government support can take the form of:
                               –	participation in the recapitalization of a bank in exchange for shares or
                                 other capital instruments (temporary public equity support); or
                               –	taking a bank into temporary public ownership through the use of a
                                 transfer order (temporary public ownership).

                               In either case the bank must be managed on a commercial and professio-
                               nal basis and transferred to the private sector as soon as commercial and
                               financial circumstances allow.

                               Liquidity to resolution funds
                               Public support may also be required to provide liquidity to resolution
                               funds. Loans from banks or other third parties willing to provide pre-fun-
                               ding, including the government or possible international sources, may be
                               contracted if the resolution fund is insufficient or not readily available
                               (see chapter 21a).

                               Precautionary public recapitalization for a solvent bank see chapter 9.

                               Relevant documents
                               EBA/GL/2014/09, Guidelines on the types of tests, reviews or exercises
                               that may lead to support measures under Article 32(4)(d)(iii) of the Bank
                               Recovery and Resolution Directive




138
                                                                                             chapter 20




Chapter 20:
Valuation of Difference
in Treatment ex-post
Resolution – No Creditor
Worse Off than under
Liquidation (NCWOL)

By Georg Merc



Key questions                                                                  Art. 74, 75 BRRD
–	 Is an ex-post hypothetical insolvency valuation needed in every
   resolution case?
–	 Is there a maximum timeframe for conducting an ex-post valuation?
–	Does NCWOL mean that the applied resolution tools were the least costly
   for the shareholder/the creditor?



The ex-post counterfactual valuation (“Valuation 3” in European Banking        The ex-post
Authority terminology) is one of the safeguards in the BRRD to ensure          counterfactual valuation
                                                                               is one of the safeguards
that the no creditor worse off than under liquidation (NCWOL) principle
                                                                               foreseen in the BRRD to
is fulfilled in every resolution case (see chapter 21a on fundamental rights   ensure that the NCWOL
protection). This valuation determines whether shareholders and credi-         principle is fulfilled in
tors would have received better treatment if the entity had entered into       every resolution case.
normal insolvency proceedings. It is conducted on a gone-concern basis
following resolution with the sole purpose of determining the appropri-
ate discounted amount of cash flows that could hypothetically have been
expected under national insolvency procedures. These recoveries can then
be compared to the losses determined in resolution.

Key Elements of an Ex-post Insolvency Valuation
The ex-post valuation begins as soon as possible after resolution starts and
is likely to take from several months to years (no explicit maximum time-
frame is set). It must be conducted by an independent valuer, this can be
the same valuer used for the ex-ante resolution valuation (see chapter 12).
The valuation methodology includes three key elements:



                                                                                                     139
Chapter 20




  Ex-post Valuation (NCWOL-Test)




                       Ex-post insolvency valuation




                                           Independent
                                              Valuer



                                                                                                 Valuation 3
       Resolution treatment as                                   Treatment that shareholders/
                                           comparison                                            Net payout amount:
        defined under ex-ante                                    creditors would have received
                                                                                                 amount of insured deposits minus
      resolution valuation 2 (V2)                                       under insolvency
                                                                                                 hypothetical recovery rate.
                                                                                                 Estimate provided under V2
                                                                                                 including subdivision of creditor
                             Determine any difference in treatment                               classes
                                NCWOL-Test: is resolution
                           treatment worse than hypothetical
                                  insolvency treatment?



                                               Yes




                                         Compensation by
                                        Resolution Fund to
                                    shareholders/creditors/DGS




140
                                                                                              chapter 20




i)	 the treatment shareholders/creditors would have received under insol-       There is no explicit
     vency at the time when the authority decided to apply the resolution       maximum timeframe for
                                                                                conducting an ex-post
     strategy (hypothetical liquidation valuation). This is the net payout
                                                                                valuation. It should begin
     amount (amount for the payout of insured deposits minus recovery           “as soon as possible”
     proceeds from the liquidation estate) and includes a calculation of        after resolution starts
     discounted amount of expected cash flows taking reasonably foresee-        and is likely to take from
     able costs as well as financing costs into account. For assets traded in   several months to years.
     a liquid and deep market the observable market price should be used.
     If assets are not traded, the prices of similar assets should be used or
     prices based on a marking-to-model valuation technique;
ii)	 the actual treatment shareholders/creditors received in resolution; and
iii)	the difference between the actual and hypothetical treatment for each
     class of shareholders/creditors.

The valuation is based on any relevant available information, including         As a rule, losses under
distressed market conditions, that could reasonably have been known at          hypothetical liquidation
                                                                                based on gone concern
the time the decision on resolution was made by the resolution autho-
                                                                                will be greater than
rity (the resolution date). As a rule, losses under hypothetical liquidation    under the application of
based on gone concern will be greater than under the application of reso-       resolution tools where
lution tools where the franchise value can be preserved. Hence it is unli-      the franchise value can
kely in practice that shareholders or creditors would have been better off      be preserved. Hence it is
                                                                                unlikely in practice that
under liquidation than under the application of resolution tools. In the
                                                                                shareholders or creditors
pre BRRD resolution case of Bankia in Spain the economic valuation of           would have been better
the BFA Group was fixed at EUR -10.44 billion, while under hypothetical         off under liquidation
liquidation it would have increased to EUR -64.02 billion. The estimate of      than under the
the hypothetical insolvency scenario in the HETA case in Austria was cal-       application of resolution
                                                                                tools.
culated with a 34 % recovery rate compared to 46 % (Erfuellungsquote)
under resolution. In the Andelskassen case in Denmark, the difference
between the losses under resolution (valuation 2: DKK -96,4 Million) and
the hypothetical insolvency losses (valuation 3: DKK -142,7 million) were
calculated at DKK 46 Million, which means losses were assumed to be
about 50 % higher under hypothetical liquidation (for more information
on these three cases see accompanying publication “Bank resolution and
bail-in in the EU: Selected case studies pre and post BRRD”).

The NCWOL test will be of special importance if specific creditors within
the same rank have been excluded from bail-in (see chapter 15 on the
exemption from bail-in) to prove that although the remaining creditors
who shared the burden (if it was not taken over by the Resolution Fund)
may be worse off than without this exclusion, they are still better off than
they would have been under liquidation. The lack of a mandatory sub-
ordination of MREL liabilities (see chapter 11) will increase the risks of
breaching the no creditor worse off principle and the likelihood of sub-
sequent legal claims: as bailed-in MREL creditors might argue that under
"hypothetical insolvency" they would have ranked pari passu and lost less.
Also national rules providing for a subordination of e.g. intragroup credi-
tors may affect the outcome of NCWOL assessments in that jurisdiction.

                                                                                                       141
Chapter 20




The lack of mandatory       Any difference in treatment that emerges from the ex-post valuation
subordination               compared to the actual treatment under resolution entitles shareholders/
requirements for MREL
                            creditors, including the deposit insurance agency in lieu of insured depo-
will increase the risk of
breaching the NCWOL
                            sitors, to compensation from the resolution financing arrangements.
test.
                            Note: The NCWOL ex-post resolution valuation described in this chapter is
                            to be clearly distinguished from the ex-post revaluation of the provisional
                            valuation undertaken by the resolution authority or an independent valuer
                            as available, in cases where an independent ex-ante Valuation 1 and/or
                            Valuation 2 has not been possible due to the urgency of the situation and
                            the circumstances (see chapter 12).

                            Relevant documents
                            EBA/CP/2014/38 Regulatory Technical Standards on ex-ante valuation
                            and ex-post valuation under Directive 2014/59/EU




142
                                                                                         chapter 21a




Resolution Financing

Chapter 21a:
Resolution Financing
By Dieter Huber



Key questions                                                                 Art. 48, 56–59,
–	 How is bank resolution financed?                                           100–105, 108 BRRD,
–	 When is public money used and how is this approved?                        Art. 107(1) TFEU
–	 What is the role of shareholders and creditors?



Bank resolution financing essentially involves the allocation of incurred
or potential future losses in support of the resolution objectives – pri-
marily to uphold uninterrupted access to critical bank functions and
preserve financial stability. Resolution financing discussions should also
include resolution-planning, the determination of the minimum require-
ment for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) and the size of buffers,
intra-group mechanisms for transferring losses, the removal of impedi-
ments to the resolvability of an institution, and early intervention. Every
decision has a potential impact on future financing requirements if an
institution reaches the point of resolution. This continuum of possible
approaches should be kept in mind when designing the resolution frame-
work and resolution-financing arrangements, as well as when executing
the powers of the resolution authority.

Financing of a bank resolution takes place against the backdrop of the
general principles governing resolutions. The resolution authority seeks
to minimize the cost of resolution and avoid destruction of value unless
necessary to achieve the resolution objectives. The BRRD limits use of
public funds to exceptional cases as a last resort and only when there is a
strong public interest (see chapter 19).

Shareholders and Creditors Bear First Losses
A bank is only resolved if it is deemed to be in the public interest, for
example to preserve financial stability or protect deposits or public funds
(see chapter 14).



                                                                                                   143
Chapter 21a




Resolution Financing




Resolution planning/ Bank structure/     Buffers/Leverage/
MREL/TLAC            business model      Recovery actions




                  Bank balance
                 sheet structure



       Core Equity Tier 1 capital
                                                                  Capital instruments eligible
       Additional Tier 1 capital                                  for write-down/conversion
                                                                    if bank no longer viable
       Tier 2 capital

       Subordinated debt                                                                                                      internal Loss absorption
                                                                                                                              by owners and creditors
       Other liabilities                                          Eligible for bail-in
       – Eligible deposits (corporates > EUR 100,000)                                                                         –	 In line with insolvency hierarchy
       – Senior debt                                                                                                          –	 Unless excluded in exceptional
                                                                                                                                 circumstances
       Preferred liabilities

       Covered deposits,                                         No loss-absorption
       secured liabilities
       	

                                                                                                                                            Can all losses
                                                                                                                                             be passed to
                                                              To be covered by DGS                                                          shareholders/
                                                             (Net loss depositors would                                                   creditors to extent
                                                             have suffered in insolvency)                                                     required ?


                                                                                                                                No
                                                                                                                                                           Yes

                                                                                                        Internal
                                                                                                    loss-absorption
                                                                                                    ≥ 8 % liabilities
                                                                                                    or 20 % RWAs ?
                                                                                                                                        No                      No further
                                                                                                                                                                financing



                                                                   +	 State aid approval        Yes                     Yes      +	 Systemic crisis
                                                                      required                                                   +	 To remedy serious disturbance in
                                                                                                                                    economy, preserve financial stability
                                                                                                                                 +	 State aid approval required




                                                                                   Resolution                            Last resort:
                                                                                       Fund                             Public support
                                                                                  may contribute                           Government
                                                                                 ≤ 5 % of liabilities                   stabilization tools




144
                                                                                       chapter 21a




The resolution framework does not preclude banks from being declared
insolvent and being wound up under normal insolvency proceedings, nor
the winding up of non-systemic parts, and shareholders and creditors
must bear losses in accordance with normal insolvency rules. In all cases,
shareholders of the institution under resolution bear losses first, followed
by creditors in accordance with the order of priority of their claims under
normal insolvency proceedings (the typical trade-off for the benefits
they receive as shareholder or creditor). Creditors of the same class are,
as a rule, treated in an equitable manner (for exemption from bail-in see
chapter 15). The no-creditor-worse-off-than-under-liquidation (NCWOL)
principle must be respected and covered deposits must be fully protected.

The BRRD framework guides the resolution authority in deciding which
claims against troubled banks deserve special protection and which types
and classes of stakeholders should participate in the absorption of losses
(see chapter 11 on the lack of a subordination requirement). The state aid
framework should be adhered to and resolution tools and powers should
be exercised in a way that minimizes the negative impact on other entities
of the banking group and on financial stability.

It could be argued that the decisions of the resolution authority in the
planning phase allocate costs to shareholders in terms of a reduced return
on equity, which could be viewed as an ex-ante allocation of hypothetical
future resolution costs: exerting influence on the structure or business
model of banks and thus restricting business opportunities; or prescribing
a certain level of own funds and MREL and thus restricting the leverage
applied to a bank’s business. However, the exercise of these powers ideally
avoids the bank reaching the resolution stage, thereby benefitting sharehol-
ders and creditors whose profits would otherwise likely be diminished, and
reduces the possible need for extraordinary public financial support.

The Hierarchical Order of Loss-Absorption
If a bank reaches the point of non-viability, Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2
capital instruments should act as a first financial “line of defense” after
equity capital, and fully absorb losses of the issuing institution. Before
any resolution action is taken, the resolution authority should be required
to write down those instruments in full, or to convert them to Common
Equity Tier 1 instruments (see chapter 13 on WDCC).

The resolution regime provides for the means to finance the resolution of
systemic banks without jeopardizing financial stability and minimizing
the costs for the taxpayer if:

i.	 the execution of the WDCC powers does not successfully restore
     viability;
ii.	 there is no alternative privately financed solution; and
iii.	the prerequisites for resolution, especially the public interest test, are met.

                                                                                               145
Chapter 21a




                               If there is a realistic prospect of the institution’s viability being restored,
                               the bail-in tool may be applied by the authority to resolve the failing ins-
                               titution as a going concern (see chapter 15 on bail-in). Bail-in can also be
                               used in combination with the other resolution tools where systemically
                               important services are transferred to an acquirer or a bridge institution
                               and the residual part of the institution ceases to operate and is wound
                               up. Again, Common Equity Tier 1 capital instruments are the first to be
                               permanently reduced, followed by Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital ins-
                               truments. Only thereafter will the remaining eligible liabilities be writ-
                               ten down or converted into equity in line with the reverse hierarchy of
                               claims in normal insolvency proceedings.1 The amount of write-down
                               and the eventual conversion rate is based on a fair valuation of the assets
                               and liabilities of the bank under resolution by an independent valuer
                               (see chapter 12). Covered deposits should not be subject to exercise of the
                               bail-in tool. The deposit guarantee scheme (DGS) should instead contri-
                               bute in lieu of protected depositors by absorbing losses to the extent of the
                               losses expected in normal insolvency proceedings and when the bail-in
                               tool is applied, the DGS is liable for the amount by which covered deposits
                               would have been written down had covered deposits been included within
                               the scope of bail-in.2 DGS will however profit from the highest hierarchical
                               order of claims covered deposits enjoy (see chapter 22 for the use of DGS
                               for resolution purposes).

Under state aid rules,         Creditors of the same hierarchy should be treated equally. Exclusions to
burden-sharing is              bail-in are however possible within the same class of creditors in excepti-
required (i.e. the
                               onal circumstances – to avoid spreading contagion or to maintain finan-
exhaustion of all capital-
generating measures
                               cial stability (see chapter 15). In such cases the level of write-down or
including contributions        conversion of other eligible liabilities may be increased to take account
by hybrid capital              of such exclusions, subject to the NCWOL principle being respected (see
holders and junior             chapter 20). If, in the case of an exclusion, the losses cannot be passed to
debt) before any public
                               other creditors, the resolution financing arrangement may contribute to
intervention – unless
that would endanger
                               the institution under resolution. This is subject to a number of strict con-
financial stability, violate   ditions, including the requirement that losses totaling not less than 8 % of
fundamental rights or          total liabilities including own funds have already been absorbed by bail-in,
lead to disproportionate       and that the funding provided by the resolution fund is limited to 5 % of
results.
                               total liabilities including own funds.

                               State Aid and Minimizing Distortions of Competition
                               EU rules for state aid set out the conditions in which Member States can
                               support banks with funding guarantees, recapitalizations or asset relief

                               1
                                	 Higher-ranking liabilities are only affected if the reduction or conversion of lower-ranking liabilities are insufficient
                                  to achieve the required capital effect. Covered deposits of up to EUR 100,000, secured liabilities to the extent
                                  actually secured, certain liabilities to payment and settlement systems or employees, and liabilities to banks with
                                  an original maturity of less than seven days, excluding entities that are part of the same group, should not be
                                  subject to the bail-in tool. Deposits of natural persons and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises should
                                  have a preferential ranking. Otherwise creditors of the same hierarchy should be treated pari passu.
                               2
                                	 The NCWOL principle applies

146
                                                                               chapter 21a




measures. These seek to ensure financial stability while minimizing dis-
tortions of competition between banks. The rules require that all measures
are taken to limit state aid to the minimum necessary. This means full
burden-sharing is required (i.e. the exhaustion of all capital-generating
measures including contributions by hybrid capital holders and junior
debt) up to the level of subordinated debt before any public intervention –
unless that would endanger financial stability or lead to disproportionate
results. The hierarchical order of loss absorption is also applicable under
the state aid regime and the NCWOL principle should be adhered to.

This applies in respect of recapitalizations and impaired asset measures,
including asset guarantees which are typically granted to cover a capi-
tal shortfall. A capital-raising plan, including burden-sharing measures,
must be produced and is used in conjunction with an asset-quality review
and a forward-looking capital adequacy assessment (for a bridge bank for
example, if applicable) to determine the residual capital shortfall to be
covered by state aid.

In exceptional circumstances, where the bail-in tool is applied, the resolu-
tion authority may exclude or partially exclude certain liabilities from the
application of the write-down or conversion powers under certain con-
ditions (Art. 44(3) BRRD, see chapter 15). Before exercising the discretion
to exclude a liability, the resolution authority has to notify the European
Commission as competition authority. Where the exclusion would require
a contribution by the resolution financing arrangement or an alternative
financing source, the Commission may prohibit or require amendments
to the proposed exclusion in order to protect the integrity of the internal
market. This is without prejudice to the Commission’s application of the
state aid framework. Measures imposed to limit distortions to competi-
tion depend on the degree of burden-sharing: enhanced burden-sharing
will imply a reduced need for accompanying measures.

Resolution decisions may involve the use of state aid beyond cases of
explicit public support. Resolution funds or DGS with a public mandate
and mandatory membership that are used to alleviate burden-sharing by
private creditors may, for example, also require state aid approval (for DGS
see chapter 23). Such cases are assessed on a case-by-case basis and prior
approval by the EC DG Competition will be required.

Relevant documents
–	Communication from the Commission on the application, from August
  1, 2013, of state aid rules to support measures in favor of banks in the
  context of the financial crisis ("Banking Communication")
–	C-526/14 – Kotnik and Others v Državni zbor Republike Slovenije
  (Request for a preliminary ruling from the Ustavno sodišče Republike
  Slovenije)



                                                                                       147
Chapter 21b




Chapter 21 b :
Ex-ante Financed
Resolution Funds
                           By Dieter Huber



Art. 99–109 BRRD           Key questions
                           –	 How many resolution funds exist in the EU?
                           –	 Who contributes to resolution funds and how much?
                           –	 What are the conditions for use of the resolution funds? Who decides
                              whether money from the fund can be used in a specific resolution case?
                           –	 Can the fund be depleted for one single resolution case?
                           –	 What if the losses are higher than the money available in the fund?



Resolution funds are       Banks and investment firms that are within the scope of the BRRD, and
built up by ex-ante        branches of third-country banks and investment firms established in
contributions from banks
                           a Member State, are obliged to contribute to national resolution funds.
and investment firms.  
                           In general, the resolution financing arrangement should be established
                           through a fund, which is at the disposal of the resolution authority. Such
                           arrangements may, under specific circumstances however, also be estab-
                           lished through mandatory contributions from banks which are not held
                           in a fund (but for example through a levy) provided that the resolution
                           authority is entitled to an amount that is equal to the amount of the con-
                           tributions, which the government makes immediately available upon the
                           resolution authority’s request for resolution financing.

The resolution             Purpose of the Resolution Fund
authority decides on       Financing arrangements are used by the resolution authority to ensure
the use of the funds.
                           the effective application of resolution tools and powers. Funds should be
Funds should be used
only to the extent
                           used only to the extent necessary and subject to the preceding applicable
necessary and subject      minimum loss-absorption by private means (8 % prior bail-in, see below
to the preceding           and chapter 15).
applicable minimum
loss-absorption by
                           As a general rule, a financing arrangement is established through a reso-
private means
(8 % prior bail-in).
                           lution fund and the resolution authority is entitled to trigger its use. The
                           fund may be owned by the resolution authority or independently con-
                           stituted (the BRRD is silent regarding the question of ownership). The
                           financing arrangements should ensure adequate financial resources and
                           the power to raise funds ex-ante and, where these are insufficient, to

148
                                                                                                               chapter 21b




Resolution Financing Arrangement


                                                                          Aim
                                                                          To ensure effective application of
                                                                          resolution tools and powers
                                                                          –	Subject to minimum private
                                                                             loss absorption
                                                                          –	To substitute loss-absorption
                                                                             capacity of discretionarily
                                                                             excluded creditors
                                                                          –	To compensate in connection
                                                                             with NCWOL principle
                           financing
                         arrangement
                             (fund)                                       Means
                                                                          –	Share purchase to recapitalize
                                                                          –	Purchase assets, guarantee
                                                                            assets or liabilities
                                                                          –	Loans and contributions to
             –	Target level: 1 % of covered deposits                        bank under resolution, bridge
             –	Ex-ante and ex-post contributions by banks                   institution, asset management
             	 Pro rata to liabilities excluding own funds                  vehicle
               and covered deposits;
               Risk adjusted (lump sum for small banks)
             –	Ability to contract borrowing
               („Alternative funding means“)



                Resolution authority calculates
                risk based contributions



    Risk pillars                            Related risk indicators
    –	Risk exposure                         –	Risk absorption capacity,
    –	Systemic importance                     leverage ratio
      of bank                               –	Interbank loans etc.
    –	Funding stability                     –	NSFR, LCR
    –	Additional factors                    –	E.g., trading activities,
      determined by resolution                complexity etc.
      authority



                                                                                                                       149
Chapter 21b




                               receive ex-post contributions and also to contract borrowings (“alterna-
                               tive finance”, see below).

Institutions pay               Target Level and Contributions to the Resolution Fund
contributions in               The BRRD requires that Member States set up financing arrangements
proportion to their
                               to fund contributions from banks and investment firms in proportion to
liabilities and risk
profile and to the size of
                               their liabilities and risk profile, and to the size of the national financial
the national financial         sector. The BRRD allows Member States to use existing ex-ante resolution
sector. The target level       financing arrangements in a different form than as a “fund”, as is the case
should be at least 1 % of      of the UK bank levy.1
the amount of covered
deposits of all authorized
banks in the Member
                               The target level set for available financial means of financing arrangements
State (the EBA is assessing    is at least 1 % of the amount of covered deposits of all the banks autho-
whether reference to           rized in the territory of the Member State. Whether a reference to “total
“total liabilities” might be   liabilities” is more appropriate than to “covered deposits” is the subject of
more appropriate).
                               a European Banking Authority (EBA) review (See EBA Report in the list of
                               relevant documents below). Banks’ contributions to resolution financing
                               arrangements are calculated pro rata to their liabilities, excluding covered
                               deposits and own funds, and adjusted in proportion to their risk profile.
                               Small banks are only asked to contribute a minor lump sum.

                               The BRRD allows a 10-year period for contributions to reach the target
                               funding level of at least 1 % of covered deposits by 2024. Each Member
                               State is responsible for financing the resolution of financial institutions
                               within their territory.

                               Within the euro area, from 2016, national resolution funds are replaced
                               by the Single Resolution Fund (SRF) owned by the SRB (see chapter 2 on
                               the SRM). There will be a transitional period of eight years where national
                               contributions are still earmarked and held in national compartments after
                               which the SRF will operate as a fully centralized fund, with no national
                               elements in the calculation of its funding nor in the use of the fund itself.
                               In a cross-border scenario, relevant authorities within the appropriate
                               Member States will be required to pre-agree the proportions of their cont-
                               ribution to any financing plan. In addition, it is recognized that a Member
                               State may not be capable of raising sufficient funds to finance the resolu-
                               tion of an institution or institutions within its own jurisdiction, in which
                               case relevant authorities will be able to ask to borrow funds from the
                               authorities of another member state or from the SRF.

Financing arrangements         Use of financing arrangements (resolution funds)
may not be used directly       The resolution funds may be used for the following purposes:
to absorb losses of
                               –	To guarantee the assets and liabilities of an institution under resolution
an institution under
resolution nor can they
                                 (including its subsidiaries), a bridge institution or an asset management
be used to recapitalize          vehicle;
such an institution.
                               	 See: HM Treasury, Transposition of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, July 2014
                               1




150
                                                                                              chapter 21b




–	To make loans to the institution under resolution, a bridge institution,
  or an asset management vehicle;
–	To purchase the assets of an institution under resolution;
–	To make contributions to (recapitalize) a bridge institution or asset
  management vehicle;
–	To pay compensation to shareholders or creditors under the no-credi-
  tor-worse-off-than-under-liquidation (NCWOL) principle;
–	To contribute in place of bail-in excluded creditors (in exceptional cases
  where the bail-in tool is applied and the resolution authority excludes
  specific creditors from its scope).

The general administration costs of the resolution funds may be borne by
banks but only via separate contributions, not from the main fund.

Financing arrangements may not be used directly to absorb losses of an         The resolution financing
institution under resolution nor can they be used to recapitalize such an      arrangement may
                                                                               only contribute to (in)
institution. If resolution actions indirectly result in losses being passed
                                                                               direct loss absorption
on to the resolution financing arrangement, the principles governing its       for an institution
use apply, including that an amount equivalent to 8 % of total liabilities     under resolution
(including own funds) must have been contributed by the shareholders           where shareholders
and creditors (Article 44). See chapter 15 for a detailed description of the   and creditors already
                                                                               absorbed losses of at least
8 % bail-in requirement.
                                                                               8 % of the institution’s
                                                                               total liabilities (including
Within their scope, resolution funds may therefore purchase shares or          own funds).
other capital instruments to make a contribution to the institution under
resolution (only when the bail-in tool is applied and the resolution autho-
rity decides to exclude certain creditors from the scope of bail-in under      The funding provided
the above mentioned conditions including the 8 % prior bail-in rule); and      by the resolution fund
                                                                               is limited to 5 % of
to purchase assets, guarantee assets or liabilities, or make loans or cont-
                                                                               the institution’s total
ributions to the institution under resolution, a bridge institution, or an     liabilities.
asset management vehicle.

Generally speaking, the contribution from the resolution financing arran-
gement may not exceed 5 % of total liabilities (including own funds).

In accordance with the NCWOL principle, shareholders, creditors, or depo-      In the case of a group
sit guarantee scheme that have incurred greater losses in a resolution than    resolution, a financing
                                                                               plan apportioning
they would have incurred under normal winding-up proceedings are
                                                                               the contributions of
entitled to a payment amounting to the difference (including to absorb         individual resolution
losses that would otherwise have been suffered by creditors discretionarily    funds should ex-ante be
excluded from bail-in, if they cannot be passed on to other creditors).        agreed by the respective
                                                                               resolution authorities.
Alternative Financing Resources and Financing in Cross-Border
Resolutions
In the case of cross-border group resolution, the national financing arran-
gement of each institution that is part of a group should contribute to
the financing in accordance with a financing plan. This plan should be

                                                                                                         151
Chapter 21b




In extraordinary          part of the group resolution regime, set up by the group-level resolution
circumstances, the        authority and should apportion the contributions of individual resolution
resolution authority
                          funds taking into account the distribution of losses within the group. The
may seek funding from
alternative financing
                          financing plan will be discussed and agreed within the resolution college,
sources including from    which is a forum in which all relevant resolution and competent authori-
(supra) national public   ties perform different tasks, with a view to reaching joint decisions.
backstops.
                          In extraordinary circumstances, the resolution authority may seek fun-
                          ding from alternative financing sources. If these are also insufficient and
                          ex-post contributions are not readily available governments could, as a
                          last resort and in very exceptional circumstances, use government sta-
                          bilization tools which should be fiscally neutral over the medium term.
                          Supra-national backstops could also be drawn upon, in accordance with
                          usual decision procedures.

Aligning depositor        Within the euro area, the financing of individual resolution cases will be
preference and creditor   dependent on national backstops or voluntary cooperation and support if
hierarchies between
                          the funds in the SRF provide insufficient. To this end the SRB has set up
countries would support
cooperation in cross-
                          a system of national credit lines to support the respective compartments
border resolutions.       of the fund in order to replenish the SRF until 2024 when it will be fully
                          loaded.

                          Use of resolution funds, especially the latter alternative sources, high-
                          light the delicate nature of decisions relating to burden-sharing and
                          exclusions from bail-in, particularly in cross-border resolutions outside
                          the euro area. Aligning depositor preference and creditor hierarchies bet-
                          ween countries would be supportive of achieving cooperative results in
                          cross-border resolutions.

                          Relevant documents
                          –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/63 of October 21, 2014
                            supplementing Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and
                            of the Council with regard to ex-ante contributions to resolution finan-
                            cing arrangements
                          –	Council Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/81 of December 19, 2014
                            specifying uniform conditions of application of Regulation (EU) No
                            806/2014 with regard to ex-ante contributions to the Single Resolution
                            Fund
                          –	EBA/OP/2016/18, Report on the appropriate target level basis for reso-
                            lution financing arrangements.




152
                                                                                              chapter 22




Chapter 22:
Use of Deposit Guarantee
Schemes under Resolution
By Georg Merc



Key questions                                                                   Art. 108–109 BRRD
–	 What can Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGS) funds be used for?
–	 Is there a limit for DGS contribution to resolution financing?
–	 What is the ranking of the DGS in the hierarchical order of creditors?
–	 May the DGS be called upon a second time if the applied resolution tools
   prove insufficient (and the bank is finally sent into liquidation)?
–	 What is the role of the European Commission when DGS funds are used?



Deposit guarantee schemes (DGS) create solidarity between all the insti-        Each EU country must
tutions operating in the same financial market. The current EU Directive        have at least one DGS,
                                                                                and all deposit-taking
harmonizing national DGS stipulates that each EU country must have at
                                                                                credit institutions are
least one DGS, and all deposit-taking credit institutions as defined under      required to contribute
EU capital requirements legislation (CRD IV/CRR) are required to join.          ex-ante according
They offer a harmonized level of protection for depositors in the event of      to their risk profile.
bank failure, with deposits held by individuals and companies at any given      DGS offer protection
                                                                                for depositors up to
bank guaranteed up to EUR 100,000.
                                                                                EUR 100,000 in case of
                                                                                a bank’s failure.
DGS are financed by banks via ex-ante contributions. By 2024, DGS in the
EU must have available financial means of at least 0.8 % of the amount
of the covered deposits of its members (target level). Contributions reflect
individual banks’ risk profiles; i.e. riskier banks have to pay more. For the
possible creation of a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) see
chapter 2 on Banking Union.

Overview of Possible Uses of DGS funds                                          DGS funds compensate
DGS funds are designed to reimburse depositors in the case of a bank            protected depositors by
                                                                                paying out the insured
failure. DGS are traditionally triggered by the start of insolvency procee-
                                                                                amount in case of a
dings and compensate depositors by paying out the insured amount to the         bank’s liquidation.
respective account holders (repayment function). They may also finance          Additional failure
measures to preserve depositors’ access to covered deposits in the cont-        prevention functions
ext of national insolvency proceedings other than a direct payout, such         may be provided for.
as a transfer to an acquiring bank (an alternative way to protect deposi-
tors in an insolvency scenario besides the repayment function). In some

                                                                                                      153
Chapter 22




  Possible Use of DGS Funds and Contribution Limit




                                    Alternative
                                     measures
                                       (early
                possible           intervention)




       use
                                      Repay
      of DGS
                                    depositors
      funds     obligation




                                     Finance                                                    Step 7
                                    resolution                                                  Determine any difference in
               obligation                                                                       treatment (ex-post valuation)
                                                                                 Step 6
                                                                                 DGS pays contribution
                                                                                 in cash (as decided by
                                                                                 the Resolution Authority)               possible repayment by
                                                                   Step 5
                                                                                                                        Resolution Fund to DGS
                                                                   Determine the liability of the
                                                                   DGS to finance resolution
                                                     Step 4
                                                     Calculation of the limit as the lower of
                                                     (I) the net losses of the DGS it would have to
                                                     bear under insolvency and
                                                     (II) 50 % of the target level of the DGS fund
                                         Step 3
                                         Determine the bail in of covered
                                         deposits if they would have been
                                         written down (hypothetical bail-in)
                             Step 2
                             Independent valuer determines
                             the value of the assets and
                             liabilities (valuation 2)
                Step 1
                Resolution authority decides
                to resolve the bank




154
                                                                                                                                   chapter 22




countries, DGS can also use their available funds for alternative measures
in order to prevent the failure of a credit institution under strict condi-
tions for early intervention (failure prevention function).

Where a bank is resolved through the application of special resolution
tools rather than liquidation, the BRRD together with Directive 2014/49/
EU on deposit guarantee schemes (DGSD) extends the possible use of DGS
to finance the resolution of credit institutions (contribution to resolution
function).

Use of DGS for Resolution Purposes and Safeguards
A general precondition to use of the financial means of the DGS in reso-
lution is that the resolution action ensures depositors continued access to
their deposits, in line with the IADI Core Principles for Effective Deposit
Insurance Systems.1

The use of DGS money for resolution purposes is foreseen for the follo-
wing purposes:

–	To subrogate bail-in-excluded protected depositors and pay the amount
  for which they would have been bailed-in (DGS bail-in in lieu, as provi-
  ded in Article 109(1)a), which is limited by the hypothetical insolvency
  loss calculation under the no creditor worse off than under liquidation
  (NCWOL) principle (see chapter 20).
–	To pay the amount DGS would have lost under a hypothetical liquida-
  tion scenario (NCWOL principle) in case bail-in is not applied (Article
  109(1)b).

Calculating the DGS Contribution to Finance Resolution                                                               The resolution authority
The resolution authority, after consulting the DGS, determines the amount                                            determines the amount
                                                                                                                     by which the DGS is
by which the DGS is liable based on the independent ex-ante valuation of
                                                                                                                     liable based on the
the assets and liabilities of the bank undertaken prior to or in connection                                          independent ex-ante
with the resolution decision (see chapter 12). The resolution authority                                              valuation of the assets
cannot exercise any discretion on the use of DGS for resolution purposes.                                            and liabilities of the
                                                                                                                     failing institution.
The ex-ante valuation is used to calculate:

–	the amount by which covered deposits would have been written down if
  included in a bail-in, or
–	the amount DGS would have paid under the application of one or more
  resolution tools other than the bail-in tool under the insolvency coun-
  terfactual i.e. the losses that covered depositors would have suffered
  had covered depositors suffered losses in proportion to the losses suf-
  fered by creditors with the same level of priority under the national law


	 See International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI) Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems
1

 CP. 9 EC 8.

                                                                                                                                           155
Chapter 22




                               governing normal insolvency proceedings (net payout amount: covered
                               deposits minus hypothetical recovery rate).

The DGS will never pay     This hypothetical amount is then compared with the NCWOL and the
more than it would         50 % cap described below. In all cases the contribution is limited to the
have paid under a
                           lower of the two limits.
hypothetical liquidation
(net payout amount).
                           The contribution from the DGS must be made in cash. If the available
                           means are not sufficient to fulfil the resolution financing obligation, DGS
                           may be required to collect ex-post contributions from member institu-
                           tions and to call for cash contributions regarding payment commitments2
                           (the same as for a pay-out under liquidation).

                           NCWOL Safeguards and 50 % Cap
                           Any difference in treatment between the amount DGS had to contribute
                           under resolution compared to the hypothetical liquidation loss will be
                           assessed by an independent valuer. The resolution financing arrangement
                           will compensate the DGS if the limit has been exceeded (safeguard provi-
                           sion under the NCWOL, see chapter 20).

To limit the possible      Although the probability of DGS use under resolution is low, the risk exists
depletion of the DGS       that financing of resolution measures might deplete the scheme and
for resolution purposes
                           endanger its capacity to pay-out for normal insolvencies. This is of con-
the BRRD anticipates
a 50 % cap of the DIF
                           cern especially in cases where, for example, a large bank with a huge retail
target level.              deposits base is bailed-in and losses under liquidation are assumed to be
                           relatively high, and the hypothetical recovery rate is very low.

                           To limit the possible depletion of the DGS for resolution purposes the BRRD
                           anticipates another element of limitation in addition to hypothetical net
                           pay-out amount under insolvency: A cap on financing resolution actions in
                           terms of the DGS target level. For Member States with one DGS this will be
                           set at an amount equal to up to 50 % of the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF)
                           target level. In Member States with more than one DGS, the target level will
                           be lower and the liability of the individual DGS reduced. However, the BRRD
                           allows Member States to set a percentage which is higher than 50 % taking
                           into account the specificities of their national banking sector.

                           This limitation to the use of the DGS under resolution is applied when the
                           amount of the DIF’s expected loss under normal insolvency proceedings is
                           higher than is allowed by the cap. For example: if the target level of DGS
                           is 1,000 money units, and the hypothetical loss under normal insolvency
                           proceedings for DIF is 800, with a cap set at 40 % (meaning the DIF cannot
                           be depleted more than 60 % of the target level) the DIF’s liability will only
                           be 400 (40 % of 1,000).


                           	 The DGSD allows banks to fulfill their payment obligations via payment commitments for up to 30 % of the
                           2

                             total amount of the DGS available financial means.

156
                                                                                               chapter 22




These safeguards also limit the risk of the DIF being depleted when called
upon twice to fund resolution and/or liquidation actions with the same
institution (e.g. if the restored entity to which the DIF already contributed
is sent into liquidation later and the DIF is this time required to pay out
the same insured deposits).

Ranking of Covered Depositors in the Creditor Hierarchy                         The BRRD provides for a
The use of the DGS in resolution is justified by the fact that resolution       “super preference” of the
                                                                                DGS in the hierarchical
and the use of resolution tools avoid a payout case. Not providing for the
                                                                                order of creditors,
involvement of DGS would constitute an unfair advantage with respect to         followed by the eligible
other creditors which also have to absorb losses under the provided safe-       deposits of natural
guards (NCWOL).                                                                 persons and SMEs that
                                                                                would have been deemed
                                                                                covered deposits if they
The BRRD provides for covered deposits and DGS, being subrogated to the
                                                                                had not exceeded the
rights and obligations of covered depositors, to have a rank ahead of eli-      coverage level.
gible deposits of natural persons and small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) that would have been deemed to be covered deposits if they had
not exceeded the coverage level and of ordinary unsecured non-preferred
creditors. This treatment is aimed at safeguarding the funds of deposit
guarantee schemes for fulfilment of their primary pay-out function when
deposits are unavailable. This super preference under liquidation, based
on the assumption of an expected high recovery rate, largely reduces the
DGS function to a liquidity provider under liquidation. That high ranking
also typically significantly reduces the contribution of the respective DGS
during resolution. Resolution financing by DGS is therefore only likely
if the losses are high and/or the bank is strongly deposit-financed (see
example calculation).

Relationship to Resolution Planning and to the Resolution Fund
Possible DGS financing should be considered when drafting the resolu-
tion plan (financing the resolution) and setting the MREL. A potential DGS
contribution to resolution financing may reduce the MREL. The financial
resources of the DGS do not compete with, nor can they replace, the reso-
lution financing mechanism. The decision of a resolution authority to, in
exceptional circumstances, exclude or partially exclude certain eligible
liabilities from bail-in under the conditions laid down in the BRRD and
a potential use of the resolution financing mechanism to cover the losses
that have not been absorbed does not have any impact on the liability of
the DGS. The financial resources of a DGS are to be used in addition to
those of a resolution mechanism.

Role of the European Commission                                                 EU state aid rules do not
The use of DGS to assist in the resolution of failing institutions should       apply to the use of DGS
                                                                                to assist in the resolution
comply with the relevant state aid provisions if it goes beyond simple loss
                                                                                of failing institutions in
absorption limited with the net payout amount in lieu of insured depo-          lieu of bail-in-excluded
sitors under hypothetical liquidation. The state aid regime does not apply      depositors.
to the repayment of depositors (paybox function) and the standing-in for

                                                                                                        157
Chapter 22




                                            covered depositors under resolution (under the bail-in and/or the transfer
                                            tools as foreseen under Article 109 BRRD). The possible financing of alter-
                                            native measures by the DGS (support measures during early intervention)
                                            outside the BRRD is subject to state aid rules and needs the approval of the
                                            European Commission.

                                            Relevant documents
                                            Directive 2014/49/EU on deposit guarantee schemes Text with EEA rele-
                                            vance and MEMO/15/6165

  Example Calculation



      –	 The target level of the DGS fund lies at 900. The liability of the DGS is limited with 50 % of the target level (450).
      –	 The loss as determined by the supervisory authority on a going concern basis amounts to 2,400. The book value of the remaining assets
         therefore lies at 1,800.
      –	 An independent gone concern valuation shows a remaining asset value of 1,600 thereby increasing the loss by 200 to 2,600 in total.
         Based on this independent valuation the net losses of the DGS have to be calculated.
      –	 Liabilities at the amount of 200 will be excluded from bail-in during resolution. According to the Liquidation Scenario the limit for DGS
         financing in resolution lies at 400. This limit, as it is lower than 50 % target level limit, needs to be compared with the Resolution Scenario.
         Under the resolution scenario 300 have to be paid by the DGS. This amount lies below the relevant limit.




                                                                                                               resolution Scenario
                   Liquidation Scenario
                                                                                                                   (Hypothetical bail-in)



            Assets                     Liabilities                                                      Assets                    Liabilities

  1,600   Assets              Liabilities not eligible          2,000                         1,900   Assets             Excluded liabilities                200
                              (covered deposits,
                              secured liabilities …)                                                                     Liabilities not eligible           2,000
                                                                                                                         (covered deposits,
                                                                                                                         secured liabilities …)

                                                                    400
                                                                    Loss to bear by DGS
                                                                    under insolvency




                              Preferred liabilities               950
                              (client deposits – households,                                                             Preferred liabilities               750
                              micro, SMEs > € 100,000)                                      300
                                                                                                                         (client deposits – households,
                                                                              Bail in of covered
                                                                                                                         micro, SMEs > € 100,000)
                                                                                   depositors in
                              Other liabilities                   800                 resolution                        Other liabilities                    800
                              Senior Eligible deposits                                                                  Senior Eligible deposits
                              debt   (corporates > €100,000)                                                            debt   (corporates > €100,000)

  2,600   Loss                Subordinated debt                   100                         2,300   Loss               Subordinated debt                   100
                              Tier 2 capital                       30                                                    Tier 2 capital                       30
                              Additional Tier 1 capital            30                                                    Additional Tier 1 capital            30
                              Core Equity Tier 1                  390                                                    Core Equity Tier 1                  390




158
                                                                                                              chapter 23




Judicial Review

Chapter 23:
Judicial Review of
Resolution Action
By Matthias Haentjens



Key questions                                                                                   Art. 85–86 BRRD
–	 Is a court decision required before a resolution authority can take
   action?
–	 What are the effects of an appeal against a resolution decision?
–	 Can the court create new economic facts?
–	 Where is an appeal lodged against a Single Resolution Board decision
   that is executed by national authorities?



Many jurisdictions have drastically overhauled their rules governing bank                       Post crisis resolution
insolvencies in reaction to the global financial crisis that started in 2008                    regimes are not judicial
                                                                                                but administrative based
(see chapter 1). Previous bank insolvency regimes, which mainly con-
sisted of either direct or indirect application of general insolvency law,
have been replaced with an administrative resolution regime. In this
administrative regime, government authorities have wide-ranging pow-
ers to resolve banks in financial distress. Thus, if any court is involved,
it is usually an administrative court (whilst it ultimately depends on the
relevant national law of procedure which court is competent). This is also
true for the regime implemented by the BRRD but, as a consequence both
of limitations imposed by BRRD itself (to be discussed below) and of the
nature of European administrative review, the administrative court can
play only a limited role. The Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU),
for instance, has held that: "The review by the European Union judica-
ture (…) is necessarily limited and confined to verifying whether the rules
on procedure and on the statement of reasons have been complied with,
whether the facts have been accurately stated and whether there has been
any manifest error of assessment or misuse of powers".1


	 Judgment of the General Court (First Chamber) of 2 March 2012, in cases T-29/10 and T-33/10
1

  (ECLI:EU:T:2012:98), nr. 103.

                                                                                                                     159
Chapter 23




Under the BRRD Member       Judicial review under BRRD: Article 85
states may stipulate that   Title 4 Chapter 9 BRRD contains only two but important provisions:
Courts ex-ante review
                            Articles 85 and 86. In Article 85(1) the BRRD recognizes the right (but no
resolution decisions
within 24 hours.
                            requirement) for ex-ante judicial review at the national level. The Article
                            provides that Member States may require that a decision to take a ‘cri-
                            sis prevention measure’ or a ‘crisis management measure’ (see below) is
                            subject to ex-ante judicial approval. The national law procedure relating
                            to the approval of a crisis management measure and the court’s conside-
                            ration of the same must be expeditious. Recital (92) substantiates that the
                            court should give its decision within 24 hours and the relevant authority
                            should take its decision immediately after the court has given its approval.
                            However, interested parties can request the court to set aside the deci-
                            sion for a limited period after the resolution authority has taken the crisis
                            management measure.2

                            Pursuant to Article 2(1)(101) BRRD, a ‘crisis prevention measure’ means:
                            –	the exercise of powers relating to recoverability (Article 6(6) BRRD);
                            –	addressing or removing impediments to resolvability
                              (Article 17–18 BRRD);
                            –	the application of an early intervention measure under Article 27 BRRD;
                            –	the appointment of a temporary administrator under Article 29 BRRD;
                            –	the exercise of write down or conversion powers under Article 59 BRRD.

Ex-post appeal against      Article 2(1)(40) BRRD states that a ‘crisis management measure’ means:
resolution decisions        –	the decision to place an institution, its parent or subsidiaries under
must be provided for but
                              resolution;
this should not result in
automatic suspension of
                            –	the application of a resolution tool;
the challenged decision.    –	the exercise of a resolution power;
                            –	the appointment of a special manager; and
                            –	implementation of resolution decisions under Article 72(1) BRRD by a
                              person appointed by the resolution authority.

                            Under Article 85(2) and (3) BRRD, Member States’ national laws must pro-
                            vide for a right of (ex-post) appeal against: a) a decision to take a crisis
                            prevention measure or a decision to exercise any power, other than a crisis
                            management measure; and b) a crisis management measure, respectively.
                            ‘Appeal’ here is used as meaning any legal challenge of a decision, rather
                            than taking a decision of a lower court up to a higher court. The terms ‘cri-
                            sis prevention measure’ and ‘crisis management measure’ must be under-
                            stood in the same sense as set out above.

                            Article 85(4) BRRD provides that the right of appeal against a crisis
                            management measure shall be subject to two limitations. These limita-
                            tions must be understood against the background that the Article intends


                            	 See M Schillig, Resolution and Insolvency of Banks and Financial Institutions, (OUP 2016), p. 117, fn 58 on the
                            2

                              possible friction of this ex-ante review and SRB decisions.

160
                                                                                             chapter 23




to address situations of extreme urgency, and that the suspension of
any decision of the resolution authorities might impede the continuity
of critical functions (see chapter 4 and recital (90)). First, the lodging of
an appeal shall not automatically suspend the effects of the challenged
decision (Article 85(4)(a) BRRD). Second, the resolution authority’s deci-
sion shall become immediately enforceable with a rebuttable presumption
that a suspension of its enforcement would be against the public interest
(Article 85(4)(b) BRRD).

In order to protect the interests of third parties acting in good faith who     No other compensation
have acquired shares, other instruments of ownership, assets, rights, or        can be awarded than
                                                                                damages.
liabilities of an institution under resolution, the annulment of a resolu-
tion authority’s decision shall not affect any subsequent administrative
acts or transactions concluded by that resolution authority on the basis
of the annulled decision. Compensation for the loss suffered by the appli-
cant caused by the decision or act is the only type of remedy available for
a wrongful decision or action by the resolution authorities (Article 85(4)
BRRD).

The rationale for Article 85 BRRD may be found in Article 47 of the Charter     Courts shall use the
of Fundamental Rights, according to which “the concerned parties have a         economic assessments of
                                                                                the resolution authority
right to due process and to having an effective remedy against the mea-
                                                                                as a basis for their own
sures affecting them”.3 On the other hand, BRRD requires that the ex-post       assessment.
judicial review of a crisis management measure must be ‘expeditious and
national courts shall use, as a basis for their own assessment, the complex
economic assessments of the facts carried out by the resolution autho-
rity’. Recital (89) adds that national courts should nonetheless examine
‘whether the evidence relied on by the resolution authority is factually
accurate, reliable and consistent, whether that evidence contains all rele-
vant information which should be taken into account in order to assess a
complex situation and whether it is capable of substantiating the conclu-
sions drawn therefrom.’

Judicial restrictions on other proceedings: Article 86                          Normal bank insolvency
Article 85 BRRD indicates the administrative nature of the proceedings          proceedings – which
                                                                                may be court or
to challenge ex-post resolution decisions (but again, this will ultimately
                                                                                administrative based
depend on the relevant national law of procedure). Such proceedings             under national law –
may represent a shift from the tradition, existing in many Member Sta-          should commence only
tes, in which insolvencies have always been in the domain of the ban-           upon decision by the
kruptcy or civil courts. This shift is further stressed by Article 86(1) BRRD   resolution authority
which prescribes that, in short, national insolvency proceedings may not
be commenced except at the initiative of the resolution authority if the
relevant institution, its parent or subsidiaries are in resolution, or it has
been determined that the resolution conditions have been met. Moreo-
ver, a decision placing an institution, its parent or subsidiaries into such


	 Explanatory Memorandum BRRD Proposal, 14
3




                                                                                                      161
Chapter 23




                          national insolvency proceedings shall be taken only with the consent of
                          the resolution authority (Article 86(1) BRRD).

Resolution action can     Notably, Article 86(3) BRRD is of importance for any judicial actions or
trigger a stay on Court   proceedings in which an institution is involved. If this institution is placed
proceedings.
                          in resolution, resolution authorities have the power to request the court to
                          stay the actions and proceedings. This is on top of the temporary ‘resolu-
                          tion stay’ that may be imposed on the enforcement of security interests ex
                          Article 70 BRRD.

                          Judicial review in practice
                          In the new euro area regime of the BRRD and the Single Resolution Mecha-
                          nism, the appropriate route to challenge ex-post the application of a reso-
                          lution tool depends on the resolution authority employing the tool, and
                          therefore on the category of bank subjected to the tool. For significantly
                          important and cross-border operating banks, the tools are to be employed
                          by the Single Resolution Board (SRB) by means of the adoption of a reso-
                          lution scheme, while for other banks, the national resolution authority
                          (NRA) is empowered to take resolution measures directly (Chapter 2 and
                          Chapter 13).

                          If a resolution tool is employed by the NRA then any appeal must be lod-
                          ged under national (administrative) law (Art. 85(3) BRRD). Under Dutch
                          law, for instance, an appeal against a decision of the NRA, i.e. the Dutch
                          Central Bank, can only be lodged directly with the Administrative High
                          Court for Trade and Industry, and the appeal is time-barred after ten days
                          (Art. 8:1 General Administrative Law Act (Algemene wet bestuursrecht)
                          and 3a:64(1) Wft). Ultimately, preliminary questions could be posed to the
                          CJEU to obtain a decision on the application of EU law.

                          For cases where resolution tools are to be employed through the adoption
                          of an SRB resolution scheme, appeal against the (adoption of the) scheme
                          itself can probably not be lodged with the SRB Appeal Panel, due to its
                          limited competences. Such appeal against the resolution scheme itself
                          may be admissible directly at the CJEU under Art. 263 TFEU.4 However,
                          a resolution scheme instructs the relevant NRA to carry out measures
                          under national law to implement the scheme (Art. 18(9) SRMR). It may be
                          unclear where and under what law the bank in question should challenge
                          the subsequent measures taken by the NRA. The answer would probably
                          depend on the margin of discretion the scheme’s instruction has left for
                          the NRA. If the scheme’s instruction to the NRA does not leave much mar-


                          	 See Recital 120 SRM Reg. Art. 18 is not included in the list of articles under which administrative appeal with
                          4

                            the SRB Appeal Board is admissible (art. 85(3) SRM Reg.). Also, such a scheme would be addressed to the
                            national resolution authority (rather than to the failing bank in question). See S. Nuyten, Legal protection
                            against actions under the Single Resolution Mechanism – or the lack of it, NautaDutilh paper 2015, p. 18–19
                            and 21 (available at http://www.nautadutilh.com/, accessed at 16 September 2016).

162
                                                                                                            chapter 23




gin of discretion for the NRA, appeal against it must probably be lodged
with the CJEU directly.5 If, conversely, the scheme’s instruction to the NRA
would leave the NRA a substantial margin of discretion, the resolution
tool must probably first be challenged with the NRA (should the applica-
ble national law require such administrative review) or with the national
(administrative) court.6




5
 	 T.M.C. Arons, Judicial Protection of Supervised Credit Institutions in the European Banking Union, in:
   European Banking Union (D. Busch & G. Ferrarini eds.), Oxford (2015), pp. 459–460.
6
 	 Parliamentary Proceedings, Tweede Kamer, 2014–2015, 34 208, nr. 3, pp. 31–33. See also, Nuyten (2015),
   p. 20 et seq. and Arons (2015), p. 433 et seq.

                                                                                                                   163
Annex 1




Annexes

Annex 1:
Crisis Management and
Communications
          By Maria Hormaeche Lazcano



          Articles 10.7 and Annex of the BRRD
          as regards communication under the resolution plans
          Articles 81, 82, 85, 88 and 97 BRRD
          as regards communication among authorities
          Article 83 of BRRD as regards external communication

          Key questions
          –	Should recovery and resolution plans include a resolution
             communications strategy?
          –	 How are incoming information and outgoing messages coordinated in
             the event of resolution?
          –	 What are the core messages to internal and external stakeholders at the
             point of resolution?
          –	 Communication of what information is legally required by the BRRD?



          Effective Communications Are Vital in Times of Crisis
          The resolution of a financial entity can create uncertainty both within the
          business and more widely. A well-planned and executed communications
          strategy is essential to:

          –	Instill confidence in the markets in which the entity operates, including
            retail customers;
          –	Avoid actions that could frustrate the resolution process;
          –	Ensure stakeholders have the information they need to continue to do
            business with subsidiaries or with the new bridge bank or asset manage-
            ment vehicle (AMV);
          –	Avoid contagion to other entities, markets or geographies; and
          –	Maintain financial stability.



164
                                                                                                  Annex 1




Communications should be timely, well-coordinated and consistent, to
effectively manage all the information generated from different sources
and ensure stakeholders are sufficiently informed. Significant ex-ante
planning between authorities and the financial institution is required to
produce a comprehensive communication strategy that takes account of:

a)	the key stakeholders;
b)	which authority or entity should act as the main point of contact for
   each group of stakeholders;
c)	the timing for different communications during the resolution process;
d)	the core messages to each stakeholder; and
e)	the optimum channel for making each communication.

Communications Strategy During Resolution Planning                              The BRRD requires that
Articles 6 and 13 of the BRRD require that recovery and resolution plans        Recovery and Resolution
                                                                                Plans include a plan for
include a plan for communication with the media and the public. Plans
                                                                                communication with the
must be revised at least annually.                                              media and the public.

Communication plans should address the needs of both internal audiences
– the employees and suppliers of the entity – and external audiences – the
authorities, the market, and the wider public – for each resolution option.
Different groups of stakeholders should be identified as part of resoluti-
on-planning and appropriate information material and documentation
prepared and checked with legal and finance departments; for example,
letters to customers and providers, press releases, Q&A, messages. Diffe-
rent languages must be taken into account.

The response to any leak during the resolution planning phase must be
swift and well-coordinated at all levels and locations. It is very important
that rumor does not trigger a contagion effect or provoke deterioration in
the value of the franchise.

Communication Strategy During Execution of the Resolution                       During the execution
Initial information presented by the resolution authority once the entity       of the resolution, any
                                                                                information released
meets all of the three conditions for resolution should be clear and suc-
                                                                                externally must also
cinct. It should contain only the content of the decision taken, a brief        be communicated
description of the reasons, and the goals being pursued by the authori-         internally, in advance or
ties. The additional release of information should be carefully controlled      simultaneously.
and managed in order to maintain the value of the franchise, and to avoid
equity and deposit outflows.

To help maintain financial stability, authorities may consider additional
external messages emphasizing the efforts being made to avoid any opera-
tional or practical disruption to the bank and the protection for depositors.
Any information released externally must also be communicated inter-
nally, in advance or simultaneously. Q&A factsheets might be circulated
to managers to help them answer employee as well as external questions.

                                                                                                       165
Annex 1




The BRRD requires the          BRRD legal requirements
resolution authority           Article 83 of the BRRD requires the resolution authority to publish, or
to publish, or ensure
                               ensure the publication of, the order or instrument by which the resolution
the publication of, the
order or instrument by
                               action is taken or a notice summarizing the effects of the resolution action.
which the resolution           This must include the effects on retail customers and, if applicable, the
action is taken or a           terms and period of suspension or restriction referred to in Articles 69, 70
notice summarizing the         and 71. Publication should be: a) on its official website; b) on the website of
effects of the resolution
                               the competent authority, if different from the resolution authority, and on
action, its effect on retail
customers and the terms
                               the website of the European Banking Authority (EBA); and c) on the website
and period of suspension       of the institution under resolution. Where the shares, other instruments
or restriction.                of ownership or debt instruments of the institution under resolution are
                               admitted to trading on a regulated market, the means used for the disclo-
                               sure of regulated information concerning the institution under resolution
                               should be in accordance with the European Transparency Directive for
                               listed companies (Article 21 (1) of EU Directive 2004/109/EC). If the sha-
                               res, instruments of ownership, or debt instruments are not admitted to
                               trading on a regulated market, the resolution authority should ensure that
                               resolution documentation is sent to all known shareholders and creditors
                               of the institution.

                               The resolution authority must make particular efforts to communicate
                               information related to the resolution nationally, particularly regarding
                               the implementation of tools such as bail-in, sale of business, bridge ins-
                               titution or asset management vehicle creation. All communications must
                               be well-informed and well-coordinated at all levels: the entity, Single
                               Resolution Board (SRB), the national resolution authority, Ministries, the
                               European Commission, Deposit Guarantee Funds (DGF) and other rele-
                               vant stakeholders.

                               Relevant documents
                               –	Directive 2004/109/EC on the harmonization of transparency requi-
                                 rements in relation to information about issuers whose securities are
                                 admitted to trading on a regulated market and amending Directive
                                 2001/34/EC
                               –	Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 supplementing
                                 Directive 2014/59/EU with regard to regulatory technical standards
                                 specifying the content of recovery plans, resolution plans and group
                                 resolution plans, the minimum criteria that the competent authority is
                                 to assess as regards recovery plans and group recovery plans, the con-
                                 ditions for group financial support, the requirements for independent
                                 valuers, the contractual recognition of write-down and conversion
                                 powers, the procedures and contents of notification requirements and
                                 of notice of suspension and the operational functioning of the resolu-
                                 tion colleges




166
                                                                                                         Annex 2




Annex 2:
Overview of national
options

Art 3 	        Designation of resolution authority (central banks, ministries of finance,
               supervisory authorities/ …) Requirement: public administrative

Art 3 	        Limitation of the liability of RA, SA: of a Temporary administrator (Art 29),
               of a bridge institution (Art 40), of asset management vehicle (Art 42)

Art 4	         Simplified obligation and waiver for recovery and resolution plans incl. frequency
               of updates Additional info in Recovery plans, records of financial contracts

Art 32 	       Determination of resolution trigger in addition to SA also by RA

Art 37 (9) 	   Additional resolution tools and powers

Art 60 	       Capital write down may be determined by SA or RA

Art 44 	       Exclusion of liabilities from bail in

Art 45 	       Additional criteria for MREL

Art 56–58 	    Government financial stabilization: equity tool and temporary public ownership

Art 84	        Confidentiality – authorization of information exchange

Art 85 	       Ex-ante judicial approval of crisis prevention or management

Art 89 	       Waiver of resolution college

Art 97 	       Entering into bilateral agreements with 3rd countries until Commission acts

Art 100 	      Same administrative function of resolution fund (RF) and deposit guarantee scheme (DGS)

Art 102 	      Higher target levels for RF/109: for DGS use higher than 50 %

Art 106 	      Inclusion of ministry or government in decision on lending between RFs




                                                                                                             167
Annex 3




Annex 3:
Overview of State Aid
in the Financial Sector
and Bank Resolution
          By Agnieszka Smoleńska



          The state aid control framework has played a crucial role in financial crisis
          coordination and management at EU level since 2008, when it acted as de
          facto resolution policy. Following enactment of the BRRD, it continues to
          be relevant where ‘extraordinary public financial support’ can trigger reso-
          lution, and where any resolution action must comply with the principles
          of EU state aid law as outlined in the 2013 New Banking Communication.
          Both state aid and resolution law aim to secure competition and financial
          stability in the internal market and also to limit taxpayer’s exposure to
          bank bailouts and curtail moral hazard in the sector as a whole.

          Maintaining a level playing field
          Articles 107–109 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
          (TFEU) prohibit Member States from extending financial support to
          undertakings where this confers a selective advantage and potentially dis-
          torts competition or affects trade in the internal market. Treaty provisions
          are supplemented by secondary legislation as well as European Commis-
          sion communications which outline its approach within the broad scope
          of its discretion.

          Notwithstanding the potential harmful effects of state aid on competi-
          tion, and the inefficiencies it can bring for the economy as a whole, a num-
          ber of derogations compatible with the internal market are foreseen by
          the EU Treaties. These include for example aid having a social character or
          granted to make good the damage caused by natural disasters, to facilitate
          economic development of certain economic areas, or for the execution of
          projects of common European interest. State aid is thus oriented at ensu-
          ring a level-playing field between Member States and undertakings within
          the internal market. Public authorities may still operate and invest in the
          markets where any such action satisfies the market economic operator
          test, thus falling outside the scope of EU state aid control (e.g. Italian state
          guarantees to “Atlante”, a NPL securitization fund, see accompanying case
          studies).

168
                                                                                                                                                        Annex 3




  State aid approval procedure under New Banking Communication 2013



                                                             Identification of capital shortfall



              PRE STATE AID
              PROCEDURE
                                                       Pre-notification contacts (voluntary)
                                                       –	capital raising plan endorsed by the supervisor
                                                         prepared by Member State and bank
                                                       –	restructuring plan discussions




                                                            Notification of state aid measure
                                                                     (by Member State)




                Capitalization/Impared assets                  Guarantees/Liquidity support                       Liquidation aid
                –	accompanied by restructuring plan            (outside central bank assistance/DGS               –	pre-resolution law framework
Type of aid




                –	 temporary approval for financial              payout)                                          –	liquidation plan required
                   stability reasons                           –	temporary approval without                       –	orderly liquidation schemes
                –	 simplified requirements for small             restructuring plan possible                        for small banks
                   banks                                       –	individual or schemes for liquidity
                                                                 measures (where no capital shortfall)



              STATE AID
                                                       Assessment of compatibility of aid
              PROCEDURE
                                                       a)	 aid limited to minimum necessary
                                                       b)	 sufficient own contribution and burden sharing
                                                       c)	 limited distortions to competition
                                                       d)	 long term viability of beneficiary is restored


                                                      + assessment of intrinsically inked provisions under BRRD




                         Aid approved                                                                                     Formal
                 As compatible with internal market                                                                    investigation




                                                                                               Positive decisions/             Negative decision (with recovery
                                                                                              Conditional decisions               if aid unlawfully granted)



              Monitoring

                                                                                                                                                              169
Annex 3




          Providing financial stability during the crisis
          Bank bailouts were granted extensively over the course of the financial cri-
          sis to prevent unorderly liquidation and restore market confidence. Where
          bail-outs conferred an advantage on the beneficiary banks they constitu-
          ted state aid and as such were cleared by the European Commission on
          the basis of hardly ever hitherto used Article 107(3)(b) TFEU, which allows
          aid to “remedy a serious disturbance in the economy of a Member State.”
          The possible impact of bank failures – in terms of contagion, spill-over
          effects, or impact on lending – on the economy of the Member State as a
          whole was a necessary consideration in approving state aid. The systemic
          impact  of the financial crisis  has  meant that state aid to fundamentally
          sound banks – also in the form of guarantees – was deemed compatible
          with the internal market. Furthermore, over the course of the crisis, finan-
          cial stability considerations were considered the overarching objective of
          state aid control by the European Commission.

          Development of a bank-specific state aid framework
          Despite the general nature of state aid law, the particularities of the ban-
          king sector required the European Commission to elaborate a bank-spe-
          cific framework. Six crisis communications adopted since 2008 address
          recapitalizations, impaired assets, and bank restructuring, building on
          the pre-crisis approach to rescue and restructuring state aid cases. Three
          central principles form the core of the Commissions assessment of bank
          bailouts: return to viability, burden-sharing, and limitation of distortions
          to competition. Whereas the crisis communications are non-binding,
          Member States retain the right to notify to the Commission proposed
          state aid which does not meet the criteria laid down in the communica-
          tions and the Commission may authorize such proposed aid in exceptional
          circumstances.1

          By the end of 2016, 117 banks in 22 Member States representing appro-
          ximately 30 % of EU banks by assets have been subject to state aid con-
          ditionality – 60 % being restructuring cases and 40 % liquidation cases.
          The European Commission took over 450 decisions. In terms of total
          amounts between 2008 and 2015 Member States have granted no less
          than EUR 465.6 billion in bank recapitalizations alone.




          	 Judgement of 16 July 2016, Kotnik v Davnyi Zbor Republike Slovenje, Case C-526/16, ECLI:EU:C:2016:570.
          1




170
                                                                                                                Annex 3




Total amounts of state aid approved and used, EU-28 (2008–2015)

    Aid Instrument           Amounts of State aid approved                 Amounts of State aid used
                                 EUR billion      % 2015 EU GDP           EUR billion      % 2015 EU GDP
    Recapitalizations                 820.9                 5.6 %              465.6                 3.2 %
    Impaired asset                    604.3                 4.1 %              188.6                 1.3 %
    measures
    Guarantees on                    3311.2                22.6 %             1188.1                 8.1 %
    liabilities*
    Liquidity                         229.7                 1.6 %              105.0                 0.7 %
    measures, other
    than guarantees
    on liabilities*

*Amounts of aid approved and used are the maximum outstanding (annual) amounts for the period of 2008–2015.
Source: 2016 State aid scoreboard, European Commission


State aid procedure
In line with the EU Treaties and the recently revised Procedural Regulation,
Member States are required to notify any aid to the European Commission
for the assessment of compatibility with the internal market, except for
aid specifically excluded from the regime (e.g. block-exempted schemes
and aid below de minimis thresholds)2. Any unnotified aid automatically
constitutes unlawful aid. On notification, the European Commission can
decide not to raise objections or, where an initial assessment raises doubts
as to the compatibility of the aid measure, an in-depth investigation is
opened which allows for comments to be submitted by third parties. Such
investigations can result in negative, positive, or conditional decisions.
In the latter case the European Commission can make its compatibility
assessment conditional on fulfilment by the Member State and/or aid
beneficiary of commitments oriented at reducing distortions to compe-
tition, including of a structural (e.g. divestments) and/or behavioral (e.g.
bans on price leadership) nature. Any commitments imposed initially on
the bank can be revised in the light of crisis-specific market developments,
as long as they continue to limit distortions to competition. Over the
course of the crisis, the European Commission developed a specific pro-
cedure for the banking sector, including temporarily approving aid within
24 hours of notification, though increasing the monitoring and restruc-
turing requirements as a second step. This emergency procedure, which
allows for rescue aid in the form of urgent recapitalization or impaired
asset measure to be approved on a temporary basis, has been maintained
by the 2013 New Banking Communication (NBC) for exceptional cases
warranted by financial stability considerations.3 A restructuring plan is to


2
 	 See Commission Regulation (EU) No 651/2014 of June 17, 2014 declaring certain categories of aid compatible
   with the internal market; which exempts certain categories of aid – e.g. to SMEs and schemes below
   EUR 150 million – from notification obligations.
3
 	 See e.g. Commission decision of 06.09.2013 in State Aid Case SA.37314 “Rescue aid in favour of Probanka”.

                                                                                                                    171
Annex 3




          be submitted within two months of the authorization of such rescue aid.
          As a rule, the NBC requires any individual aid to be accompanied by rest-
          ructuring plans outlining the banks’ strategy of returning to viability (or
          liquidation), prior to aid being granted.4

          Aid measures over the course of the crisis
          The wide scope of the state aid definition implies that the following types
          of state measures can be held to fall within it, inasmuch as they apply in a
          selective manner and confer an advantage on the beneficiary bank(s):
          –	recapitalizations;
          –	impaired assets schemes;
          –	guarantees;
          –	liquidity support;
          –	interventions by resolution funds/other guarantee funds.

          As state aid measures, their compatibility with the internal market in
          the crisis context is assessed by the European Commission in the light of
          New Banking Communications with specific conditions for individual
          types of aid.

          Neither Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) provided by central banks
          nor the depositor reimbursements via Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGS)
          constitute state aid, unless – in the case of the former - central bank inter-
          vention is guaranteed by the State, or – in the case of DGS – the funds are
          used to restructure banks rather than ensure mere depositors compen-
          sation (payout). In fact, the use of DGS for recapitalization of an Italian
          small bank resulted in a recovery order, in the absence of a restructu-
          ring plan, sufficient burden-sharing, or measures to limit distortions to
          competition.5

          State aid can be granted to an individual institution as well as in the form
          of a scheme approved by the European Commission. Schemes are typically
          adopted for smaller banking institutions to reduce the administrative
          burden. The NBC foresees the adoption of schemes in particular for liqui-
          dity guarantees and the liquidation of small banks. Where schemes do not
          entail individual restructuring plans approved ex ante by the European
          Commission, this requirement is substituted by monitoring and reporting
          obligations.

          Conditions for compatibility under Art. 107(3)(b) TFEU
          Over the course of the crisis, the approach of the European Commis-
          sion evolved substantially, both as a result of a learning process as well


          4
           	 See for recapitalization aid measures points 34 and 53 of NBC allowing for temporary approval of aid without
             restructuring plan in exceptional cases for reasons of financial stability.
          5
           	 Commission Decision (EU) 2016/1208 of December 23, 2015 on State aid granted by Italy to the bank Tercas
             (Case SA.39451 (2015/C).

172
                                                                               Annex 3




as Court jurisprudence. Initially, the Commission relied on the general
principles of the 2008 Banking Communication, which in particular
required compliance with three conditions of appropriateness, necessity,
and proportionality. Appropriateness required aid to be well-targeted in
order to achieve its objective (“remedy a serious disturbance”). Necessity
limited aid to the minimum necessary in both form and amount – even
where the burden-sharing requirements were relaxed in the first phases
of the crisis, given its unprecedented nature. Finally, proportionality was
deemed when positive effects of the aid measure were balanced against
any distortions to competition.

This approach was nuanced through the introduction of the restructu-
ring plan requirement imposed by the Restructuring Communication
2009 (RC). Restructuring plans were to demonstrate in particular: the
return to long-term viability, provide for equitable burden-sharing and
allow for correction of excessive distortions to competition. The plans
were composed of two parts: complete information about the bank’s
business model, and measures oriented at restoring the bank’s long
term viability. In particular, they should identify the causes of banks’
weaknesses and outline how the restructuring measures would seek to
remedy the bank’s underlying problems. The requirement to present a
restructuring plan was subsequently extended to all aid beneficiaries in
2011 (including fundamentally sound institutions). The NBC, under the
overarching aim of financial stability, shifted the focus from the assess-
ment of the aid measure itself towards measures to be taken by the aid
beneficiary and the granting Member State once the aid is granted. The
European Commission criteria for assessment of compatibility thus are:
(a) aid must be limited to the minimum necessary; (b) distortions to
competition must be limited; (c) there must be sufficient own contribu-
tion and burden-sharing; and (d) long-term viability of the beneficiary
must be restored.

State aid and resolution law
The BRRD requires that implementation of competition law, inclu-
ding state aid, and resolution law should be conducted by operationally
separate authorities (Art. 3(3) BRRD, chapter 6). Nevertheless, where
resolution financing potentially constitutes state aid, resolution sche-
mes require prior approval by the Directorate-General for Competition.
Furthermore, since 2014, as part of its state aid decisions the European
Commission assesses “indissolubly linked provisions” of the BRRD, even
in cases which do not entail resolution but concern ordinary liquida-
tion. To this end, the EU Courts have held that those aspects of aid which
contravene specific provisions of the Treaty other than those of state aid
may be so indissolubly linked to the object of the aid that it is impossible
to evaluate them separately and that their effect on the compatibility
or incompatibility of the aid must therefore of necessity be determined



                                                                                   173
Annex 3




                               in the light of state aid procedure.6 The European Commission has thus
                               sought to ensure that state aid measures comply with the general princip-
                               les of resolution (Article 34 BRRD) or provisions related to specific resolu-
                               tion tools (see chapter 9).

                               The European Commission’s practice over the course of the crisis, in par-
                               ticular with regard to valuation of approaches to impaired assets (asset
                               management companies, see chapter 17 on bridge institution tool), has
                               influenced both the general principles of EU resolution law and its tools
                               (see chapter 12 on valuation), though their different context – compe-
                               tition policy and internal market harmonization legal bases – should be
                               borne in mind. To this end, state aid burden-sharing requirements and
                               resolution law’s bail-in framework should be distinguished despite their
                               similar features.

                               In addition to the substantive dimension provided for in the BRRD, the
                               Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) as the institutional counterpart
                               created for Banking Union specifies new modes of institutional interac-
                               tion between resolution and state aid authorities. In particular, the SRM
                               Regulation requires the Single Resolution Board to refer to the European
                               Commission where it considers that resolution actions – either through
                               the Fund or complementary Member State action – could constitute aid
                               (Art. 19(2) BRRD, see also chapters 6 and 14).

State aid in the new regulatory framework

                                                       Banking Union                 Outside Banking Union

Outside                       Member State                                                                                Member State
                                                     No state aid (e.g. IT securitisation scheme, HU AMC)
Resolution (a)                competence                                                                                  competence
                                                           State aid Precautionary recapitalisations
                                                              (e.g. Greek banks; compatible aid)


                                                          State aid:                          State aid:
                                                   With the use of the Single        With the use of the National
                                                       Resolution Fund                    Resolution Fund
Within                           SRB                                                                                 National resolution
Resolution (b)                competence                                                                            authority competence
                                                         No state aid:                       No state aid:
                                                    Without the use of the             Without the use of the
                                                    Single Resolution Fund             National Resolution Fund


Insolvency                    Member State                State aid: Limited liquidation aid in insolvency                Member State
Proceedings (c)               competence                                  (compatible aid)                                competence



Source: European Commission


                               	 Judgment of the Court of June 15, 1993, Matra SA v European Commission, Case C-225/91.
                               6




174
                                                                                Annex 3




State aid for financial stability and a level-playing field
State aid has been an integral part of EU competition policy since the 1957
Treaty of Rome. It plays an essential role in the pursuit of integration and
broader internal market objectives of the Union – as made evident by the
extent to which the European Commission has reframed its application of
state aid law through the objective of financial stability in the context of
bank bailouts, notwithstanding its overarching competition mandate. EU
resolution law and state aid control seek to limit taxpayers’ exposure to
bank bailouts and curtail moral hazard, also through burden-sharing and
bail-in requirements. However, their jurisdictional scope is not entirely
the same, banks can still receive extraordinary public financial support
without triggering resolution (see Chapter 9). Where the SRM is subjected
to state aid rules, this ensures that Banking Union and other EU banks will
be treated in the same way – thus protecting the level competitive field.

Relevant documents
–	Council Regulation (EU) 2015/1589 of July 13, 2015 laying down
  detailed rules for the application of Article 108 of the Treaty on the
  Functioning of the European Union (Text with EEA relevance), OJ L 248,
  24.09.2015, p. 9–29
–	10.07.2013 – Communication from the Commission on the application,
  from 1 August 2013, of State aid rules to support measures in favour of
  banks in the context of the financial crisis ("Banking Communication"),
  OJ C 216, 30.07.2013, p. 1.
–	01.12.2011: Communication from the Commission on the application,
  from 1 January 2012, of State aid rules to support measures in favour
  of banks in the context of the financial crisis, Official Journal C 356,
  06.12.2011, p. 7
–	01.12.2010: Communication from the Commission on the application,
  after 1 January 2011, of State aid rules to support measures in favour
  of banks in the context of the financial crisis Official Journal C329,
  07.12.2010, p.7
–	23.07.2009 Communication from the Commission "The return to viabi-
  lity and the assessment of restructuring measures in the financial sec-
  tor in the current crisis under the State aid rules" Official Journal C195,
  19.08.2009, p. 9
–	25.02.2009 Communication from the Commission on the Treatment of
  Impaired Assets in the Community Banking sector, Official Journal C 72,
  26.03.2009, pages 1–22
–	05.12.2008 – Commission Communication Recapitalisation of finan-
  cial institutions in the current financial crisis: limitation of the aid to
  the minimum necessary and safeguards against undue distortions
  of competition. Adopted on December 5, 2008, Official Journal C 10,
  15.01.2009, p. 2–10




                                                                                    175
Authors




authors

Freudenthaler, Dominik, Advisor in the Division for Legal Affairs of Banks and
the Capital Market, Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance (MoF).
Dominik serves as a legal expert on banking regulation in the Austrian MoF. He is engaged in nego-
tiating at expert level in the European Council and drafting government bills, including involvement
with the transposition of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive in Austria. Dominik provided
legal advice on a technical mission of the World Bank FinSAC team to the Central Bank of Albania
(legal reform of the banking resolution framework). He lectures regularly in his field of expertise.

Dominik studied law at the University of Vienna (scholarships for semesters abroad: Amsterdam and
Santa Clara/California). He previously worked at the University of Vienna (Department of Commercial
and Business Law).



Gromova-Schneider, Anastasia, finance professional
Anastasia is a multilingual finance and management consulting professional with over 14 years of
experience including set-up and lead of large scale international cross-border projects for CFO/CRO/
COO offices in DACH and CEE. She has in-depth knowledge of accounting, audit, risk management,
regulations, project management, integration management, business development and retail. In the
past she worked for Unicredit, KPMG, OeNB, Sberbank and zeb in diverse positions. Currently she is
pursuing her Executive MBA at London Business School and Columbia Business School.



Prof. Dr. Haentjens, Matthias, PROFESSOR OF FINANCIAL LAW
Matthias is full professor (chair) of financial law and director of the Hazelhoff Centre for Financial
Law at Leiden University. He teaches and publishes nationally and internationally on European ban-
king law, insolvency law and on private international law. He is also a deputy judge in the District
Court of Amsterdam and a certified expert to the European Commission.

Prior to joining Leiden University in 2012, Matthias was an attorney with De Brauw Blackstone West-
broek. In this capacity, he handled cases both as an international transaction lawyer and as a (supreme
court) litigator.

Matthias studied Greek and Latin at the University of Amsterdam (BA cum laude), and obtained his
Master degree in 2001. He became a teacher of classics, but subsequently obtained a Master degree in
Law (cum laude) in 2003, also at the University of Amsterdam. He obtained his PhD at the University
of Amsterdam in 2007 and was a visiting scholar at Université de Paris II (Panthéon-Assas), Harvard
Law School and New York University School of Law.

Key publications include: EU Banking and Insurance Insolvency (2nd ed., with G. Moss QC and B. Wes-
sels), (forthcoming); Research Handbook on Crisis Management in the Banking Sector (M. Haentjens
and B. Wessels eds.), 2015; European Banking and Financial Law (with P. de Gioia ­
                                                                                 Carabellese), 2015;
Harmonisation of Securities Law: Custody and Transfer of Securities in European Private Law, 2007.




176
                                                                                                  Authors




Hormaeche Lazcano, Maria, Head of Communications, Spanish Fund for
Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB)

Maria has over 18 years’ experience of finance in the areas of risk analysis, foreign trade, marke-
ting communications and sales of financial markets to corporates, private, retail banking and asset
management (Fortis Bank, BNP Paribas, BBVA and BBK Bank). She has participated on different ban-
king integration projects and since 2013 is Head of Communications at FROB (the Spanish Resolution
Authority).

She has developed extensive experience in the communication of restructuring (BFA / Bankia, BMN,
Caja3, Liberbank) and resolution (Banco de Valencia, Novacaixagalicia, Banco Gallego, Catalunya Banc,
CEISS) banking processes; and in crisis management, and particularly on loss absorption and recapi-
talization processes, management exercises of hybrid instruments, divestment processes, transfer of
assets to an AMC and corporate governance.

Maria studied Economics and Business Administration at Deusto University and has an MBA.



Huber, Dieter, Policy Expert, Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB),
Supervisory Policy and Strategy Department
Dieter has been working in banking and finance for more than 19 years, since 2011 as an expert for
banking regulation and strategy in the Austrian central bank (OeNB). There he focuses, inter alia, on
the regulation and practical aspects of bank capital requirements, bank restructuring and dissolution
of financial institutions. He was involved in the negotiations of the BRRD and the SRM Regulation
and represents the Austrian central bank in several technical fora.

Prior to his career as a bank regulator, Dieter worked in the fields of acquisition and project finance. As
a capital markets lawyer, he also helped analyze and negotiate financial derivatives agreements and
advised the Vienna Stock Exchange. During his stint at the Austrian Constitutional Service he focused
on the assessment of emerging laws and regulations.

Dieter is a graduate of the Universities of Salzburg (Austria) and Tulane (New Orleans), for which he
received a Fulbright grant.



Jennings-Mares, Jeremy, Partner, Morrison & Foerster (UK) LLP
Jeremy is a partner in the Capital Markets Group of the law firm Morrison & Foerster. He advises a
wide range of banks, financial institutions, fund managers, borrowers and issuers on debt and struc-
tured securities, derivatives and financial regulation.

During his 25 year career, Jeremy has practised law in the UK, as well as Singapore, Thailand and
Japan. He frequently authors articles and client publications, is a contributor to the “Covered Bonds
Handbook” and “Structured Products”, and co-authored “The Approaches to Bank Resolution”, a chap-
ter in “Bank Resolution: The European Regime”, 2016.




                                                                                                        177
Authors




Lintner, Pamela, Senior Financial Sector Specialist,
The World Bank/Financial Sector Advisory Center (FinSAC)
Pamela is a legal expert specialized in European financial services regulatory policy. She provides
consulting on the establishment and enhancement of bank recovery and resolution frameworks in
FinSAC’s client countries in line with international best practice and with a focus on BRRD alignment
and home/host issues.

In her previous roles for the Austrian central bank (OeNB) Pamela headed the on-site inspections for
the licensing process for the Austrian Central Counterparty (CCP.A) in 2014, and represented the OeNB
in several technical fora at the ECB and the European Commission. Before that she applied her expert
knowledge, including on CRD IV, crisis management, deposit guarantee schemes, and MiFID, from a
different angle at the Austrian Bankers Association where she also participated in respective EBF wor-
king groups. In her prior work at the Austrian Ministry of Finance she led the national delegation of
the Council Working Group on the Payment Services Directive and supported the Austrian Presidency
of the European Council in 2006.

Pamela studied law at the Universities of Linz, Vienna and Madrid and received a research scholarship
at the European Institute of Public Administration (EIPA)/Maastricht in 2004. She holds a PhD from
University of Linz.



Merc, Georg, Head of Group Prudential Affairs, Erste Group Bank AG
Georg joined Erste Group Bank AG in September 2016 and is responsible for regulatory and legislative
affairs. He is a legal expert specialized in banking regulation and thoroughly familiar with post crisis
regulatory reforms and the establishment of the European supervisory structure.

Georg served as national expert of Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB) between 2009 and 2016.
As such, he acted as a member in working groups and committees of the European Commission, the
European Central Bank, and the European Banking Authority, and as Austria’s national representative
at EU Council meetings. He played a critical role in implementing new requirements and procedures
into the Austrian supervisory framework.

Previously, Mr. Merc worked for Schönherr Rechtsanwälte in the banking and finance department
focusing on cross-border project and acquisition financing as well as debt restructuring. He studied
law and business administration at the University of Vienna.



Qefalia, Lira, Consultant, The World Bank/Financial Sector Advisory Center
(FinSAC)
Lira is a consultant at the World Bank office in Vienna. She joined the Bank in 2014 and has since
assisted the Financial Sector Advisory Center team with the administration, maintenance of relevant
data and representational duties. She is currently majoring in International Business Administration
at the Vienna University of Economics and Business. Through her work with FinSAC she has developed
a strong interest in Macroprudential Policymaking and Crisis Prevention in Emerging Europe, as well
as Bank Recovery and Resolution.




178
                                                                                              Authors




Smolenska, Agnieszka, PhD Researcher, European University Institute
Agnieszka is a PhD Researcher in law at the European University Institute studying the application
of EU state aid rules to the financial sector in the context of post-crisis EU/Eurozone bank resolution
frameworks for cross-border banks. She holds a BA in European Social and Political Studies (Uni-
versity College London) and MA in European Interdisciplinary Studies (College of Europe). Prior to
commencing her PhD at the EUI, she worked at the European Commission (2010–2011) and the
European Parliament (2011–2014). She is a Research Associate with the Florence School of Banking
and Finance.



Stiefmueller, Christian M., Managing Director, CEPA – Centre for Economics
and Public Administration Ltd. (London, UK)
Christian provides advice to public-sector clients and civil-society organizations, and he authors
reports, policy statements and commentaries, on financial regulation in the European Union. His
principal research focus at present is on measures addressing systemic risk in the banking sector, in
the areas of resolution, capital adequacy and structural reform in particular.

Previously a senior investment banker, Christian has more than twenty years’ first-hand experience
in the financial industry and worked for major global banks advising corporate clients and financial
investors on mergers, acquisitions and capital markets transactions. He also managed two London-
based Corporate Finance advisory firms serving clients in the technology and telecom sectors.

He holds graduate degrees in Law and Applied Languages from the University of Innsbruck and an
M.B.A. degree from the University of California (Berkeley).



van Heukelem, Emmeline, Supervisor at the European Central Bank (ECB)
Emmeline works as a Supervisor in the Crisis Management Division of ECB.

Before joining ECB, Emmeline worked as a Supervisor in the International Banks Division of the
Dutch Central Bank (DNB). At DNB, Emmeline’s activities ranged from prudential supervision matters
regarding Business Model and Profitability to Recovery and Resolution Planning. The contribution to
this Guidebook was made by Emmeline on behalf of the Dutch Central Bank.

Emmeline has given several training courses on Recovery and Resolution planning within ECB, DNB
and at Leiden University. Before joining DNB, Emmeline worked as a lawyer for one of the Nether-
lands’ leading law firms. At De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek, she spent the majority of her time in the
M&A department.




                                                                                                    179
T +43 121 70761
E kdhulster@worldbank.org
  plintner@worldbank.org
W	www.worldbankgroup.org/finsac
Praterstraße 31-19th Floor
1020 Vienna, Austria
