THE CURRENT STATE OF
WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
IN TURKEY

Prepared by:
Ms. Fiona Duguid, Ph.D.
Ms. Gökçen Durutaş
Mr. Michael Wodzicki




December 2015
                                                                               3




THE CURRENT STATE OF
WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
IN TURKEY




Prepared by:
Ms. Fiona Duguid, Ph.D.
Ms. Gökçen Durutaş
Mr. Michael Wodzicki




* This study has been prepared for the “Increasing Women’s Access to
Economic Opportunities (2012-2017)” project implemented by the World
Bank and the Ministry of Family and Social Policies with the financial
support of Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. The
findings in the study do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the Bank or
the Ministry.
                                                                                  5




Table of Contents
List of Figures	                                                                       4
Acknowledgements	                                                                      6
Scope of Research	                                                                     7
List of Acronyms	                                                                      8
Executive Summary	                                                                     9
Context	                                                                               9
Structure of Report	                                                                   9
Findings	                                                                             10

Chapter 1: Introduction11
  1.1 Objectives of Research	                                                         11
  1.2 Methodology	                                                                    12
     1.2.1 Survey	                                                                    12
     1.2.2 Interviews	                                                                14
     1.2.3 Micronarratives	                                                           14
     1.2.4 Literature reviews	                                                        15
  1.3 Limitations of the methodology	                                                 15

Chapter 2: Women’s Participation
in Labor Force and the Co-operatives in Turkey	
   2.1 Turkey’s economic growth and women’s labour force participation	               16
   2.2 Co-operatives	                                                                 17
   2.3 Women and co-operatives	                                                       18
   2.4 Co-operatives in Turkey	                                                       20
   2.5 The Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan 2012–2016	                  21
   2.6 Women in co-operatives in Turkey	                                              23

Chapter 3: The Emergence of Multipurpose Women’s Co-operatives	                       25
  3.1 Profile of women’s co-operatives	                                               25
     3.1.1Defining a “women’s co-operative”	                                          25
     3.1.2Status, age, type and size of women’s co-operatives	                        26
  3.2 Why are women’s co-operatives created?	                                         30
  3.3 What do women’s co-operatives do?	                                              34
  3.4 What does a women’s co-operative member and beneficiary look like?	             37
  3.5 Financial profile and social security situation of women’s co-operatives	       41
  3.6 Stakeholders in women’s co-operatives	                                          48
     3.6.1Internal stakeholders	                                                      48
     3.6.2 External stakeholders50
  3.7 The challenges faced by women’s co-operatives: Why do they close?	     51
     3.7.1 External challenges	                                              52
     3.7.2 Internal challenges	                                              54

Chapter 4: Understanding the Impact of Women’s Co-operatives	                56
  4.1 How many people have women’s co-operatives had an impact on?	          56
  4.2 Empower women	                                                         58
  4.3 Provide education and lifelong learning	                               62
  4.4 Create jobs, livelihoods and equitable growth	                         63
  4.5 Ensure good governance and effective institutions	                     65

Chapter 5: The Legal Framework for Co-operatives in Turkey	                  67
  5.1 Lessons from the Guidelines for Co-operative Legislation	              68
  5.2	The Turkish Co-operative Law	                                          69
     5.2.1 General legislative features and sources of law	                  69
     5.2.2 Definition and purpose of co-operatives	                          70
     5.2.3 Range of anticipated co-operative activities	                     70
     5.2.4 Forms and modes of establishment	                                 71
     5.2.5 Membership rights, obligations and governance	                    71
     5.2.6 Financial aspects	                                                72
     5.2.7 Approaches to governance	                                         72
     5.2.8 Registration and means of control	                                73
     5.2.9 Conversion options and procedures	                                74
     5.2.10 Tax treatment	                                                   74
     5.2.11 Co-operation among co-operatives	                                75
  5.3 Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan 2012-2016	              75
     5.3.1 Public organization and the provision of co-operative services	   76
     5.3.2 Training, consulting, information and research programs	          76
     5.3.3 Organization and co-operation among co-operatives	                76
     5.3.4 Enhance access to capital	                                        77
     5.3.5 Enhancing audit systems	                                          77
     5.3.6 Enhancing management capacity	                                    77
     5.3.7 Legal infrastructure improvement	                                 77
     5.3.8 State responsibility post-2012	                                   77
  5.4 Moving forward	                                                        78

Chapter 6: Support Programs for Women’s Co-operatives	                       80
  6.1	Main support programs: Availability and usability	                     80
     6.1.1 Availability	                                                     80
     6.1.2 What the women’s co-operatives did with the support	              85
     6.1.3 What women’s co-operatives want	                                  87
  6.2 	What kind of support programs might be more effective?	               90
                                                                       7



     6.2.1 Support programs that consider women’s co-operatives	           90
     6.2.2 Support programs that are local	                                90
     6.2.3 Understanding the role of local supportive organizations	       91
     6.2.4 Capacity to pursue support	                                     92
     6.2.5 More than entrepreneurship	                                     93

Chapter 7: Conclusion and Recommendations: From Surviving to Thriving	     94
  7.1 Key findings and recommendations	                                    94

References	99
  Appendix 1: Women’s Co-operatives (active and inactive)	               103
  Appendix 2: Stakeholders List (25 out of 45 willing to be identified)	 108
  Appendix 3: Profile of Agricultural Women’s Co-operatives	             109
  Appendix 4: Childcare and Women’s Co-operatives	                       111
  Appendix 5: Profile of Enterprise Women’s Co-operatives	               113
  Appendix 6: Support Programs Available to Women’s Co-operatives	       115
List of Figures
Figure 1: Research Questions	                                                                          12
Figure 2: Women’s co-operatives - active, inactive and inaccessible	                                   14
Figure 3: Number of participants in micronarratives organized by membership status	                    15
Figure 4: Weaknesses of co-operatives in Turkey	                                                       23
Figure 5: Breakdown of women’s co-operatives by status (n=101)	                                        28
Figure 6: Breakdown of women’s co-operatives by region and status (N=101)	                             28
Figure 7: Length of time open for active and inactive women’s co-operatives (N=87) 	                   30
Figure 8: Size of women’s co-operatives in 2014 (N= 96)	                                               30
Figure 9: Active women’s co-operatives based on type and membership size (N=58)	                       31
Figure 10: Reasons for starting the women’s co-operative (N=101)	                                      32
Figure 11: Women’s co-operatives start date based on active and inactive (n=93)	                       32
Figure 12: Women’s co-operatives’ activities based on active and inactive
(percentage at present) (N=101)	                                                                       35
Figure 13: What members reported receiving from women’s co-operatives (active and inactive)	           36
Figure 14: Breadth of goods and services offered by women’s co-operatives over time	                   36
Figure 15: Unique needs women’s co-operatives are addressing
for their member and in their communities	                                                             38
Figure 16: Age of members and beneficiaries (N=250)	                                                   39
Figure 17: Education levels for members and beneficiaries	                                             39
Figure 18: Education levels for members and beneficiaries based on status of co-operative	             40
Figure 19: Projected revenues (current year) versus membership size (active) (N=58)	                   40
Figure 20: Average number of women benefiting from women’s co-operatives annually versus
membership size (active) (N=57)	                                                                       41
Figure 21: Individual workers (members and beneficiaries); monthly income earned from the women’s
cooperatives (active only) (N=205)	                                                                    42
Figure 22: Active women’s co-operatives annual revenue comparison
(last year and current year) (N=63)	                                                                   43
Figure 23: Source of income for women’s co-operatives (active and inactive)	                           44
Figure 24: Revenue type versus income for women’s co-operatives (active and inactive)	                 44
Figure 25: Income generators for women’s co-operatives (active and inactive)	                          46
Figure 26: Tax and fee profile for women’s co-operatives	                                              47
Figure 27: Source of Social Security (active)	                                                         48
Figure 28: Human resources challenges: Lack of social security (active) (N=63)	                        48
Figure 29: Number of active women’s co-operatives that identified lack of social society as a challenge (by
type) (N=63)	                                                                                          49
Figure 30: Board activities based on women’s co-operatives (active) (N=63)	                            50
Figure 31: External Stakeholders with which women’s co-operatives partner
(active and inactive) (N=101)	                                                                         51
Figure 32: How does the women’s co-operative partner (active and inactive) (N=101)	                    51
                                                                                                9




Figure 33: What activities women’s co-operatives do with each external organization (active) (N=63)	 52
Figure 34: Financial challenges faced by the women’s co-ops (active and inactive)	                  53
Figure 35: Immediate expenses for women’s co-operatives at start up	                                54
Figure 36: Average number of women who benefit annually from co-operative	                          57
Figure 37: Number of women on average which benefit from the co-operatives’ activities each year by
active cooperative type (percentage of each type) (N=63)	                                           58
Figure 38: Numbers of women on average benefit from the co-operatives’ activities each year based on
region (active) (N=63)	                                                                             58
Figure 39: Common themes throughout micronarrative stories	                                         59
Figure 40: Participants’ self-analysis about whether women’s co-operatives empower women (N= 268)	
                                                                                                 60
Figure 41: Members and beneficiary’s participation in women’s co-operatives (N=268)	                62
Figure 42: How women learned to run their co-operative (N=101)	                                     64
Figure 43: Number of women earning income through co-operative (active coops) (N=63) 	              65
Figure 44: Participants’ self-analysis about whether women’s co-operatives help women access the labour
market (N= 268)	                                                                                    66
Figure 45: Number of women’s co-operatives who applied for support programs (active and inactive)
(N=101)	82
Figure 46: Support based on type of co-operative (active and inactive) (N= 101)	                    83
Figure 47: Support received and was it useful (active and inactive)	                                83
Figure 48: Regional breakdown (active and inactive) (N=101)	                                        84
Figure 49: Regional breakdown of the supportive institutions accessed by women’s co-operatives (active
and inactive) (N=101)	                                                                              85
Figure 50: Support received filtered by type (all women’s co-operatives) (N=101)	                   85
Figure 51: What women’s co-operatives did with the support (active and inactive)	                   86
Figure 52: What women’s co-operatives need to improve business based on active and inactive status
(N=101)	88
Figure 53: What women’s co-operatives need to improve business based on type (active and inactive)
(N=101)	88
Figure 54: Women’s Co-operatives	                                                                   104
Figure 55: Activities at startup by type (active and inactive) (N=101)	                             114
Figure 56: Activities at present by type (active and inactive) (N=101)	                             114
Figure 57: Revenues for this year for active enterprise women’s co-operatives	                      115
Figure 58: Numbers of members for active enterprise women’s co-operatives	                          115
                                                                           11    T




Acknowledgements
This report would not have been possible without the strong engagement of the
Turkish central government through the Ministry of Family and Social Policy, the
Ministry of Customs and Trade, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock,
and the Ministry of National Education; as well as the consistent and constructive
support from the World Bank Country Office Social Inclusion team.

Many thanks goes to the KEDV team – Şengül Akçar, Gökçesu Özgül, Berrin Yenice,
Didem Demircan, Ayşe Coşkun Tekman and Melike Özgül – and the CCA team
including Andrea Vandette, Jo-Anne Ferguson and Kate Wetherow for their support
in research design, data collection, analysis and report preparation. The Research
Assistants (RAs) dealt with an aggressive data collection timeline during Ramadan
and the summer, as well as data collection tools that were complex. Their ability to
work comfortably with members, directors and stakeholders helped to ensure the
quality of the data.

Tim Petrou and Nadya Weber provided their knowledge about the law and women’s
empowerment respectively and in a timely and helpful manner. Mary Werre
volunteered her time and skills to support the analysis and was instrumental for the
report. Norm Davidson volunteered to build the databases for easy and efficient
data entry.

We would like to thank the stakeholders who allowed us to enter their work spaces
to ask questions about women’s co-operatives. Their time was much appreciated as
their insight provides an important perspective.

And most importantly, we would like to acknowledge the women’s co-operatives’
members, beneficiaries, directors, employees and managers who willingly gave us
their time as well as their hopes, dreams, disappointments and ideas. Our hope is
that we have given them a voice. We also hope that the findings from this research
will also help to support you and the critical work that your co-operative does for
women.
Scope of Research
This is one of the first comprehensive studies on women’s co-operatives in Turkey. This
study, while answering many questions, does unearth many new ones. The opportunity for
further research to provide the depth and focus needed to answer many of these emerging
questions we hope is taken up by researchers within Turkey and around the world.


The definition of women’s co-operatives has been enshrined by the legislative regulations,
but in practice women and co-operatives are understood in different ways. For this study
we have focused on women’s co-operatives that are created by women, for women. We
have not included in our understanding of women’s co-operatives, co-operatives that
employ mostly women, are managed by some women, have some women who sit on the
board of directors, or more generally support women. While these co-operatives do exist,
they are beyond the scope of this research.


Every effort was made to contact and include in this research study all of the women’s co-
operatives operating or had operated in Turkey. In some cases, women’s co-operatives listed
in official documents did not exist, so despite numerous attempts to find or contact them
they remained inaccessible.


Throughout the duration of the research process every effort was made to design the
research study, collect and analyze the data, and present findings in an objective and
thoughtful manner.


Women’s empowerment and gender equality has been understood within this research
study as women’s personal capacities, feelings of honor and self-confidence, capacity for
overcoming challenges, women’s solidarity, and the evolution of women’s gender roles.
While patriarchy and violence against women have a role to play in hindering women’s
empowerment and gender equality, they have not been directly addressed in this research
study.
                                                                                   13   K




List of Acronyms
BRICS		      Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa
CCA	 	       Canadian Co-operative Association
CoC 		       Chambers of Commerce
DID 		       Développement international Desjardins
DGRV 		      Deutscher Genossenschafts- und Raiffeisenverband
EU		         European Union
FSWW		       Foundation for the Support of Women’s Work
GDP 		       Gross Domestic Product
GFC		        Global Fund for Children
ICA		        International Co-operative Alliance
ILO		        International Labour Organization
KEDV		       Kadın Emeğini Değerlendirme Vakfı (Foundation for the Support of Women’s Work)
KIA		        Kadın Kooperatifleri İletişim Ağı ( Women’s Co-operative Communications
Network)
KOSGEB	      Küçük ve Orta Ölçekli İşletmeleri Destekleme İdaresi Başkanlığı
MoCT 		      Ministry of Customs and Trade
MoEU 		      Ministry of Environment and Urbanization
MoFAL 	      Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock
MoFSP		      Ministry of Family and Social Policy
MoNE		       Ministry of National Education
NCBA 		      National Co-operative Business Association
NCUT		       National Co-operative Union of Turkey
NGO 		       Non-Government Organization
OECD		       Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
RA		         Research Assistants
SEWA		       Self-Employed Women’s Association
SIMURG	      Simurg Kadın Kooperatifleri Birliği (Women’s Co-operative Union)
SME		        Small and Medium Enterprises
SOCODEVI 	   Société de co-opération pour le développement international
SODES		      Sosyal Destek Programı	
SPSS		       Statistical Package for Social Sciences
SYDV		       Sosyal Yardımlaşma ve Dayanışma Vakfı
TurkStat	    Turkish Statistical Institute
UNDP		       United Nations Development Program
USD 		       United States Dollar
WB	 	        World Bank
                                                                              15   Ö




Executive Summary
Context
Women in Turkey have traditionally lagged significantly in their official participation
in Turkey’s economy. According to TurkStat,women’s labour participation rate is
only 31.5 per cent (2015).This rate does not compare well with other upper middle
income countries, such as the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa),
members of the OECD, and members of the EU (Boudet et al. 2014). The average
rate for women’s participation in the labour force for the EU-28 is 51.3 per cent
(Eurostat,2015).

Within this context, the Ministry of Family and Social Affairs and the World Bank
are jointly implementing a project titled, “Increasing Women’s Access to Economic
Opportunities.” This project aims to increase women’s access to economic
opportunities in Turkey and to increase their access to more and better employment
opportunities. The project focuses on strengthening the evidence base needed for
designing policies in these areas; compiling data and information and sharing them
with key actors and stakeholders; and carrying out supportive actions aimed at
specific groups. One such key group are women’s co-operatives and their members
in Turkey.

The co-operative model itself has been used in Turkey for over a century to advance
employment opportunities, provide goods and services, and contribute to the
economy. A co-operative is understood here in the manner accepted most widely,
namely as an “autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their
common economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations, through a jointly
owned and democratically controlled enterprise” (ICA, 2015). In 2012, Turkey’s
Ministry of Customs and Trade developed the 2012-2016 Turkish Co-operatives
Strategy and Action Plan to improve the landscape for co-operatives in Turkey.
Women’s co-operatives first started to be established in 1999. Today the women’s
co-operative sector is delivering goods and services to members and communities
across the country, but face challenges in terms of growth and effectiveness.

There is limited publically available information on women in co-operatives in
Turkey. Few attempts have been made to explore the impact of existing Turkish co-
operatives on their women members; or on women’s co-operatives broadly. This
report aims to begin to address those gaps. Research conducted for this report
had two objectives: first, to assess the current situation of women’s co-operatives
in Turkey, including identifying problems and reasons for inactivity and closure of
many co-operatives; and second, to assess mechanisms that support women’s co-
operatives. This research is intended to help all stakeholders better understand how
to strengthen women’s co-operatives and increase their sustainability.

Structure of Report
The report is structured in the following manner. The first chapter introduces the
research objectives, methodology (literature reviews, survey, micronarratives and
interviews), and limitations of the proposed methodology. The second chapter
presents the global and Turkish context for women’s co-operatives. Chapter three
profiles women’s co-operatives in Turkey, describing their origins, their membership,
their business and their internal and external challenges. Chapter four discusses the
impact of women’s co-operatives on their communities and their members. Chapter
five and six present the supportive infrastructure for women’s co-operatives, namely
the legal context for co-operatives in Turkey as it relates to Turkey’s co-operative
strategy and international good practices; and the support programs that women’s
co-operatives are asking for, and that are effective. The conclusion presents high-
level findings and links these findings to eleven recommendations that aim to
strengthen women’s co-operatives in Turkey.

Findings
The main over-arching finding of the research is that women’s co-operatives in
Turkey are organizations that cross the divide between organizational structures
purely for economic purposes, and those purely for social purposes.The story that
emerges from the research is that most women’s co-operatives in Turkey are started,
governed, and owned by women are doing a wide array of activities, and hence
are referred to throughout the research as “multipurpose women’s co-operatives”.
These co-operatives are multipurpose in the sense that they conduct wide variety
of activities, the two most important of which are providing jobs for women while
simultaneously providing a social outlet for women. The majority of their members
are married women, between 40 and 60 years old, with one to three children, and
varied levels of education. For many, the co-operative represents the first source of
income that they have ever earned independently. This income is important both
for their households, as well as their self-esteem.

Women’s co-operatives are small, mostly with less than 25 members. Importantly,
these co-operatives are actively owned by their members, with strong participation
in the governance and leadership of the co-operative. Their most important source
of support to date has been the women’s co-operative sector themselves, whether
                                                                              17



for training, funding, or solidarity. The women’s co-operatives are not linked with the
rest of Turkey’s vast co-operative sector or with the Government of Turkey. These co-
operatives face several internal and external constraints, which can lead to closure
of women’s co-operatives. The two key external challenges identified are financial
challenges, in particular capitalization, and a general lack of understanding of
women’s co-operatives. Women’s co-operatives also face several internal challenges,
such as lack of business skills, operations capacity, and knowledge of how co-
operatives can function best to serve their members’ interests.

Despite these challenges, women’s co-operatives have had and continue to
have an important impact on individuals, households and communities around
Turkey. Throughout the research, women spoke extensively about their personal
experiences of impact, as well as the impact experienced in their households, such
as by their children or their husbands; as well in their community, including both
the community of local women, as well as the geographic community. Impact
was understood as empowering women, as contributing to lifelong education
and learning, and contributing to their ability to obtain an income through
employment. Importantly, these do not occur in silos, but reinforce each other and
can be understood to have a multiplier effect on the women who engage with the
co-operatives as members or beneficiaries.

With respect to Turkey’s supportive infrastructure for women’s co-operatives,
namely the legal environment and possible supportive programs, the main finding
is that women’s co-operatives tend to be unaccounted for in the laws, policies, and
programs aimed to support co-operatives and/or women’s entrepreneurship. For
instance, women feel there is a surfeit of entrepreneurial trainings and insufficient
programs that are specific to co-operative governance and business. Furthermore,
while the Government of Turkey is actively aligning its laws in with recognized
international legal frameworks for co-operatives, there remains a need to ensure
that women’s co-operatives unique existence as organisations that are both social
and economic in nature is recognized.

The research demonstrates that women’s co-operatives will have a better chance
of success if a wider supportive infrastructure can be conceptualized and realized
through commitment of key supportive organizations and appropriate follow-
through. Government can play an important role in supporting women’s co-
operatives, but without acknowledging and working with a full complement of
supportive mechanisms, women’s co-operatives will continue to survive but not
necessarily to thrive.
                                                                                  19   1




1
Introduction

The co-operative model has been used in Turkey for over a century to advance employment
opportunities, provide goods and services, and contribute to the economy. Women’s co-
operatives specifically first started to be established in 1999. They are created by women,
for women. Today the women’s co-operative sector, while small, is delivering goods and
services to members and communities across the country. They are organizations that cross
the divide between organizational structures purely for economic purposes, and those
purely for social purposes.


This research is an example of the growing interest in women’s co-operatives as
organizational structures that aim to provide employment opportunities to women
through the development of their own business. The research demonstrates that women’s
co-operatives will have a better chance of success if a wider supportive infrastructure can
be conceptualized and realized through commitment of key supportive organizations
and appropriate follow-through. Government can play an important role in supporting
women’s co-operatives, but without acknowledging and working with a full complement
of supportive mechanisms, women’s co-operatives in Turkey will continue to survive but
not necessarily to thrive.


1.1 Objectives of Research
The research has two main objectives: First, to assess the current situation of women’s co-
operatives in Turkey, including identifying problems and reasons for inactivity and closure
of many co-operatives; and second, to assess mechanisms that support women’s co-
operatives. A complete list of the guiding research questions is in Figure 1.
              Figure 1 RESEARCH QUESTIONS


   What is the current landscape for women`s co-operatives in Turkey?

   •	 What is the current situation of active women’s co-operatives– membership, funding,
      longevity, growth, field of operation, and nature of operation?
   •	 What are the main reasons behind the inactivity of women’s co-operatives?
   •	 What are the main reasons behind the closure of women’s co-operatives?
   •	 What are the project experiences and capacities of the co-operatives?
   •	 What is the contribution of the co-operatives to the empowerment of women?


   What is the difference between women’s co-operatives
   and other co-operatives in Turkey?

    •	 What are the main differences between women-only and other types of co-operatives?
    •	 Are co-operatives providing childcare services only for their members or for everyone?
       What constraints do they face?


   What are the main support programs provided by government and other
   stakeholders and how effective are these?

    •	 What kind of support programs might women’s co-operatives need to be more
       effective?
    •	 What alternative models of support may be effective in fostering women’s co-operative
       development?
    •	 How does the current legal framework support or hinder co-operative formation and
       operation?




This research is intended to help stakeholders better understand how to strengthen women’s
co-operatives and increase their sustainability. Based on its main findings, recommendations
are proposed on how government and other supportive organizations can support women’s co-
operatives.


1.2 Methodology1
The study employed a mixed methods approach. Elements of qualitative and quantitative
approaches were employed to ensure a depth and breadth of understanding and
collaboration. Four methods of data collection were used to answer the research
questions: survey, interviews, micronarratives and literature reviews. While each of these



1	 The research team was formed by the Canadian Co-operative Association (CCA) and Kadın Emeğini
   Değerlendirme Vakfı (KEDV) representatives. KEDV is translated to the Foundation for the Support of
   Women’s Work (FSWW) in English.
                                                                                                     21



data collection methods has its strengths and limitations, they were all included in the
research design because of their compatibility with the approach and their contribution to
the overall research objectives. All data collection methods were employed with women
participants.


1.2.1 Survey
The survey was intended to gather standardized information from as many
women’s co-operatives as possible. Since it aimed to reach any and all women’s
co-operatives, the sample was formed using purposive and snowball sampling
methods. The survey was filled out by women in positions within the co-operative,
such as board chair (67),board member (20), founder (6), member (4), manager (2),
and volunteer (2). . See Appendix 1 for a list of the women’s co-operatives that were
part of this research via the survey. The Research Assistants (RA) administered the
survey face to face with the respondents. Once a respondent completed the survey,
it was returned in hard copy to the RA, who then mailed it back to KEDV’s office
in Istanbul. An Excel spreadsheet was created to house the survey data. Statistical
Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) was used to run the appropriate cross tabulations
and analysis of the surveys.2

KEDV’s knowledge of women’s co-operatives in Turkey was crucial to access active,
inactive, terminated and closed women’s co-operatives.3 Working with identified
women’s co-operatives facilitated access to other co-operatives and expanded
the sample total. In total, 1014 women’s co-operatives were surveyed: 62 per cent
were active and 38 per cent were inactive. An additional 53 women’s co-operatives
were labelled inaccessible for a number of reasons. The reasons for inaccessibility
vary and include: existence of co-operative could not be confirmed; no one would
respond to inquiries into involvement in research study; representative stated that
they would not participate in the research study; and/or co-operative closed such a
long time ago that there was no one available to talk about the co-operative.

A map of Turkey (Figure 2) shows the locations of active, inactive and inaccessible
women’s co-operatives. The map illustrates that women’s co-operatives are spread
across the country, with increased women’s co-operative activity in the Aegean,
Southeastern and Marmara regions. As will be demonstrated in the report, such
increased activity is in part due to support available from local governments in the
regions.



2	 SPSS is a software program for doing quantitative analysis.	
3	 The shorthand will be active women’s co-operatives include those with active or expansion status and
   inactive women’s co-operatives include those that have inactive, terminated or closed status.
4	 It was not possible to account for the total number of the women’s cooperatives in the country.
             WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
  Figure 2
			        	 ACTIVE, INACTIVE AND INACCESSIBLE




                                                                                 WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
                                                                                 Active
                                                                                 Inactive
                                                                                 Inaccessible




1.2.2 Interviews
Interviews were used to collect information of a more subjective nature, such as
perceptions and feelings. Three categories of participants were interviewed: active co-
operatives, inactive co-operatives and other stakeholders. RAs took notes during the
interviews on specially prepared question and answer sheets, which they mailed or scanned
and emailed to KEDV, which translated them into English. Each interview was then coded
using NVIVO.5 Codes were created from the research questions, activities and objectives.
Using this coding technique allowed analysis to be driven by the research questions, while
also allowing findings to emerge based on common themes.


In total, 16 active women’s co-operatives and 11 inactive ones were interviewed.
Interviewees included co-operatives’ founders, employees, treasurers, board chairs,
executive directors and members. The women’s co-operatives were purposely chosen to be
interviewed in order to have a diversity of responses based on region, status, size, length of
year operational and type. Forty-five people were interviewed under the category of other
stakeholders, including employees of municipalities, funders, governorship, government
ministries, development agencies, the Chamber of Commerce (CoC), universities, non-
governmental organizations (NGO) and foundations. Appendix 2 provides a list of the 25
stakeholders out of 45 who provided consent to be identified. Again a purposive sampling
process was employed in order to have a diversity of stakeholder voices based on region


5	 NVIVO is a software program for doing qualitative analysis.
                                                                                                            23



               and relationship to women’s co-operatives. In total, RAs conducted 72 face-to-face
               interviews with participants in the field.


               1.2.3 Micronarratives
               Using micronarratives allows contributors to lead the conversation and to share experiences
               that are important to them, as opposed to following the lead of a pre-designed interview or
               focus session questions. Told through short stories to RAs, such narratives provide a source
               of information for understanding individuals or groups, as these narratives represent lived
               experiences infused with meaning perceived by the storyteller. One of the main advantages
               of using micronarratives is that contributors are treated as “experts” about their own lives,
               enabled to share an experience within their own environment and to assign meaning
               to that experience. The SenseMaker software program allows a researcher to conduct a
               statistical analysis, as well as understand and nuance patterns as well as meanings.6


               For this study, women were asked to tell personal stories about the impact of women’s
               co-operatives on their lives. In total, RA’s collected 268 micronarratives from members and
               former members of women’s co-operatives and beneficiaries (Figure 3).




                            NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS IN MICRONARRATIVES
                 Figure 3
               			        	 ORGANIZED BY MEMBERSHIP STATUS

Status    Current        Currently on     Current          Previous     Previous             None         Total
          Member         Board            Beneficiary      Member       Beneficiary          of the
                                                                                             Above
Aktif     121            63               10               1            --                   9            204
İnaktif   10             16               2                29           2                    5            64




               As a measure of validity, story contributors stated that stories like theirs happened
               sometimes (25 per cent), frequently (23 per cent), rarely (22 per cent), all the time (17 per
               cent) and not sure (13 per cent). Ninety-five per cent of respondents stated that they were
               part of their story as opposed to seeing it happen or hearing about it.




               6	 The approach used here was developed by Cognitive Edge, which also designed and supports the
                  SenseMaker© software used to analyze the micronarratives.
1.2.4 Literature reviews
Two literature reviews were done to support the primary data collection. The first provided
contextual information on the following: co-operatives internationally; co-operatives in
Turkey; women’s co-operatives in general; women’s co-operatives in Turkey; women’s
empowerment; entrepreneurship; and women’s economic development. It consulted
materials including academic articles, reports, development agencies reports and books.
The second detailed the current legal framework for women’s co-operatives in Turkey. It
reviewed the main features of Turkey’s co-operative law, as well as international examples of
co-operative law, in order to propose reforms based on best practices.


1.3 Limitations of the methodology
While the methodology was designed with expertise and the methods of this research
study were scrutinized with care and thoughtfulness, any research methodology has its
limitations.


Primary data was not collected from other types of organizational structures such as
companies, sole proprietorships, family businesses, multinationals, foundations, associations
and organizations about their experience using their chosen organizational structure.
Therefore, comparisons between the co-operative structure and these other types of
business or organizations are not possible.


Primary data was not collected from or about the general co-operative sector of Turkey,
therefore direct comparisons to women’s co-operatives and the sector are not able to be
done through a standardized and similar dataset and analysis.


Similarly, no other women’s co-operatives or co-operatives that employ mostly women
from other parts of the world were contacted. Thus no direct comparisons can be made to
women’s co-operatives globally. There is very little empirical data collected about women’s
co-operatives, co-operatives that employ mostly women or co-operatives that greatly
impact women thus making it difficult to draw conclusions about a women’s co-operatives
sector.


Socio demographic data (micronarratives) was collected separately from survey and
interview data, so therefore the database and findings from the survey and interviews
are unable to be cross tabulated or connected to the database or findings of the
micronarratives. For example, queries around the revenues of the women’s co-operatives
cannot be connected to the individual earnings of women.


In some cases, findings from the analysis pointed to the need for much deeper analysis
and investigation. For example, a detailed review of tax law as it relates to women’s co-
operatives would provide more information as to how the tax burden can be tackled.
                                                                              25   2




2
Women’s Participation in Labor
Force and the Co-operatives in
Turkey

2.1 Turkey’s economic growth and women’s labour force participation
Turkey has demonstrated strong and inclusive growth over the last decade (OECD,
2014). As stated by Turkey’s Minister of Finance, Mehmet Şimşek, in March 2015,
Turkey’s fundamental macroeconomic policies have demonstrated continued
improvement in this timeframe (Şimşek, 2015). While GDP growth slowed to three
per cent in 2014, which still outpaced all developed economies, it is anticipated to
return to above four per cent per year over the next five years starting in 2015 (EIU,
2015; Şimşek, 2015).

Within this context of sustained economic growth and transformation, Turkey’s
labour market has also been changing. Key indicators such as GDP per worker and
labour productivity per hour worked have shown marked improvement, as Turkey
has outpaced other similar sized upper-middle income economies and come close
to meeting European Union levels (Şimşek, 2015). However, one of the anticipated
challenges in the labour market will be reducing unemployment as the labour
market, in particular as there is there are growing numbers of low-skilled entrants
into the labour force (Şimşek, 2015). This is particularly true for Turkish women.

Women in Turkey have traditionally lagged significantly in their official participation
in Turkey’s economy. According to TurkStats,women’s labour participation rate is
only 31.5 per cent (2015).This rate does not compare well with other upper middle
income countries, such as the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa),
members of the OECD, and members of the EU (Boudet et al. 2014).The average rate
for women’s participation in the labour force for the EU-28 is 51.3 per cent (Eurostat,
2015).As noted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) in its most recent survey of Turkey’s economy,

Women’s very low labour force participation in Turkey is reflected in shortcomings in
human capital: 78 per cent of the female working age population have less than high
school education, 58 per cent have primary education or less and 17 per cent are illiterate.
In urban areas, women’s labour force participation stayed as low as 17 per cent until the
mid-2000s. In rural areas, many women are counted as unpaid family workers, artificially
increasing participation but often masking low productivity quasiunemployment in the
informal sector. When these women migrated to urban areas they generally found no job
and withdrew from the labour force. (OECD Economic Surveys, Turkey 2014, p. 81)


The World Bank (WB) and the Turkish Ministry of Family and Social Policy (MoFSP) have
identified two important factors affecting women’s low participation in the labour force in
Turkey are the lack of affordable child care services; as well as lack of business networks/
mentorship for women once they are in the labour force or if they start a business (Boudet
et al. 2014; Gökşen et al, 2014).7 As will be demonstrated later in this report, women’s co-
operatives in Turkey can and do help address both of these factors. As noted by the former
Minister of Family and Social Policy in Turkey, Fatma Şahin, women’s “access to the labour
market is still an important problem” (Şahin, 2014).


Increasing women’s participation in the labour force is a priority for the Government
of Turkey and there have been positive changes in the last five years (Şimşek, 2015).
This is particularly true in urban areas, where female participation has increased up
to 50 per cent, mostly by university educated women (OECD, 2014). There have also
been positive trends amongst women with high school education or less, whose
participation rates increased from 11.7 per cent to 16 per cent between 2007 and
2012 (OECD, 2014).

Turkey’s Tenth Development Plan (2014-2018) identifies improving women’s
low labour force participation as a clear priority, aiming to increase women’s
participation to almost 35 per cent by 2018 (Ministry of Development, 2014). Other
important goals include improving women’s roles in decision making in the family
and economic life, as well as providing assistance to allow women to enter the
workforce. Co-operatives are also cited in the Plan, noting the need to “improve
[co-operatives]” as an important legal structure that contributes to doing business
together (Ministry of Development, 2014).


7	 The MoFSP and the WB published in 2014 a thorough comparative summary of trends in women’s
   participation in Turkey’s labour market (Gökşen et al, 2014).
                                                                                                    27



2.2 Co-operatives
Although co-operatives can take on different forms, they aspire to align with the same
accepted international definition as well as follow the same seven co-operative principles.8
The International Co-operative Alliance (ICA), the international body representing national
co-operative associations, defines a co-operative as “an autonomous association of
persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social and cultural needs
and aspirations, through a jointly owned and democratically controlled enterprise” (ICA,
2015).9 The ICA sets out seven co-operative principles: Voluntary and open membership;
democratic member control; member economic participation; autonomy and
independence; education, training and information; co-operation among co-operatives;
and concern for community (ICA, 2015). This definition and these principles make a clear
link become the economic viability that a co-operative necessarily needs to demonstrate,
and the social and cultural aspirations that a co-operative needs to meet. Co-operatives are
one of many forms of doing business and can take on different legal forms – for example
for-profit or not-for-profit – or be defined in different ways – for example, community
association versus enterprise – depending on the jurisdiction in which the co-operative
operates.


The most credible and methodologically sound research into the size and scale of
the global co-operative sector is published by the ICA. Since the United Nations
sanctioned the International Year of Co-operatives in 2012, the ICA has published
a Co-operative Monitor of the world’s largest co-operatives as a means of better
understanding and promoting the economic and social benefits of co-operatives.
The most recent issue of the Co-op Monitor reports that the world’s 300 largest
co-operatives have revenues over USD 2 trillion (ICA, 2014). Over one billion people
worldwide are co-operative members, three billion people make their living
through co-operatives, and co-operatives employ 20 per cent more people than
multinational corporations (Co-operatives UK, 2014).

The impressive economic statistics are built upon a business model which also
meets social and cultural aspirations. The basis for this is that co-operatives at
their root are formed by groups of individuals that come together voluntarily to
collectively address needs in their communities that are not being met by the
public or private sectors. As a result, an effective co-operative – small, medium, or
large – is one that exists because of and for its members, with a primary focus being
to meet its members’ needs (CCA et al, 2012). As a result, and as acknowledged by



8	 This can be understood in terms of broader emergence of a public international co-operative law in the
   last decade (Henrÿ et al, 2012).
9	 The International Co-operative Alliance (ICA) is is an independent, non-governmental organization
   established in 1895 to unite, represent and serve co-operatives worldwide. It provides a global voice and
   forum for knowledge, expertise and coordinated action for and about co-operatives.
the European Parliament for instance, co-operative enterprises assist in resolving
social issues, promote sustainable economic growth, fairer incomes, and wealth
distribution (European Economic and Social Committee, 2012). In 2014, the ICA
in partnership with the International Labour Organisation (ILO) have produced a
policy brief, Co-operatives and the Sustainable Development Goals, which outlines
the ways in which the co-operative model could assist in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals in the Post-2015 Development Agenda (2014). Research and
independent evaluations have demonstrated that co-operatives can and do meet
such development goals, when they are supported effectively (CAPRA, 2013).10

According to the ILO’s Guidelines on Co-operative Legislation, it is commonly
accepted that the role of government in co-operative affairs be restricted to four
functions: legislation, registration, dissolution/ liquidation, and monitoring the
application of the law by the co-operatives (Henrÿ et al, 2012). While co-operative
laws in Turkey will be discussed later in this report (see Chapter 5), a key element of
these Guidelines bears mentioning here.

The main objective of a co-operative law be to guarantee minimum government
involvement, maximum deregulation, maximum democratic participation and minimum
government spending by translating the co-operative principles into a legally binding
framework for the organization of self-determined self-help. (Henrÿ et al, 2012).


Co-operatives are found in over 90 countries around the world and are providing goods,
services and jobs that are needed in their communities.


2.3 Women and co-operatives
One key area where co-operatives can have a meaningful impact is meeting the
economic and social needs of women. A distinction can be made between the
impact that co-operative enterprises have on women and the impact of women’s
co-operatives on women. Research into both areas is relatively new, and limited.
A key qualification outside the scope of this report, but into which some research
exists, is that women’s participation and ultimately empowerment through co-
operatives or any other form of enterprise model is affected by socio-cultural
perceptions and attitudes and the behavioural patterns resulting thereof, including
among men (Majurin, 2012). For the purpose of this report, the focus is on women’s
co-operatives. There has been more research into the potential and actual impact
of co-operatives on women than on the impact of women’s co-operatives on their
women members and communities.


10	This impact evaluation by the Canadian International Development Agency, now Department of Foreign
   Affairs, International Trade, and Development, was an extensive study into the effectiveness of co-operative
   development programs supported by the Government of Canada over almost 30 years, which had as a goal
   to reduce poverty and increase wealth. The evaluation contains an extensive literature review of the role of
   co-operatives in its annexes.
                                                                                                    29



The main sources of information for the impact of co-operatives on women are the
ICA and the ILO; and/or researchers that are affiliated with both. The ILO and ICA
are currently conducting a global survey to assess the impact of co-operatives on
women’s empowerment and gender equality globally, as follow-up to the Fourth
World Conference on Women in Beijing.11

To date, general findings on the impact of co-operatives on women include that
globally, there are more women in leadership positions in co-operatives than
in other businesses (ILO & ICA 2014). Women are well-represented as members
of consumer co-operatives, social service co-operatives and in low-profit/yield
agriculture, but co-operative enterprises with high profits, land ownership and
high capital investment are predominantly male. Women are also less likely to be
in leadership positions within mixed (male and female members) co-operatives.
Women’s engagement with co-operatives is limited by gender inequalities in
literacy levels, low business skills, lack of land ownership and limited access to
credit and information ( ILO & ICA 2014; Bonnan-White et al, 2013; Tesfay et al, 2013;
Majurin 2012; Nippierd 2012; Eşim et al, 2009; ILO 2009; ILO 2008).

There is more limited, published research into women’s co-operatives and as a result,
limited findings on internationally accepted good practices in this regard. Generally,
women start co-operatives to get access to lower priced goods; to improve and
access paid employment; to obtain more reliable, safer, better working conditions;
to gain access to financial services; to increase social participation, agency, and
inclusion; and to address gender-based violence (Majurin, 2012; Nippierd, 2012).

One of the most studied women’s co-operatives is the Self-Employed Women’s
Association (SEWA) that started in 1972 in Gujarat, India. This co-operative started at
the grassroots working with women from any caste, class or religion. The organizers
worked through literacy issues and grew this small papadum making enterprise
into an enterprise with almost two million members, earning over 100 million USD
annually, which get redistributed to the co-operative members through dividends
(Datta, P.B. and Gailey, 2012; Jones et al, 2012; Datta, R 2003; Eşim, 2003; Eşim, 2000).

There are generally accepted good practices to improve the participation of women
in co-operatives; and the impact of co-operatives for their women members.
Organizations active in support of women’s participation in co-operatives all
implement such good practices to varying degrees.12 These good practices are


11	 Further information is available on the ILO website (accessed April 2015): http://ica.co-op/en/media/news/
   international-co-operative-alliance-and-international-labour-organization-launch-survey.
12	 These include the following, from Canada, the CCA, the Société de co-opération pourle développement
   international (SOCODEVI), andDéveloppement international Desjardins (DID); from Sweden, WeEffect; from
   Germany, Deutscher Genossenschafts- und Raiffeisenverband (DGRV); and from the USA, the National Co-
   operative Business Association (NCBA).
implemented at the co-operative, policy, and legislative levels. These good practices
include supporting co-operatives to provide services that meet their women’s
member’s needs; affirmative action measures such as the introduction of gender
quotas on boards of directors; and support programs to nurture co-operative
development in economic sectors where women are most active (Majurin, 2012).
The recently updated Resource Guide for Advanced Training of Co-operatives
on Entrepreneurship Development of Women and Gender Equality, published
by the ICA Asia office, provides a useful training-of-training for programs aimed
at increasing the leadership role of women in co-operatives (2015). Key areas of
support that the training guide includes are in financial management and business
development services for women in co-operatives.

Common threads through studies into women’s co-operatives highlight both the
sustainable and positive contributions of women’s co-operatives to the lives of
women and their communities. Women’s co-operatives can increase income, skills,
and autonomy for women. Women’s co-operatives or co-operatives that directly
support women emerge from women striving to meet needs as defined by them.
Women’s co-operatives have a ground-up approach of mutuality, participation and
practicality. Limitations and challenges faced in establishing a women’s co-operative
or the management of women’s co-operatives include: lack of start-up funding,
family and care responsibilities,lack of child care services, and embedded and
encompassing societal problems including deep poverty, socio-cultural norms, and
unemployment (Van Vliet, 2006; Eşim, 2003; Eşim, 2000; Theis and Ketilson, 1994).

2.4 Co-operatives in Turkey
Turkey has a long, well-established history of co-operatives. Co-operative-like
organizations existed between the 13th and 19th centuries, known as the Ahi
institutions, which were based on a set of moral, economic, social and political
values that were embedded in the membership principles that emphasized fairness
and good relations between rich and poor. Some observers point to the creation
of agricultural development funds during the Ottoman Empire as some of the
first examples of rural financing for agricultural co-operatives (Okan & Okan, 2013;
Karahocaligil et al, 2011).

The founder of the Turkish Republic, Ataturk felt that co-operatives were a means
of modernizing and democratizing the mostly rural country. Later, Article 51 of
the 1961 Constitution included the provision “The Government shall take all the
measures to improve co-operatives”, which has encouraged a more proactive and
responsible role for the Government of Turkey in the promoting of co-operatives.

Today, co-operatives are present in Turkey in a variety of economic sectors.
According to the Ministry of Customs and Trade (MoCT), there are 26 different types
                                                                                                        31



of co-operatives in Turkey which carry out activities under three separate ministries:
the MoCT, the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock (MoFAL), and the Ministry
of Environment and Urban Planning (MoEUP).13 The MoCT latest published statistics
of co-operatives in Turkey (December 2014) states that there are 73,581 co-
operatives in Turkey and 7,642,520members of co-operatives.14

The MoCT regulates the largest number of types of co-operatives (18) which
represent about 25 per cent of all co-operative members in Turkey, of which the
largest types of co-operatives are transport and retail co-operatives. The MoFAL
regulates six types of co-operatives which represent 50 per cent of all co-operative
members, of which the largest types of co-operatives are agricultural development,
agricultural credit, and irrigation. Finally, the MoEUP regulates the fewest types of
co-operatives (3) but is responsible for regulating over 70 per cent of established
co-operatives in Turkey, which are in the housing sector, and are home to over 2
million co-op members.15

As a result, co-operatives make an active contribution to Turkey’s economy.
According to the National Co-operative Union of Turkey (NCUT), Turkey’s national
co-operative association, there are almost 100,000 people employed – which
is separate from being a member of a co-operative – by co-operatives in Turkey,
which does not include economic spin-offs of other businesses engaged in
value-chains where co-operatives are active. Underneath this national umbrella
organisation, co-operatives are organised in unions based on the economic sectors
where they are most active, including agriculture, rural development, transport,
forestry, and housing.16 The Central Union of Agricultural Credit Co-operatives, for
instance, represents 1.1 million members from over 1,600 primary co-operatives, 16
secondary unions, which collectively have over USD 2 billion in assets.17 The Union
of Beet Growers Co-operatives represents more than 1.6 million members organized
in 31 primary co-operatives, and conduct more than USD 3.5 billion in business




13	As will be shown in Chapter three, women’s co-operatives thus far have been formed under the MoCT and
   MoFAL.
14	 Also available at http://koop.gtb.gov.tr/data/54b539e4f293709bc0985728/
   İstatistikpercent20percent20percent20aralık.pdf (Accessed April 2015). In collaboration with the ILO, the
   MoCT has recently launched a multi-stakeholder working group with the Turkish Statistical Institute to
   take stock of its experiences, challenges and identified good practices of keeping up-to-date co-operative
   statistics in Turkey. These efforts will be informed by the ILO, the MoEU, the MoFAL, and the NCUT. See:
   http://www.ilo.org/public/english/region/eurpro/ankara/areas/multi_stakeholder_co-operative_statistics_
   workshop.htm (Accessed April 2015)
15	Statistics also cited from the MoCT, Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan, 2012.
16	A full list of these unions, their activities, and hyperlinks to the public websites are made available through
   the NCUT website, found here: http://www.turkey.co-op/ (accessed: April 2015).
17	 Source: Website of The Central Union of Turkish Agricultural Credit Co-operatives: http://int.tarimkredi.org.
   tr/index.php/en.html (accessed: Apr 2015).
annually.18 However, according to the MoCT, only 25 per cent of co-operatives
actively participate in such tertiary structures (2012). As will be discussed later,
women’s co-operatives in Turkey are in the early stages of formalizing a women’s co-
operatives union. Women’s co-operatives have not joined other co-operative unions
or the NCUT.

Co-operatives received more publicity within government and the Turkish co-
operative sectorin November 2015, as Turkey hosted thousands of co-operative
members and policy makers from around the world at the ICA Global Conference
and General Assembly.19 Hosting this prestigious international conference for co-
operatives serves to demonstrate in part the respect that Turkey’s co-operative
sector has amongst its co-operative peers around the world.

2.5 The Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan 2012–2016
A key document guiding the Government of Turkey and the co-operative sector is
the 2012–2016 Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan, published by the
MoCT. The Strategy is a product of consultations between the Government and the
co-operative sector. The Strategy is ambitious and could be considered aspirational,
given the relatively short-time frame, the number of desired interventions (total
36), the complexity of interventions, and the number of different government,
co-operative, and international actors involved. While the legal implications of
this document will be discussed later in Chapter 5, there are important elements
of the Strategy that bear mentioning here as it relates to women’s co-operatives:
First, the Strategy’s identification of weaknesses in co-operative sector; and second,
its proposed strategic activities to overcome those weaknesses. Both have a direct
bearing on women’s co-operatives in Turkey.

The Strategy lays out a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis
of the co-operative sector, which cites some available literature on co-operatives
in Turkey. Listed strengths include Turkey’s long-standing experience with co-
operatives, including constitutional provisions guaranteeing their promotion, and
examples of co-operative success. These strengths are reiterated in the literature,
mostly related to agriculture co-operatives, which notes that the success and
potential of Turkey’s co-operative sector is grounded in good performers that have
managed to remain strong and evolve with changing domestic policies as well as
global and domestic economic challenges (Okan and Okan, 2013).

The Strategy is self-critical of challenges facing Turkey’s co-operatives. The Strategy
identifies 22 weaknesses in the co-operative sector, which are then regrouped into


18	 Source: Website of The Union of Beet Growers Co-operatives: http://en.pankobirlik.com.tr/ (accessed: April
   2015).
19	 Source: http://antalya2015.co-op/ (accessed: April 2015).
                                                                                                   33



seven fields of strategic intervention. As will be seen in Chapter 3 of this report,
many of these weaknesses are similar to those weaknesses or challenges faced by
women’s co-operatives. Key elements of this extensive list, as they relates to primary,
secondary and tertiary co-operatives, are reproduced in Figure 4. Some items have
been paraphrased to ensure consistency of language with this report (e.g. primary,
secondary, tertiary co-operatives).20



            Figure 4
                           	 WEAKNESSES OF CO-OPERATIVES IN TURKEY

     •	 Primary co-operatives’ have few members and are small.

     •	 Limited numbers of co-operatives in sectors other than agriculture and housing.

     •	 Members of primary co-operatives demonstrate:
         •	 Low education level, especially in agricultural co-operatives
         •	 Low participation of members in co-operative activities
         •	 Low level of understanding of economic issues
         •	 Little understanding of co-operative culture
         •	 Little experience in managing a business
         •	 Little social capital or understanding of working co-operatively
         •	 Tertiary co-operatives are inadequate in encouraging sufficient co-operation at
            every level among the co-operatives; and play an inadequate role in providing
            training, audit, consultancy and technical services for primary co-operatives.


Source: adapted from Ministry of Customs and Trade, 2012


The Strategy also highlights the impact of the Government of Turkey’s interventions
in the co-operative sector, which has “increased the dependency of the co-
operatives to the state and co-operatives have almost become a public institution”
(MoCT, 2012). The result is enduring confusion in Turkey between the role of co-
operatives and the role of the state.

The level of control by the state of co-operatives and therefore the lack of control
by its members is an oft-cited concern that is reiterated in the literature of Turkey’s
co-operative sector. Roots of these concerns are often found in the diverse laws
governing Turkey’s co-operatives, in particular the division between co-operatives



20	 Primary co-operatives are co-operatives in which a majority of members are individual persons. A
   secondary co-operative is a co-operative in which a majority of members are themselves primary co-
   operatives. A tertiary co-operative is a co-operative in which a majority of members are themselves primary
   and/ or secondary co-operatives. Thus, what can be produced through the development and embedding
   of these levels of co-operatives is a vertical integration of support and potential operations and sales
   exchange.
housed under the MoCT and those regulated by the two other Ministries (Okan
and Okan, 2013). Aman’s research has pointed out that the result of these laws
is that the sector has co-operatives that are more democratic and others that
still operate as state institutions, and whose business shortcomings (i.e. losses)
are subsidized by the state (Aman, 2014; Mülayim, 1997). Co-operatives in the
agricultural sector in particular were not the result of an autonomous, member-
driven initiative to respond to problems or opportunities in their communities,
rather are an “instrumental institution of … agricultural policy” (Gün, 2005). Until the
mid-2000s, agricultural sales co-operatives in particular were primarily channels for
the implementation of government programs rather than operating as member
owned enterprises (Cakmak, 2004).

The Strategy attempts to respond to these weaknesses by laying out seven
sectors of strategic intervention, and 36 resulting activities. The seven sectors
of intervention are focused on transferring state responsibilities (e.g. auditing) to
the tertiary unions, strengthening tertiary co-operatives, standardizing training
for co-operative members across Turkey in a variety of areas (e.g. management,
business, etc.), increasing public education programs on co-operatives, establishing
co-operatives in key sectors, facilitating access to finance, and updating laws and
regulations that affect co-operatives. These strategic areas of intervention and
resulting activities are almost exclusively led by the MoCT, in coordination with a
variety of other state and national co-operative actors. In addition, the co-operative
development activities seem almost exclusively state led. Also, as part of the
strategic target No. 3.7, actions aiming to increase women’s welfare by gathering
under the umbrella of cooperatives are being taken in cooperation with relevant
institutions.

The approach taken in the Strategy can be juxtaposed with some of the available
literature on examples of successful co-operatives in Turkey. Researchershave
highlighted examples of successful co-operatives in Turkey that have benefited that
from entrepreneurial management that prioritized members’ cultural, social and
economic needs, remained open and transparent, and provided quality, affordable
goods; and further allowed their co-operatives to make structural changes that
made them more autonomous from the state (Okan and Okan, 2013). A number
of researchers have researched and described examples of successful, small,
autonomous rural agricultural and development co-operatives in Turkey (Başaran
et al, 2014; Can et al, 2014; Erdal et al, 2014; Özdemir et al, 2011). One of the lessons
learned from rural development policies and implementation of these policies in
Turkey is that rural development programs need to be developed from the ground
up; and that one of the most powerful ways of developing Turkey’s economy in
rural areas is by supporting the establishment of “independent, autonomous, and
effective organisations, especially co-operatives” (Gülçubuk, 2015). Therefore, while
the Strategy’s planned activities address certain weaknesses in co-operatives, an
                                                                                                  35



argument could be made that how these activities are implemented – namely by
different ministries – needs to be balanced with the need to have well run, member-
owned independent and autonomous co-operatives.

2.6 Women in co-operatives in Turkey
There is limited publically available information on women in co-operatives in Turkey.
Official government data is not-disaggregated between male and female co-operative
members. Little publically available information was found exploring the impact of existing
Turkish co-operatives on their women members. With respect to women’s co-operatives in
Turkey, they are considered a type of co-operatives regulated by the MoCT. The Strategy
includes an activity calling explicitly for the establishment of at least 20 women’s co-
operatives, as a means to “improve their entrepreneurial ability and their participation in
the economy as actors.” This activity is the only mention of women’s co-operatives, or even
women in Turkey in general, in the Strategy. It is also the only explicit mention of the MoFSP
in the Strategy.


There is information on the lack of women in agricultural co-operatives in Turkey.
Different sources of information indicate that most agricultural co-operatives
have almost exclusively (more than 90 per cent) men as members (Çelik Ateş
et al, 2015; Can et al, 2015; Okan and Okan, 2013; Karakocagil et al, 2011). Some
authors have researched extensively the roles of and challenges faced by women in
agriculture in Turkey and have proposed co-operatives as one means of overcoming
these challenges (Gülçubuk, 2010). The MoFAL reports since 2004, 49 agricultural
development co-operatives have been established where the majority of members
are reportedly women. 21 The Ministry reports that these co-operatives were
established thanks to subsidy programs that the Ministry offers for co-operatives,
with grants totaling USD 8 million (Okan and Okan, 2013). These co-operatives
have further been able to benefit from agricultural extension services offered by
the Ministry in their fields of activities, for instance animal husbandry and breeding,
animal diseases, milking techniques and hygiene, greenhouse cultivation, and barn
care. A further discussion of these women’s co-operatives is presented in Chapter 3
and in Appendix 3.

One type of co-operative that has emerged in the last 15 years independently from
the government and the co-operative sector are women’s co-operatives, which are
the key interest in this report. There is limited research available on women’s co-
operatives in Turkey. Three pieces of independent research have been identified
regarding women’s co-operatives in Turkey.

The first study, by Gulen Özdemir from the Department of Agricultural Economics
at Namįk Kemal University, is based on data collected in 2005 when there were


21	Source: Written communication from the Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Livestock (March 2015).
only 36 women’s co-operatives (2013). The study survey was completed by 34 of
the co-operatives and three members and one manager from each co-operative
were interviewed. Özdemir’s research looked at women co-operative member’s
perceptions of themselves and their roles in co-operatives and within their families.
Özdemir’s found that women had different motivations for joining co-operatives. An
important motivation was that women felt that within their co-operative, they could
find unity, solidarity, and develop self-confidence – this is the social capital cited
in the 2012 Turkish Co-operative Strategy and Action Plan. Women interviewed
by Özdemir felt that their co-operatives were started autonomously and from the
“bottom-up”, women started these co-operatives out of real needs for themselves
and their community. Similar to weaknesses identified in the Strategy, weaknesses
in women’s co-operatives were identified as a lack of integration between the
different co-operatives; and the members had low skills in managing a business and
governing a co-operative (Özdemir, 2013).

The other two pieces of research are much more limited in their reach and
explore specifically how women’s co-operatives in Turkey can impact women’s
empowerment. Research has been conducted into a women’s textile co-operative
founded in 1982. The co-operative was founded in part to emancipate women,
assist women in recognizing the value of their work and to promote and sustain
women’s knowledge and skills as weavers. The research highlights the dilemma that
women who worked in the co-operative faced: their earnings in the co-operative
went to their husband or their father.

Research has also explored the impact of six women’s co-operatives in the Istanbul
area on women’s empowerment (Varol, 2013). All of these co-operatives were
formed between 2004 and 2006. While the research used a very small sample and
is based largely on individual interviews, some of the findings remain relevant.
Five of the six co-operatives benefited directly from externally funded projects or
support, such as by European Union, or ongoing, targeted support by organisations
such as KEDV.22 Most of the co-operatives at one point or another have benefited
from preferential treatment by municipal government, such as subsidized rent and
utilities. Women supported the ideal of the co-operative model, but faced economic
difficulties in having the co-operatives succeed as businesses and social pressures
from home when they were not earning any income from the co-operatives. As will
been shown, this is consistent with the research findings of this study.




22	KEDV aims to support women’s access to economic development. They have supported the development
   of many enterprise women’s co-operatives and continue to play a role in the start-up of women’s co-
   operatives in Turkey. This may explain why the organization is featured in the minds of participants.
                                                                            37   3

3
The Emergence of Multipurpose
Women’s Co-operatives

Over the past decade, the number of co-operatives owned and operated by women
in Turkey has expanded threefold, yet there are few studies of these co-operatives
and little data available to build upon.

This research study aims to address those gaps. In this section, the following
questions for the terms of reference for this research study are addressed in more
detail, not in this particular order:

  •	 What is the current situation of active women’s co-operatives– membership,
     funding, longevity, growth, field of operation, and nature of operation?

  •	 What are the main reasons behind the inactivity of women’s co-operatives?

  •	 What are the main reasons behind the closure of women’s co-operatives?

  •	 What are the main differences between women-only and other types of co-
     operatives?

  •	 What are the project experiences and capacities of the co-operatives? What is
     the contribution of the co-operatives to the empowerment of women?

  •	 Are co-operatives providing childcare services only for their members or at the
     community level? What constraints do they face?

The story that emerges from the research is that most women’s co-operatives
are started, governed, and owned by women are doing a wide array of activities,
and hence are referred to here as “multipurpose women’s co-operatives”. These
co-operatives are multipurpose in the sense that they conduct wide variety of
activities, the two most important of which are providing jobs for women while
simultaneously providing a social outlet for women. The majority of their members
is married women, between 40 and 60 years old, with one to three children, and
varied levels of education. For many, the co-operative represents the first source of
income that they have ever earned independently. This income is important both
for their households, as well as their self-esteem.
Women’s co-operatives are small, mostly with less than 25 members. Importantly,
these co-operatives are actively owned by their members, with strong participation
in the governance and leadership of the co-operative. Their most important
source of support to date has been the women’s co-operative sector themselves,
whether for training, funding, or solidarity. The women’s co-operatives are not linked
extensively with the rest of Turkey’s vast co-operative sector or with the Government
of Turkey. These co-operatives face several internal and external constraints, which
lead to closure of women’s co-operatives. Such constraints are revisited in the
Chapter 5 on supportive programs available to women’s co-operatives, and inform
the recommendations of the final chapter.

3.1 Profile of women’s co-operatives
As noted in the Introduction at the outset of this report, a total of 101 co-operatives
were reached, the majority of which are active co-operatives. A further 53 co-
operatives were inaccessible.23 Given the variety of methodological approaches, the
findings presented in this report are considered representative of the women’s co-
operative sector, women’s co-operatives and their members and beneficiaries.

3.1.1 Defining a “women’s co-operative”
The co-operative law Number 1163 states that co-operatives are, “Partnerships
with legal personality that have convertible partners and convertible capitals
that are founded by real and legal persons with the objectives of providing
and maintaining the partners’ specific economic interests and especially their
necessities regarding their occupation and subsistence through help, support
and surety with the contribution of their labor force and money are called
as cooperatives .” (Official Gazette No 13195, 1969)The MoCT, which regulates
women’s co-operatives, defines a co-operative “as an autonomous association of
persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social, and cultural
needs and aspirations through a jointly-owned and democratically-controlled
enterprise”(Ministry of Customs and Trade, 2015).The MoCT’s definition is taken
directly from the International Co-operative Alliance’s (ICA) definition of co-
operatives.

There is no official definition of a women’s co-operative in Turkey. However, women’s
co-operatives have their definition, as demonstrated by the Women’s Co-operative
Union (SIMURG), which defines women’s co-operatives as “structures formed from
local women groups to develop services based on their needs and priorities”
(SIMURG, 2015). SIMURG’s builds on the universal understanding of women’s co-
operatives as being by women and for women. As well as the definition of social co-



23	Every effort was made to contact all women’s co-operatives that were identified by the researchers.
                                                                                39



operatives as exemplified in Italy, Sweden and other European countries. As defined
by International Organization of Industrial and Service Co-operatives (CICOPA),
“social cooperatives are specialized in the provision of social services or reintegration
of disadvantaged and marginalized workers (disabled, long-term unemployed,
former detainees, addicts, etc.)” (CICOPA 2015).

The research conducted here indicates that in coming together to perform their
co-operative economic activities, women worry about insufficientservices for
themselves – such as technical training and women-centred training; for their
children – such as early child education centres; and for the wider community
of women – such as social spaces, work spaces, and safe spaces. Women’s co-
operatives end up doing a combination of social and economic activities, some
of which are income generating for the co-operative and the workers, others are
not income generating and are for members and the wider community’s benefit.
Significantly, the data that emerges from the research, the social and economic
aspects of the co-operative are equally as important.

Women’s co-operatives are hence understood here as multipurpose in that they
provide economic as well as social benefits. Rather than working alone, they often
come together for a purpose such as selling handicrafts or milk jointly. This is
particularly true as many of these activities generally traditionally take place in the
home.

Home-based work is common in Turkey, especially for women.Home-based workers
are defined as a) own-account workers and contributing family workers helping
the own-account workers, involved in the production of goods and services, in
their homes, for the market and b) workers carrying out work in their homes for
remuneration, resulting in a product or service as specified by the employer(s),
irrespective of who provides the equipment, materials or other inputs used, and
those contributing family workers helping such workers (WIEGO, 2015). Own-
account workers are those workers who, working on their own account or with
one or more partners, hold the type of job defined as a self- employed job, and
have not engaged on a continuous basis any employees to work for them during
the reference period (OECD, 2015). Home-based work is often within the garment,
automobile, electronics, toys, food and packaging industries in Turkey.

3.1.2 Status, age, type and size of women’s co-operatives
This research study surveyed 101 women’s co-operatives in the summer of 2014.
Through the survey, the status of the co-operatives can be determined according
to their stage of development: start-up, operational and expansion for active co-
operatives; inactive, terminated, and closed for inactive co-operatives (Figure 5).
Expansion refers to when a co-operative decides to expand its number of members
and/or offering of goods/services. The difference between terminated and closed
is purely legal. Terminated means that the co-operative has voted to stop activities
and officially close, but have to wait a year until they can file to be officially closed.
Closed means the co-operative has legally ceased to exist.


                             BREAKDOWN OF WOMEN’S
  Figure 5
			                          CO-OPERATIVES BY STATUS (N=101)

 Durum                                                                Kadın kooperatiflerinin sayısı
 Başlangıç                                                                                                2
 Faaliyet halinde                                                                                         47
 Büyüyor                                                                                                  14
 Aktif                                                                                                63

 İnaktif                                                                                                  10
 Fesih sürecinde                                                                                          8
 Kapandı                                                                                                  20
 İnaktif                                                                                              38

 Toplam                                                                                              101




Sixty three of the co-operatives surveyed identified as being active – either start
up, operational or expanding. While 63 active women’s co-operatives is not a
large number, it does point to interest and opportunity. There are 38 inactive co-
operatives – those that are either inactive, terminated or closed – which suggests a
need to address the reasons why so many women’s co-operatives meet challenges
they could not overcome.24

Figure 6 presents a breakdown of women’s co-operatives according to region and
status. This figure provides a general picture of women’s co-operatives in Turkey.




24	 For more information see http://ica.co-op/en/media/news/co-op-statistics-multi-stakeholder-working-
   group-launched-turkey (obtained May 4, 2015)
                                                                                                        41


                                  BREAKDOWN OF WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
                       Figure 6
                     			        	 BY REGION AND STATUS (N=101)

                                                                                     INACTIVE WOMEN’S
                         ACTIVE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
                                                                                       CO-OPERATIVES

                           Type of co-
             of co-ops                              Field of activity              of co-ops   Type of co-ops
 REGIONS                    operative


                         1 enterprise      Income generation and other types                   4 enterprise
  Akdeniz       2                                                                     6
                         1 agriculture     of activities                                       2 agriculture


                                           1 income generation and social
    Doğu                 1 enterprise                                                          2 enterprise
                2                          aimed activities                           4
  Anadolu                1 agriculture                                                         2 agriculture
                                           1 income generation

                                           9 income generation and other
                         7 enterprise      types of activities (mainly trainings               3 enterprise
      Ege       11       1 consumers       for women, socio-cultural and              5        1 small arts
                         3 agriculture     awareness raising)                                  1 agriculture
                                           2 just other activities

                                           11 income generation and social
                                           aimed activities (mainly trainings
Güneydoğu                11 enterprise
                13                         for women, socio-cultural activities,      1        Enterprise
  Anadolu                2 agriculture
                                           guidance to services and advocacy)
                                           2 income generation

                                           4 income generation and other
                                           social aimed activities (mainly                     2 enterprise
                         5 enterprise
İç Anadolu      10                         trainings for women)                       6        1 small arts
                         5 agriculture
                                           4 income generation                                 3 agriculture
                                           2 social aimed activities

                                           4 income generation and other
                         3 enterprise      social aimed activities (mainly                     2 enterprise
 Karadeniz      6                                                                     4
                         3 agriculture     guidance to other services)                         2 agriculture
                                           2 income generation

                                                                                               8 enterprise
                         15 enterprise     14 income generation and social
                                                                                               1 small arts
                         3 agriculture     aimed activities
  Marmara       19                                                                    12       1 consumers
                         1 manufacturing   4 income generation
                                                                                               1 manufacturing
                         and marketing     1 socio-cultural activities
                                                                                               and marketing
Comparing the inactivity of women’s co-operatives with the broader number of inactive
co-operatives in Turkey is not straightforward. Clear data on the number of inactive co-
operatives in Turkey was not obtained. The number of inactive co-operatives in Turkey
is referred in the Turkish Co-operative Action Plan in a general sense, noting that co-
operatives that close tend to close because they were not successful businesses; or because
they were temporary in nature (i.e. housing co-operatives). More broadly, the trend in
Turkey has been a reduction in the number of co-operatives, from a little more than 84,232
cited in the Action Plan to 73,581 in the latest statistics from the MoCT (2014). Co-operative
numbers in other countries also fluctuate, as co-operatives merge or dissolve. As noted in
Section 2.4, a new co-operative statistics committee has been struck in Turkey. The work
of this committee may result in most standard and uniform data collection active and
inactive co-operatives, within which women’s co-operatives would be included, making
comparisons more straightforward and meaningful.


According to Figure 7, the most number of active co-operatives have been around for ten
years, followed by one, three and four years. In terms of inactive co-operatives, years two,
three, four and five are years when women’s co-operatives canbecome inactive. The shift
from active to inactive status is revisited in Section 3.1.3.



            LENGTH OF TIME OPEN FOR ACTIVE AND INACTIVE
 Figure 7
			       	 WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES (N=87) 25




Note: 14 inactive co-operatives didn’t provide their closing date.




25	 İnaktif kooperatiflerin tümü bir kapanış tarihi bildirmemiştir.
                                                                                            43



  Figure 8
			        	 SIZE OF WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES IN 2014 (N= 96)




With respect to the size of women’s co-operatives, almost half of active women’s co-
operatives have between 7-24 members (Figure 8).

The type of co-operative has been taken from the legal categorization. In terms
of the types of women’s co-operatives, 63 per cent of the women’s co-operatives
identified as enterprise co-operatives and 28 per cent identified as agriculture co-
operatives.26 The following figure (Figure 9)presents only active co-operatives. Five
co-operatives did not answer both questions in the survey so they are not included
in this figure.



             ACTIVE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES BASED
  Figure 9
			        	 ON TYPE AND MEMBERSHIP SIZE (N=58)

                                                                                             Total
 TYPE                         7-14       15-24       25-34       35-49        50-74   75+
                                                                                            (Type)

 Enterprise                    14          11           6           5           1      2         39
 Manufacturing/                 0           1           0           0           0      0         1
 Marketing
 Consumers                      1           0           0           0           0      0         1
 Small Arts                     0           0           0           1           0      0         1




26	 Enterprise co-operatives are presented in further detail in Appendix 5.
Figure 9shows there is a range in sizes for enterprise and agricultural development
women’s co-ops. The majority of agricultural women’s co-operatives were fairly large,
with five out of 16 having over 75 members. Enterprise women’s co-operatives are
generally smaller in size, with 25 of the 39 active enterprise women’s co-operatives
having between 7-24 members. That being said, enterprise women’s co-operatives
were found in all membership size categories, thus indicating that a preferred
membership size does not seem to exist. When the survey was run to see if any
trends emerged regarding women’s co-operatives’ size, it was found that membership
size does not really affect how a women’s co-operative is going to be run or which
challenges it will face.

Given that the two most prevalent types of women’s co-operatives are enterprise
co-operatives and agricultural co-operatives, more lengthy descriptions of each
have been included in Appendix 5 and 3. While these two types of co-operatives
are noticeably un-networked with each other; and have different origins – all of
the agricultural co-operatives are started by the support of MoFAL and enterprise
co-operatives are almost exclusively self-started – these women’s co-operatives
nevertheless meet similar needs of their members. This is further explored in the
following sections of this chapter. Furthermore, a more detailed description of when
and how co-operatives provide childcare services is presented in Appendix 4.

3.2 Why are women’s co-operatives created?
An important element defining the multipurpose women’s co-operative is that
the majority are created by women, for women. According to the survey, 42 of the
active women’s co-operatives were started by women in the community out of 63,
as well 23 out of 38 of the inactive women’s co-operatives were started by women in
the community. The remaining women’s co-operatives either began as a result of a
project, or were first created by NGOs or public institutions.

The research data from the survey demonstrates that the top three reasons for
starting a women’s co-operative directly relate to solving problems for women (Figure
10). Women’s co-operatives were asked to provide the top five reasons for starting
their co-operative and to rank these reasons from most important to least important,
with “1” being most important. The figurebelowshows the number of active and
inactive women’s co-operatives who chose each category in their top three and their
given rank. These include providing jobs for women, empowering women socially
and providing solutions for common women’s issues. Providing jobs for women was
ranked in the top three reasons for start-up for 81 per cent of active co-operatives
and 68 per cent of inactive co-operatives. Empowering women was found in the top
three for 79 per cent of active co-operatives and 68 per cent of inactive co-operatives.
Lastly, creating solutions for common women’s issues made it into the top three of 56
per cent of active co-operatives and 48 per cent of inactive co-operatives.
                                                                                                                            45


                                        REASONS FOR STARTING
                            Figure 10 	
                           			THE          WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVE (N=101)


                                      ACTIVE CO-OPS (N = 63)                            INACTIVE CO-OPS (N = 38)

  CO-OP CREATED TO:           First      Second       Third       Total        First     Second        Third               Total


       Provide jobs for
                                59%         17%           5%        81%           55%        13%             0%                  68%
               women

     Empower women
                                17%         38%         24%         79%           11%        39%           18%                   68%
             Socially

   Solutions common
                                16%           8%        32%         56%           13%        29%           47%                     0%
      women’s issues

    Childcare services            6%          3%          2%        11%            3%         5%             0%                    8%

Organize and empower
                                  5%        10%         14%         29%           13%        18%           21%                   53%
             members

Provide social services
                                  5%          2%          5%        11%            0%        11%           11%                     0%
            for comm.

    Provide goods for
                                  2%          5%          3%        10%            3%         3%             5%                  11%
          community

        Institutionalize
                                  6%          6%          5%        17%            5%         0%             5%                  11%
   informal comm/org




                           There have been peaks and valleys in the frequency of the establishment of
                           women’s co-operatives in Turkey since 1999 (see Figure 11). The highest peak
                           occurred in 2004. That year, a number of women in various communities across
                           Turkey that had been conceptualizing and working on pre-establishment activities,
                           such as networking, feasibility studies, trust building, and business development,
                           completed these activities and established their women’s co-operatives. Also at this
                           time, key supportive organizations reached a critical point in knowledge building,
                           networking, funding and materials. For example, a manual was collaboratively
                           produced by key supportive organizations specifically to support women’s co-
                           operative development.27




                           27	This is called The Handbook of Women’s Co-operatives and was written and produced by KEDV.
In 2009 there was a drop in the creation of new women’s co-operatives. According
to the survey and interviews, during this time as well as throughout life of many
of the women’s co-operatives, women’s co-operatives faced capitalization issues,
legal challenges, high legal and administrative fees, and lack of support. These
challenges are discussed further in Section 3.5 of this chapter. It was at this time
when the membership fee was changed from 1TL to 100TL thus causing women to
reconsider and re-plan their co-operative establishment. In 2010 there was another
peak because there was a growth in women’s co-operatives in the agriculture
sector. In this case, co-operative organizing had gained some momentum in the
agricultural sector because of subsidy programs provided by the MoFAL to support
women farmer’s through positive discrimination, as well as training specifically for
women from co-ownership agricultural development co-operatives.


              WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES START DATE BASED
  Figure 11 	
			           ON ACTIVE AND INACTIVE (N=93)




Many (10) currently active women’s co-operatives were established in 2004(Figure
11). In more recent years – 2010, 2011 and 2013 – eight currently active women’s co-
operatives were established. The largest number of inactive women’s co-operative
was established in 2010 (6). From the survey there does not seem to be a trend
based on the year established and the chance of survival.

In order to understand this evaluation of women’s co-operatives, the research
data from the surveys, interviews, and micronarratives is describe the motivations
for conceptualizing and developing women’s co-operatives. The motivations for
starting a women’s co-operative can be broken down into two categories: Those
about serving women’s needs through a women’s co-operative and those for using
the co-operative model as an organizing structure.
                                                                                   47



Through the interviews and micronarratives, founders, members and representatives
of boards expressed a number of reasons for forming women’s co-operatives. First and
most importantly, they felt a women’s co-operative would help provide local women
with employment opportunities that would give them a chance to attain some level
of economic freedom and to stop exploitation of home-based workers. Seventy-six
per cent of all women’s co-operatives surveyed (active and inactive, n = 101) were
started to provide job opportunities for women. They wanted to support women to
earn money through collective work and to make women’s economic viability more
visible in the community.

The second reason, which is related to income generation, was to empower women.
Seventy-five per cent of all women’s co-operatives surveyed wanted to empower
women socially and fifty-two per cent wanted to find solutions to common women’s
issues. An example of an active women’s co-operative mission statement captures this
sentiment:

“To provide for members’ economic, social and cultural needs within the scope of economic
activities including the production of goods and services to be marketed to meet their needs
thereby, to protect, improve and support their economic, social and cultural interests, and
ensure members’ environment is healthy and improved.”

A third motivation was to produce goods and services for a number of targeted
audiences including for the public, tourists, and the community (pastries, olive oil,
milk, and handicrafts), for women in the community (training, hubs for networking,
childcare) and for children (early childhood learning centres). Often specific goods or
services were offered because founders saw a gap in the community or a niche market.

Finally, founders established women’s co-operatives as a means of increasing
awareness of women’s issues and rights among women themselves, as well as
among the wider community. They specifically wanted to increase awareness that, as
entrepreneurs, women could be active economically and contribute to the national
economy.

Founders also spoke about their motivations for using the co-operative model.
First, they felt it was the model that would best support their goals. As one founder
disclosed:

“We organized under co-op model because we thought that this would serve better for the
purpose of women reaching their common aims. ”

These women also felt it would be easier to work together rather than to struggle
alone. The co-operative model is a good platform for this, as expressed by one co-
operative member:
“To be able to overcome some difficulties. Individual initiatives are not enough (finance,
communication, marketing). When you do these jointly, you can be heard and give
support. When you unite, you get stronger. It brings success and self-confidence.”

Third, organizers found that they could not do business under other organizational
structures, such as the NGO or foundation law, as these did not facilitate economic
activities; the co-operative laws legislates an entity that has an economic nature. As
one founder of a women’s co-operative put it:

“We also considered starting an association but the laws on co-operatives were more
flexible so we found it more appropriate.”

Founders also liked the flat, non-hierarchical nature of the co-operative model.
Other types of organizational structures such as associations and foundations have
their purposes, but founders were looking for something different. As one of them
stated:

“Foundations have been contaminated. Co-operatives accept democratic participation,
they’re egalitarian, they have transparent accountability. In these ways co-operatives are
positive. ”

The findings in Özdemir, 2013study concur with previous findings about motivations for
forming a women’s co-operative. That women’s motivations for joining the co-operative
included: social and economic sharing, equality and employment, plus there are legal
limitations of associations because of their activity fields. Women felt that within them, they
could find unity, solidarity, and develop self-confidence (Özdemir, 2013).


Ultimately, the picture that the survey, interviews, micronarratives and literature
paint is that women’s co-operatives emerge from the local and the grassroots.
Women’s co-operatives emerge in order to cope with women’s socio-economic
challenges. They directly involve women as the creators, designers, workers,
managers and governors of their enterprise and they choose the co-operative
model because it allows them to do so. As seen, , women’s co-operatives in
Turkey are by-and-large organized from the ground up. As a result, their internal
stakeholders – or members – demonstrate strong participation and ownership in
the operations of their co-operatives, which is further described below.

3.3 What do women’s co-operatives do?
Women’s co-operatives are different from other types of co-operatives in Turkey
in a number of ways. Women’s co-operatives are multipurpose by nature, offering
both social and economic goods and services, unlike other co-operatives in the
Turkish co-operative sector, which focus primarily on economic activities. Like other
co-operatives, they are driven by their membership, but are specifically made for
                                                                             49



women, by women. They are grassroots organizations, employing a bottom-up
approach to start-up, operations, management, governance and membership. Also
different from other co-operatives in Turkey, women’s co-operatives offer multiple
different goods and services.

Women’s co-operatives in Turkey undertake many different types of activities (see
Figure 12). When asked in the survey to choose as many activities as their co-
operative offers, the top activity is income generation, followed by socio-cultural
activities and a number of related social activities aimed at improving the lives of
women and their communities. The final two types of activities listed, early childcare
and education services for disabled children, are specialized services not offered by
all women’s co-operatives (see Appendix 4).


              WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES’ ACTIVITIES BASED
  Figure 12 	
			           ON ACTIVE AND INACTIVE
			           (PERCENTAGE AT PRESENT) (N=101)




When looking into common combinations of co-operative activities among active
women’s co-operatives, most co-operatives currently offer more than one activity.
Out of the 63 active co-operatives, only 15 (24 per cent) took part in only one
activity listed in Figure 12. Although there were no instances where a women’s co-
operative offered all ten suggested activities, there were nine cases (14 per cent)
where eight of the suggested activities were offered, seven cases (11 per cent)
where a co-operative offered seven of the proposed activities, and eight cases each
(13 per cent) where either three or four suggested activities were pursued by an
active women’s co-operative.
            Figure 13 	 WHAT MEMBERS REPORTED RECEIVING FROM
	                       WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)

    SERVICES MEMBERS RECEIVED                                     OF TIMES REPORTED


    Socio-cultural services                                              141

    Guidance to services provided by other institutions (e.g.            129
    municipal services, other NGOs)

    Training (e.g. gender roles, anti-violence, IT, leadership,          126
    financial literacy, entrepreneurship)

    Job skills (e.g. sewing, handicraft, cooking)                         78

    Access to marketing information                                       73

    Income generations from co-ops (e.g. food production,                 35
    jams, handicrafts)

    Access to fair priced goods and services                              29

    Other                                                                 23

    None                                                                  18

    Early childhood care and education                                    17

    Loan                                                                  12

    Learning centres for disabled children                                8

    Agricultural technical assistance                                     7

    Savings groups                                                        6




Of the nine instances where co-operatives offered eight activities, all but one
provided the exact same combination of activities. These were income generation,
capacity building, skills training, community needs assessments, social/cultural
services, guidance to services, public awareness and advocacy and lobbying.

The most common combination overall of specific activities was income generation
and social/cultural activities, which could be found within 57 per cent of active
women’s co-operatives. The second most common combination of activities
included income generation, social and cultural services and public awareness
(40 per cent). In both of these instances, the activities presented were not the
                                                                                                 51



                only activities provided by the women’s co-operatives. This further speaks to the
                multipurpose nature of women’s co-operatives.

                Information was also obtained from the micronarratives about the activities or
                services that members or beneficiaries had received from their women’s co-
                operative. The multipurpose nature of women’s co-operatives is further confirmed
                from the member perspective; the mix of economic activities (such as job skills,
                income generation, and business training) and social activities (such as socio-
                cultural activities and gender training) are clearly present. The important role of
                women’s co-operatives for women’s empowerment (such as providing training for
                anti-violence and leadership) and as a catalyst for women and the co-operative
                in networking, being a player in and supporting the wider community (such as
                providing guidance to services) also begins to emerge. Active and inactive women’s
                co-operatives are treated together in Figure 13.

                             BREADTH OF GOODS AND SERVICES OFFERED
                 Figure 14 	
                			BY WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES OVER TIME

GOODS & SERVICES                             ACTIVE                             INACTIVE

                                 At Start        At Present Change   At Start        At Present Change


    Gelir getirici faaliyetler              53         57       4               26           3        -23

  Sosyo-kültürel faaliyetler                38         40       2               19           2        -17


     Kadınlar için kapasite                 28         29       1               14           1        -13
    geliştirme programları

           Beceri eğitimleri                26         27       1               16           2        -14

     Toplumsal farkındalık                  26         30       4               10           1         -9
                geliştirme

       Savunuculuk ve lobi                  19         22       3               11           2         -9

  Toplumsal ihtiyaç tespiti                 17         14      -3                7           1         -6

  Hizmetlere yönlendirme                    15         22       7                7           1         -6

     Erken çocuk bakım ve                    8          8       0                5           0         -5
         eğitim hizmetleri

Engelli çocuklar için eğitim                 3          2      -1                0           0         0
Women’s co-operatives offer a broad breadth of goods and services (Figure 14).
As discussed earlier, not all of these generate income; some are done for social
purposes.

There has been a steady growth in the number of goods and services offered by
active women’s co-operatives. When looking at gains/losses in thevariety of goods
and services specific to each women’s co-operatives, the majority of active women’s
co-operativescontinueto offer the same goods and services they did at start-up
(41 of the 63 active co-ops). Eight of the active women’s co-operatives surveyed
dropped goods or services (four dropped one service, two dropped two services
and one dropped five). Fifteen of the active co-ops gained goods and services, with
six offering one extra service, six offering two new services, two offering four new
services and one offering six new services. Some services, notably early childhood
care and education for disabled children are much more rarely offered than more
common services such as income generation activities and social-cultural activities.

Women’s co-operatives address unique needs for their members and their
communities, through the diverse and multiple nature of their economic and social
activities. According to the survey, respondents identified income generation as
the top need that is being addressed for members and their communities, which is
the primary reason for forming a co-operative (Figure 15).28 Women’s co-operatives
also support skill building to help managers and members improve the way they
run the co-operative or their spin-off businesses, as well as other capacity building
events and training. Following this are a number of needs of a more social nature
that do not generate income, but that represent needs that women’s co-operatives
have identified and are attempting to fill. In many cases the women’s co-operative
becomes a safe place for women to congregate, network, discuss women’s and
community issues, and take action.




28	From Figure 17, 19 women have identified income generation for their community. This reflects that depth
   of some members understanding of their women’s co-operative existing for more than their personal
   economic (and social) benefit. That the women’s co-operative actually provide income generation
   opportunities for the community.
                                                                                                  53


              UNIQUE NEEDS WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
  Figure 15 	
			           ARE ADDRESSING FOR THEIR MEMBER AND
			IN THEIR COMMUNITIES

                                                             Members/Beneficiaries*          Community*

 Income generation                                                                      54                  19
 Socializing/solidarity                                                                 47                  30
 Skils building for production and marketing                                            41                   7
 building programs for women
 Better status as women in the family and                                               39                  27
 community
 Trainings/capacity building                                                            38                  21
 Marketing/sales oppurtunities                                                          37                   6
 Raising awareness on rights as a woman                                                 36                  25
 Good governance skills                                                                 36                  19
 Entrepreneurship opportunities                                                         33                  11
 Access to public services                                                              23                  14
 Child care and education services                                                      10                   6



In the survey sample there are 70 co-operatives identified as urban and 28 as rural
(three are unidentifiable). Only women’s co-operatives located in rural areas are
agricultural co-operatives. And all urban women’s co-operatives are enterprise co-
operatives. There also are manufacturing and marketing, consumers and small arts
women’s co-operatives in urban areas. What this shows is that women in rural areas
are not turning to the co-operative model to produce core goods or services that
fall outside of agriculture.

3.4 What does a women’s co-operative member and beneficiary look like?
For the purpose of this research, a women’s co-operative member is understood to
be someone that is an official member with a share or shares in the women’s co-
operative. A beneficiary is understood as someone who participates in the activities
and/or benefits from the services or goods offered by the women’s co-operative
without being its’ member. About 90 per cent of the micronarrative respondents
were members (240), and about 10 per cent were identified as beneficiaries (14).29

Women’s co-operative members tend to be middle aged women, married, with one
to three children. Although members span all age groups, 87 per cent are between
31-60 years old and majority are between 41-60 years old. Most beneficiaries were
between 41-50 years old (Figure 16).


29	 The members and beneficiary profiles are created from data from the micronarratives tool and are from
   both active and inactive women’s co-operatives.
        Figure 16     	 AGE OF MEMBERS AND BENEFICIARIES (N=250)

          AGE              MEMBERS (N=240)               BENEFICIARIES (N=10)

     20 and under                    1                              0
         21-30                      19                              1
         31-40                      36                              3
         41-50                      96                              7
         51-60                      77                              3
          60+                        6                              0
       No answer                     5                              0



Most members are married (75 per cent) while others are single (12 per cent),
widowed (5 per cent) and divorced (7.5 per cent). In terms of beneficiaries, 86 per
cent are married while the other 14 per cent are divorced. In terms of children, only
14.6 per cent of members do not have children. Most women have between one
and three children (76 per cent) while nine per cent of the women surveyed have
either four or five children.

The women’s co-operative model is being taken up by and used by women with
different educational backgrounds (Figure 17). Of the diverse range of education levels,
three most common are primary completed (26 per cent), high school completed (23
per cent) and university completed (20 per cent) for members. It is the same education
profile for beneficiaries – the highest level of education most have completed is
primary school (50 per cent), followed by high school at 21 percent.



 Figure 17 	 EDUCATION LEVELS FOR MEMBERS
			AND BENEFICIARIES




			
                                                                                                                 55


                            EDUCATION LEVELS FOR MEMBERS AND
                Figure 18 	
              			           BENEFICIARIES BASED ON STATUS OF CO-OPERATIVE




              As seen in Figure 18, there is no relationship between education level and status
              (active or inactive) for women’s co-operatives. When it comes to income earned
              through the co-operative, not every member of a women’s co-operative is looking
              to have an income from the co-operative, whether through wages or return of
              surplus or profit sharing through a patronage dividend. In many cases, members
              or beneficiaries are looking for services (such as child care) or goods (such as
              common cooking product like olive oil) at reasonable prices. They do not work for
              the women’s co-operative; therefore, they do not earn income.

              In many ways membership size versus projected revenue are as one would expect (Figure 19).30


                                            ORTAK SAYISIYLA KARŞILAŞTIRMALI ÖNGÖRÜLEN
                          Şekil 19
                                            GELIR (MEVCUT YIL) (AKTIF) (N=58)

                               5,000-          10,000-        25,001-         50,001-          100,001-         250,000
               0-5,000TL
                              10,000TL        25,000TL       50,000TL        100,000TL        250,000TL           TL +
 7-14 ortak
                    5              2               5              2               0                 0              0
    (n=16)
15-24 ortak
                    1              2              2               4               2                 2              0
    (n=14)
25-34 ortak
                    0              0              1               2               2                 1             0
      (n=9)
35-49 ortak
                    2              0              1               2               0                 0             1
      (n=8)
50-74 ortak
                    1              0              0               1               0                 0             1
      (n=4)
 75+ ortak
                    2              0              1               1               1                 1             1
     (n=7)




              30	Only 58 active co-operatives provided membership size and thus, were included in the figure.
Women’s co-operatives with 7-14 members most commonly are part of the lowest
revenue bracket, but can range up to 50,000TL. It is not until membership size
rises to 35+ that co-operatives start reporting revenue of over 250,000TL. That
being said, one thing this chart shows is that increase in membership size does
not automatically mean that there will be an increase in projected revenue. There
are cases where membership sizes as low as 35 to over 75 members only make
0-5000TL a year, while in some instance the smaller membership sizes such as 15-34
members report making as high as 100,001-250,000TL. Excluding the 7-14 members
category, there seems to be quite a bit of flexibility among co-ops between
membership size and revenue. This means that there are likely other factors, such
as sectorsupports that have been successfully accessed, that more directly affect
annual revenue than membership size.



There does not appear to be any identifiable relationship between membership
size and average number of women benefiting from co-operative annually (Figure
20). Most co-operatives benefit 1-50 women annually, which is reasonable since the
sizes provided were from 0-75+.



                         AVERAGE NUMBER OF WOMEN BENEFITING FROM
         Figure 20
                         WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES ANNUALLY VERSUS
			                      MEMBERSHIP SIZE (ACTIVE) (N=57)

                           AVERAGE NUMBER OF WOMEN BENEFITING FROM CO-OPS ANNUALLY
                             1-50          51-100            101-200             201-300        301+

        7-14 Members          10              2                  1                  0            3
       15-24 Members           8              1                  0                  2            2
       25-34 Members           6              1                  0                  2            0
       35-49 Members           5              0                  1                  0            2
       50-74 Members           3              1                  0                  0            0
         75+ Members           1              3                  1                  0            2


*Note: Only 57 active co-ops provided both membership size and an answer to the question
“average number of women benefiting from the co-op annually”. These co-ops are represented in
the table above.




The micronarrative provided information on the amount that women members and
beneficiaries earn from their co-operative (Figure 21). These numbers are relatively
small: 29 per cent identified income between 0TL and 250TL per month and 21 per
cent identified between 251TL and 500TL per month from their involvement in their
                                                                                          57



women’s co-operative. This income is less, markedly so in many cases, than Turkey’s
official net minimum wage of1.300TL per month, as published by the Ministry of
Labour and Social Security.31



                             INDIVIDUAL WORKERS (MEMBERS AND
          Figure 21
                             BENEFICIARIES); MONTHLY INCOME EARNED FROM
                             THE WOMEN’S COOPERATIVES (ACTIVE ONLY) (N=205)




There are two important factors to consider when understanding what this income
means, despite its small size. First, most respondents to the survey stated that this
was the first money they have ever made themselves. The importance of this will be
discussed further in Chapter 4, understanding the impact of women’s co-operatives,
but this quote from a women’s co-operative leader is telling.

“Economic empowerment is the main insurance for women and very effective in making
women feel better. Let me give you an example: Husband of one woman always created
problems every time she came to the co-op. He said she was neglecting her house, her
children. One day when she was preparing to come to the co-op, he said there is no food
at home and created problem. Woman put some money on the table and said “call the
restaurant and order some food; I am treating you to food.” Children became very happy
and the husband remained silent. Empowerment is such a thing. Woman could go to
the place she wanted to and could order food with her own money. She did not request
money from someone else for ingredients or she could buy the shirt she wanted to buy.
No one could ask “why are you doing this?” because it was the money she earned herself.”




31	 See: http://www.csgb.gov.tr/csgbPortal/cgm.portal?page=asgari. (accessed May 2015).
Second is the share of women’s income from the women’s co-operative in the household
income. Responses to questions about household income showed that 25 per cent had
income of between 750TL and 1500TL per month, and eight per cent had more than
3500TL per month.32 Therefore women’s income from the co-operative can be understood
as an important component of overall household income.


3.5 Financial profile and social security situation of women’s co-operatives
The financial profile of women’s co-operatives that emerged from the research is one of
predominantly small co-operatives that function largely on the basis of sales, with little
access to outside capital. Despite these circumstances and reports from the members that
they have weaknesses in business operations and financial management, the co-operatives
have basic financial controls in place and operate as responsible business enterprises.


Fourteen women’s co-operatives made annual revenues between 0-5,000TL in 2014 (see
Figure 22). The three women’s co-operatives from the survey that are making 250,000TL or
more are two agriculture co-operatives and one learning centre for disabled children, which
operates with support from the Ministry of Education. Covering the middle ground are four
agriculture co-operatives and eight early childhood learning centres. Overall, among active
co-operatives in the survey, it appears that there is growth over the past year, as more co-
operatives are projecting a higher revenue intake than in the previous year. As is seen in
Figure 22, however, the smaller co-ops are not generating more income. This suggests after
some years in business, women’s co-operatives are able to increase their annual revenue. To
ensure consistency, two start-up co-operatives which could not report revenue figures for
the previous year were not included in Figure 22. Both of these co-operatives projected a
revenue intake of 5,000-10,000 TL for the current year.




32	 Many respondents left household income blank. It is unknown whether they did not know (although
   there was an answer to choose from titled do not know) or whether they were unwilling to provide this
   information.
                                                                          59


                      ACTIVE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
        Figure 22
                      ANNUAL REVENUE COMPARISON
			                   (LAST YEAR AND CURRENT YEAR) (N=63)




                                                                                 		
                                                                                 	




Women’s co-operatives’ income comes predominantly from the sale of goods or
services (Figure 23). Following distantly is project funding and donations, which
suggests that women’s co-operatives do not receive a lot of outside funding, either
through personal connections or applying to funding programs. The donations are
minimal and mostly from individuals. Early childcare and education services that
generate income are specialty services only offered by some co-operatives, as
discussed.




                      SOURCE OF INCOME FOR WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
        Figure 23
                      (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)




			
Women’s co-operatives were asked in the survey about their sources of income,
expressed as a percentage of their total income. This was then compared with the
forecasted revenues of co-operatives in the current year. The intention is to see if a
relationship exists between the revenues of co-operatives and where their income
comes from.

Sales from the co-operative are often a primary source of income (Figure 23), similar
to data cited in Figure 24. In 33 cases, sales made up between 51-100 per cent of
the co-operative’s income. Certain revenue categories where a large number of
women’s co-operatives fall make over 50 per cent of their income through sales
include women’s co-operatives making between 0-5000TL (9), 10,0001-25,000TL
(9) and 25,001-50,000TL (11). One interesting finding is that in the top two income
categories, resulting in forecasted revenues of over 100,000TL, in most cases sales
only made up for less than 50 per cent of income. Other sources of income for
women’s co-operatives making 100,000-250,000TL or 250,000+ include project
funding, donations and childcare. One interesting finding is for at least one co-
operative in each revenue bracket, donations made up somewhere between 0-50
per cent of their co-operative’s income.

Despite these conclusions, it should be noted that a large number of women’s co-
operatives in all income categories provided other activities for income generation.
For this reason, it would be difficult to make any concrete conclusions about the
relationship between revenues and the methods of income generation originally
suggested to the women’s co-operatives.
                                                                                                    61


                                                 REVENUE TYPE VERSUS INCOME FOR WOMEN’S
                                Figure 24
                                                 CO-OPERATIVES (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)

                                      FORECASTED REVENUES OF CO-OPERATIVE (CURRENT YEAR)
              PER CENT
SOURCE        OF CO-OP                                                                  100,000-   250,000
                                          5,001-     10,001-     25,001-     50,000-
              INCOME         0-5000 TL                                                  250,000     TL and
                                         10,000TL   25,000 TL   50,000 TL   100,00 TL
                                                                                           TL        over

                 0-50%           2           2          1           0           1           3            3
   Sales
                51-100%          7           2          8          11           4           1            0

                TOTAL            9          4          9           11          5           4         4



                 0-50%           1           0          0           5           1           3            0
  Project
 Funding
                51-100%          1           0          0           2           0           1            0

                TOTAL            2          0          0           7           1           4         0



                 0-50%           2           1          2           2           1           1            1
Donations
                51-100%          1           1          0           0           0           0            0

                TOTAL            3          2          2           2           1           1         1



                 0-50%           0           0          0           2           0           0            0
 Childcare
                51-100%          0           0          2           0           0           2            0

                TOTAL            0          0          2           2           0           2         0



  Other         Various          11          5          10         13           5          4             4
 Activities   Percentages




                        Examples of other sources of income include tourism, dairy and agricultural
                        income, disabled children’s education, contributions from members, documentary
                        production, promotional activities, service fees and membership fees. To make the
                        figure clearer, the exact percentages attributed to each of these “other activities”
                        were not broken down in the table.

                        When asked where start-up capital came from among active women’s co-operatives
                        (N=63), overall, 30 co-ops had received start-up capital from members. When
broken down, 14 stated that they had received 100 per cent of their start-up capital
from their members while many co-operatives (16) received between 10-50 per
cent of their start-up capital from members.

In regards to the other 33 active women’s co-operatives, other sources of start-up
capital for active women’s co-operatives came from member shares (11). This is a
purchase of the member share for between 1-100TL. Other sources include grant
funding (6) and donations from individuals or organizations (11). In only one case,
a co-operative received 100 per cent of its start-up capital from a bank/financial
institution, in two cases capital came from microfinancing (one accounted for 50
per cent and another 100 per cent of start-up capital) and lastly, in two cases co-
operatives received capital from loans from another co-op, union or association
(one accounting for 50 per cent and another for 90 per cent of all start-up capital).

The purchase of membership shares is one way to help capitalize co-operatives.
However, this is not straightforward for women’s co-operatives as for co-operatives.
Most, 78 per cent of those surveyed, have a membership share between 1TL and
100TL. Prior to 2009, a membership share could be as low as 1TL, but it was legally
changed in 2009 to a minimum of 100TL. This has greatly affected women’s co-
operatives, as was mentioned by SIMURG and many interviews with leaders of
women’s co-operatives. While the rationale for the increase was that members
should support the capitalization of their co-operative, for many women the cost is
beyond their financial capacity. As a result, one of two things happen: either women
do not pay but are members, or they do not become members and instead have
an in-between status as “beneficiary.” Often, instead of capital, women contribute
volunteer hours or in-kind donations of things such as equipment or space. Other
types of co-operatives, such as construction or agriculture co-operatives including
agriculture women’s co-operatives, can charge more for membership. This would
be determined by the co-operative’s board and could be more than the mandated
minimum 100TL. It remains the case that it seems that women’s co-operatives are
unable to capitalize through membership shares as perhaps the law intended.

When the sales income of women’s co-operatives is broken down, a picture of what
does generate income for women’s co-operatives begins to emerge. Figure 25
illustrates the goods or services that generate income for women’s co-operatives.
                                                                            63



                        INCOME GENERATORS FOR WOMEN’S
           Figure 25
                        CO-OPERATIVES (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)

 Goods                                           Active (n=63)     Inactive (n=38)

 Food                                                 57%                47%
 Handicraft                                           44%                39%
 Other                                                29%                32%
 Agricultural goods production                        25%                 3%
 Weaving                                              19%                29%
 Textile                                              14%                 8%
 Livestock and animal products                        11%                 8%
 Ready to Wear Clothing                                8%                11%
 Soap                                                  6%                 5%
 Gift boxes                                            5%                 8%


 Services                                         Aktif (n=63)      İnaktif (n=38)

 Restaurant/food sales (service)                      40%                24%
 Handicraft/gift sale/shop (service)                  40%                34%
 Trainings                                            29%                 8%
 Sales network (wholesaling)                          17%                13%
 Events organization                                  16%                 5%
 Day care centre/play rooms                           10%                16%
 2nd hand sales                                        6%                16%
 Guesthouse                                            3%                 5%




The top three goods provided by active women’s co-operatives (not including
other) are food, handicraft and agricultural goods production while the top three
services provided by active women’s co-operatives are restaurant/food sales,
handicraft/gift shops and training. For inactive co-operatives, the top three goods
provided are food, handicraft and weaving while the top three services provided
by inactive women’s co-operatives are handicraft/gift stores, restaurant/food sales,
wholesale network and day care centres. When asked for clarification about “other”
goods provided by women’s co-operatives, co-operatives identified second hand
items, books and magazines, greenhouses, silk production, stitching and candles. As
a rule, women begin producing a good or service without much understanding of
operations or running a business. They do not usually conduct a feasibility study and
while they may have completed some entrepreneurship training, they generally do
not identify as having the business skills required to operate their co-operative (see
below). They play to their strengths; hence, many women’s co-operatives provide
goods or services that fall within the tradition of “women’s work”.

Out of the 45 active women’s co-operatives who were willing to share information
on their profits from the previous years, the majority of them (25 in total) made
between 0TL-249TL in profits in the past year. In terms of how the profits are
distributed, women’s co-operatives have a different relationship to profit than other
types of co-operatives – they are not legally able to share it among members. Most
women’s co-operatives are not-for-profit, meaning their intention is not to share
the surplus among members, but rather to reinvest it in the co-operative and in
community needs. Women’s co-operatives also do not issue patronage dividends
to members, however, when participants were asked in the survey about profit
sharing, the answers provided cloud the truth.​ For example, out of all 63 active
women’s co-operatives, nine shared profits among their members. ​      Five of these
women’s co-operatives are established as agricultural co-operatives which differ
from women’senterprise co-operatives in terms of commercial relations with their
members. Agricultural co-operatives work with specific by-laws which state70 per
cent is to be distributed as return to members. The remaining four are women
enterprise co-operatives. Although, participants have stated that they profit share
with members, this is not legally possible. They are most likely confusing payment
for services (i.e. wages or salaries) with profit sharing.

When asked why profits were not shared bythe other 54 co-operatives, 27 of them
​
stated that they were a non-profitco-operative based on their by-laws, 16 of the co-
operatives stated that theyinvest their profits back into the co-operative and 11co-
operatives stated it was because they had made no profit to share.

Considering their relations with profit, these responses can be their perception of
​
profit status and their priorities.

According to the survey, 19 of the 63 active women’s co-operatives currently
have outstanding loans or debts. When asked where money had been borrowed
from, one women’s co-operative had borrowed money from its members, two
had borrowed from a bank or financial institution, five had borrowed money from
Ministries or public institutions, and one had borrowed money from an NGO. None
of the women’s co-operatives had borrowed money from family members or micro-
finance institutions. Out of 19, 11 are enterprise and eight are agricultural women’s
co-operatives. 7 of these women’s co-operatives provided information on what they
used the money for; two paid taxes, one paid rent, one purchased raw materials,
one used for Union membership and two used it for various other needs including
rent, operational and admin costs, and the purchase of equipment.
                                                                            65



In terms of taxes and extraneous fees, women’s co-operatives feel the burden of
being an economic enterprise that also engages in social activities as discussed
previously in this chapter. Figure 26 is a compilation of the taxes and fees women’s
co-operative pay on an annual basis compiled by SIMURG. From the survey, 98 per
cent of active women’s co-operatives pay corporate tax. Seventy-three per cent of
active co-operatives pay income tax on behalf of their members.




        Figure 26      TAX AND FEE PROFILE FOR
                       WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
         FEE/TAX                          COST                      PERIOD

  Corporate tax               22% of profit                   Annual

  Income tax                  15-20% of income earned from    Annual
                              the co-op by persons

  VAT                         8-18% of invoices               Monthly or every three
                                                              months

  Rent tax                    20% of rent amount              Monthly

  Insured Staff               30% of gross salary             Monthly

  Chamber of Commerce         ~250 TL                         Annual
  annual fee

  General Assembly            ~2000 TL                        Annual
  required fees




There are two important points here: one, even though most of the women’s co-
operatives state that it is a huge challenge to pay the taxes, they are still paying
them; and two, women’s co-operatives pay the same percentage of corporate tax as
other types of for profit enterprises (such as investor owned firms). As this member
states,

“Tax, notary, accountant and like expenses were too much, and they continue to be so.
We could not insure our members as the insurance premiums are too high. We paid
attention to making formal business, but this increased our expenses too much and we
came at a point where we did not earn money at all.”

In terms of social security, the data from the micronarratives clearly show that
in most cases women are not receiving social security from their women’s co-
operative (Figure 27). When splitting up the general membership category into
members and board members, only 11 per cent of members receive social security
from their co-operative while a single board member stated they were receiving
social security from their co-operative. Of the 16 micronarrative respondents
who receive social security from their co-operative, all except one work in the
co-operative, although their membership lengths vary. Most women including
members and beneficiaries receive their social security through their husband or
their father’s social security (42 per cent of members, 40 per cent of board members,
and 60 per cent of beneficiaries), while members who receive social security from
their own businesses, other businesses or through retirement each make up around
11 per cent.




         Figure 27      SOURCE OF SOCIAL SECURITY (ACTIVE)


                                                 MEMBERSHIP STATUS
 SOURCE SOCIAL
 SECURITY                   Members         Board Member        Beneficiary     None of Above
                            (n=123)            (n=63)             (n=10)           (n=9)

  None                          11%               8%                10%                 0%

  Co-operative                  11%               2%                 0%                 11%

  Own Business                  11%               10%                0%                 56%

  Another Business              10%               11%                0%                 22%

  Pay Own Fees                  2%                3%                 0%                 0%

  Husband or Father’s           42%               40%               60%                 0%

  Retired                       11%               27%               30%                 11%

  Green Card                    2%                0%                 0%                 0%
                                                                                      67




                               HUMAN RESOURCES CHALLENGES:
                   Figure 28
                               LACK OF SOCIAL SECURITY (ACTIVE) (N=63)

                                   # of co-operatives           per cent of co-operatives
TYPE OF CO-OPERATIVE           paid social security in past   paid social security in past 12
                                       12 months                         months

Agricultural (n=18)                          8                              44%

Enterprise: Non-Childcare
                                            10                              30%
(n=34)

Enterprise: Childcare (n=8)                  7                              88%

Small Arts (n=1)                             0                              0%

Consumers (n=1)                              0                              0%

Manufacturing (n=1)                          0                              0%


All active women’s
                                            25                             40%
co-operatives




        All but one of the childcare women’s co-operatives paid social security in the
        past 12 months compared to only 44 per cent of active agricultural women’s co-
        operatives and approximately 30 per cent of active non-childcare enterprise
        women’s co-operatives. These percentages are significantly higher than the number
        of respondents in the narratives belonging to active women’s co-operatives who
        state they actually receive social security from their co-operative. There seems to be
        discrepancies in the amount of women’s co-operatives which appear to offer some
        form of social security and the amount of people who actually say they receive
        this support. The survey does not contain any questions which asked directly if a
        co-operative offers social security for women, and therefore this number must be
        inferred from this statistic alone. 

        When asking about challenges for women’s co-operatives, one of the suggested
        challenges included “lack of social security”. Out of all active women’s co-
        operatives, 30 (or approx. 48 per cent) women’s co-operatives identified lack of
        social security as a challenge. Furthermore, women’s co-operatives were asked
        to rank the importance of the challenge to their co-operative. The following is a
        figure depicting the number of women’s co-operatives who identified lack of social
security as a challenged, filtered by type, and broken down to show the difference
between the number of women’s co-operatives who identified it as a challenge
versus the number who gave it a ranking of 1-3 in importance (Figure 29).



                        NUMBER OF ACTIVE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES
         Figure 29
                        THAT IDENTIFIED LACK OF SOCIAL SOCIETY AS
                        A CHALLENGE (BY TYPE) (N=63)


                                                                           Lack of Social Security
                                              Lack of Social Security
  Type                                                                     a Challenge:
                                              a Challenge: YES
                                                                           RANKED 1-3


  Agricultural (n=18)                                     8                            3

  Enterprise: Non-Childcare (n=34)                       15                           14

  Enterprise: Childcare (n=8)                             4                            3

  Small Arts (n=1)                                        1                            1

  Consumers (n=1)                                         1                            1

  Manufacturing (n=1)                                     1                            1




What this table shows is that in most cases, women’s co-operatives which included
social security as a challenge also almost always ranked it with high importance
(1-3). The major exception to this can be found in terms of agricultural women’s
co-operatives. Although eight agricultural women’s co-operatives recognize lack of
social security as a challenge, only three rated this challenge with high importance.
Another interesting observation is that although all except one childcare co-
operative paid social security in the past year, half still believe that a lack of social
security is a challenge within their co-operative. Similarly, a little under half of
general enterprise women’s co-operatives find a lack of social security a challenge. 

Results from the survey show that most women’s co-operatives pay Chamber of
Commerce (CoC) fees. Few women’s co-operatives pay vehicle or real estate fees
because most do not own vehicles or real estate. Those that do owe vehicles or real
estate pay the fees.
                                                                                                     69



Most women’s co-operatives feel that they have a reasonable understanding of the
financing of their co-operatives. Most women’s co-operatives keep their financial
records in either a ledger book or computer program. Out of 61 of the 63 active
women’s co-operatives who were knowledgeable or willing to share information
as to where financial reporting is done, 29 (47.5 per cent) said that they were kept
using a computer program compared to 26 (41.3 per cent) who used a ledger
book, two who used a cash book (3 per cent) and four (6 per cent) active women’s
co-operatives who used a notebook to keep their financial records. When asked
how they would describe their financial recording practices, 66 per cent of all co-
operatives said they do it properly and 21 per cent said they keep records but are
not good at it.

3.6 Stakeholders in women’s co-operatives
3.6.1 	Internal stakeholders
Internal stakeholders in a women’s co-operative are understood as the co-
operative’s founders, members, employees and the board. Like all co-operatives,
women’s co-operatives function through the interplay of the different roles and
responsibilities of these internal stakeholders. There are roles and responsibilities
for the board, employees, members and beneficiaries; however, the people who
fill these positions often have overlapping roles. This is common within all types of
co-operatives.

Co-operative members have a number of responsibilities: governance if on
the board; human resources, either paid or unpaid; and voting constituents.
Representation at meetings and the annual general meeting, or General Assembly
as it is known in Turkey, is indicative of wider involvement of members in the
co-operatives’ functioning and decision-making. According to the responses,
48 per cent of women’s co-operatives have between 80 per cent and 100 per
cent membership attendance at the General Assembly of their co-operative. 33
Recognising that there is a legal requirement in Turkey for co-operative members to
be present at the General Assembly, when combined with the data on participation
in the co-operative, these numbers exhibit the real commitment of members to
their women’s co-operative.

The responses to the survey indicate the strong participation and commitment
of women to their co-operatives in Turkey. Women’s co-operatives are governed
by a board made up of members (see Figure 30). From the active co-operatives,
78 per cent of the respondents stated that there are three members are on their


33	 Participation rates in co-operatives in other countries, in particularly in industrialized economies, are
   generally understood to be low and declining, and a concern for co-operative representative bodies.
   Limited data exists on such participation rates. Indicative references include that 2.5 to 5 per cent member
   participation is considered “high” amongst Canadian credit co-operatives, which are amongst the strongest
   in the world (Theriault et al, 2008).
board and 75 per cent said that these board members change regularly. From active
women’s co-operatives, 95 per cent of respondents said that their board holds
regular meetings and that records of them are kept. At board meetings respondents
reported that the agenda is filled with regular updates, opportunities to work
through any problems, a chance to hear financial reporting and to deal with any
emergencies that have arisen in that order of frequency. Ninety-seven per cent of
respondents to the survey from active women’s co-operatives said that their board
was active in the co-operative, involved in (in order of importance) governance
(92 per cent), overall management (83 per cent) financial management (67 per
cent), legal procedures (67 per cent), daily operations (67 per cent), leadership
roles (54 per cent) and strategic planning (54 per cent). The board of directors are
also responsible for creating annual reports as a way of reporting on the activities
and financial health of the co-operative. Eighty-four per cent have written annual
reports. These reports are shared mostly with members and board of directors, but
are rarely made public or shared with donors or ministries local branches.

Human resources include member workers and some paid employees. Some
members earn income by working in the co-operative. Thirty-two per cent of
women’s co-operatives stated that they employ people other than members. In
some cases non-members are employed because of certain skillsets needed for co-
operative operations, such as early childcare teachers and janitorial staff for learning
centres.

3.6.2 External stakeholders
External stakeholders are institutional stakeholders, which the co-operative relates
toand has an effect on the success or failure of the co-operative. Key external
stakeholdersare the Ministries that have an interest in women’s co-operatives,
notably the MoCT, the MoFAL, and the MoFSP. As discussed early in this chapter,
women’s co-operatives in Turkey are regulated by the MoCT, with the exception
of the agricultural development co-operatives, which are regulated by the MoFAL.
Another key government stakeholder in women’s co-operatives are municipal
governments, which as will be described in Chapter 6, play a key role in supporting
the success of women’s co-operatives.

Other external stakeholders that women’s co-operatives identified in the survey
as important include the Women Co-operative Union (SIMURG) and Women’s Co-
operative Communications Network (KIA)34, NGOs, other women’s co-operatives,
MoFAL provincialdirectorates, the Chamber of Commerce (CoC) and Customs and
Trade directorates (CT) (Figure 31).




34	Detailed information about these organizations can be found in Chapter 6
                                                                  71


                       BOARD ACTIVITIES BASED ON WOMEN’S
      Figure 30
                    		 CO-OPERATIVES (ACTIVE) (N=63)


Board Membership                               per cent of active women’s
                                                     co-operatives

Three Members on the Board                                78%

Five Members on the Board                                 14%

Seven Members on the Board                                8%


Board Characteristics

Board members change regularly                            75%

Board holds regular meetings                              95%

Board of directors active in the co-op                    97%

Purpose for Board Meetings

Board meetings held for regular updates                   89%

Board meetings held for financial reporting               65%

Board meetings held to deal with problems                 73%

Board meetings held to deal with emergencies              43%

Board active in…

Governance                                                92%

Overall management                                        83%

Financial management                                      67%

Daily operations                                          67%

Legal procedures                                          67%

Leadership                                                54%

Strategic planning, overview and monitoring               54%

Board active on field studies                             44%

Trainings                                                 37%
                        EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS WITH WHICH WOMEN’S
        Figure 31
                        CO-OPERATIVES PARTNER (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)
                        (N=101)


 Stakeholder                                                     Active (63)      Active (63)

 Co-op Union (SIMURG)/                                             50.8%              28.9%
 Women’s Co-ops Communication Network (KIA)
 NGOs                                                              47.2%              39.5%
 Other Women’s Co-ops                                              39.7%              26.3%
 Provincial/District Directorates of Agriculture                   38.1%              15.8%
 Chamber of Commerce (CoC)                                         33.3%              15.8%
 Provincial/District Directorates of Customs and Trade (CT)        25.4%              18.4%



The top three partnership activities identified by active women’s co-operatives is
training, sharing experiences and technical support (Figure 32). This is different from
inactive women’s co-operatives which identified sharing experiences, training and
networking.



                        HOW DOES THE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVE PARTNER
        Figure 32
                        (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE) (N=101)


 Activities                                        Active (63)         Inactive (38)

 Training                                            65.1%                 44.7%
 Sharing Experiences                                 61.9%                 52.6%
 Technical Support (Offered or Received)             55.6%                 18.4%
 Networking                                          50.8%                 28.9%
 Trading                                             33.3%                     7.9%
 Sharing Resources                                   17.5%                 13.2%
                                                                                                          73



               Figure 33 represents what activities women’s co-operatives do with external organizations.
               According to survey responses, women’s co-operatives turn to NGOs, SIMURG and other
               women’s co-operatives the most for training, although all organizations identified do
               support training in some manner including Provincial directorates of Food, Agriculture and
               Livestock and Customs and Trade as well as Chamber of Commerce. Answers also show that
               trading goods or services, sharing resources, and networking to a certain extent, are not
               activities women’s co-operatives necessary do with any other organizations. This suggests
               a degree of felt isolation due to the lack of collaboration and collective organizing with
               other external organizations on women-related activities. Despite the isolation, women’s
               co-operative do pursue sharing experiences more with NGOs, SIMURG and other women’s
               co-operatives. They also gained some technical support from SIMURG, NGOs and Provincial
               Directorates of Food, Agriculture and Livestock.




                                             WHAT ACTIVITIES WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES DO
                         Figure 33
                                             WITH EACH EXTERNAL ORGANIZATION (ACTIVE)
                                             (N=63)

                                                             Sharing                     Technical     Sharing
Organization             Training       Networking                           Trading
                                                            Resources                     Support    Experiences

 Other women’s
                            32%               17%                9%             11%        25%          22%
    co-ops
  SIMURG/KIA                51%               23%               14%             12%        33%          29%
      NGOs                  45%               22%               14%             12%        33%          25%
Provincial/District
 Directorates of
                            33%               12%                5%              8%        28%          13%
Food, Agriculture
 and Livestock 35
Provincial/District
                            23%               12%                7%              4%        19%          11%
 Directorates CT
       CoC                  33%               15%                7%              8%        25%          15%



               3.7 The challenges faced by women’s co-operatives: Why do they close?35
               Women’s co-operatives in Turkey face distinct external and internal challenges.
               These have been cited throughout this chapter and are summarised below. The
               majority of women’s co-operatives face these challenges, but not all of them face
               inactivity, termination, and closure.

               So given that the majority of women’s co-operatives face these challenges, why do
               some women’s co-operatives close and others do not? There are several reasons.


               35	Available only for rural development and agricultural co-operatives.
First, there are “one off” closures: For example the cooperative was cheated by an
accountant and the members decided to continue on their own. Second, there are
examples of burn out: the leader or core group doing all the work and suffer from
burn out from trying to build awareness with members, staff, board, community
and institutions. Third, some women’s co-operatives lost momentum and energy
and are unable gain traction. One quote from a founder captures much of this:

“Our members lost hope in co-operatives and they earn their money individually by daily works.
I started this work with good will and took great pains to make it work. I am tired, if this had
been my personal work I would have progressed a lot. I feel bad about my efforts, exhaustion and
money.”


Women’s co-operatives also close because of the lack of funding/ revenue. There
were not enough funding opportunities specifically for women’s co-operatives.
There was a lack of understanding about how to get this funding. And sometimes
goods or services they had chosen did not work or could not get it off the ground.

Finally, women’s co-operatives close because of their lack of associative and business
skills. Examples were provided of co-operatives that started too quickly and did not do
the up-front work of building a co-operative – working on the associative glue of good
co-operative development. Such as, building trust between members, creating policies
and bylaws that really reflect their values and goals, understanding how to govern and
manage a co-operative with a membership not investors and getting the right partners
on board who understands what a women’s co-operative is trying to do. Women’s co-
operatives also often do not have the business skills within their board, management or
membership to support the co-operative’s economic activities.

3.7.1 External challenges
3.7.1.1 Financial Difficulties
The key external challenge for women’s co-operatives is financial. This was related
24 times in interviews with women’s co-operatives. This includes capitalization
including mobilizing member shares, accessing credit, grants or financing options;
as has already been demonstrated. As a member of a women’s co-operative
described in an interview:

“We always had financial problems. Because the members didn’t put money neither a
percentage from their earnings or their dues to the co-op. ”

From the survey, 44 of 63 (70 per cent) active women’s co-operatives identified
budget management as a challenge (28 for inactive women’s co-operatives). Even
more telling, 51 out of 63 (81 per cent) active women’s co-operatives identified
access to loans and grants as a challenge. For inactive women’s co-operative this
was 32. Figure 34, highlights the financial challenges for women’s co-operatives.
                                                                                 75



                         FINANCIAL CHALLENGES FACED BY THE WOMEN’S
        Figure 34
                         CO-OPS (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)


 Identified as a challenge                 # of active              # of inactive

 Paying taxes                                   48                       33
 Paying other obligatory fees                   43                       29
 Paying rent                                    40                       19
 Paying other operational/
                                                40                       28
 administrative costs
 Paying the salaries                            39                       14
 Costs of the business                          36                       22




In a study conducted by Varol (2013) the women faced difficulties regarding
their legal status and expenditures related to co-operative management and
membership. Co-operatives Law (No. 1163) currently in effect, is a general law that
states that all members have to pay a share when they join the co-operative. The
partnership/membership shares increased to 100TL in 2009 resulting in the loss of
many members who were experiencing poverty, which may have resulted in the
limited participation of poor members.

Women’s co-operatives also have a difficulty finding larger markets because
of their very local nature. This leads to a lack of revenues and profits, which can
lead to inactivity due to debts and an inability to recover. The financial challenges
do not only relate to lack of market to sell their goods or services or their lack of
business acumen. Their financial challenges are interwoven and inclusive of other
external challenges that have or will be discussed including legal restrictions and
the extraneous fees that need to be paid. As a member of an active women’s co-
operative describes:

“We have difficulties getting funding. Not-for-profit co-operatives need to be assisted
with supports. The municipalities should change the laws. I think we should also benefit
from a five-year tax exemption. We pay too much tax. This is unfair. Let’s say the rate of
tax collection at the source should be lowered, an appropriate share should be found. We
don’t pay in installments. If we didn’t pay for three months, the fourth month we wouldn’t
get a deduction. We need to be protected and supported. We pay almost 6,000 Turkish
liras per month for SGK.”

Figure 35 presents a list of the expenses women’s co-operatives face when they
start up. Individually each of these fees are not tremendously onerous, although
for a group of women to start a co-operative, as will be discussed, it is difficult to pay.
When calculated together, the 3415 TRL borders on prohibitive for women that are
looking to begin operations co-operatively.



                         IMMEDIATE EXPENSES FOR WOMEN’S
        Figure 35
                         CO-OPERATIVES AT START UP

Expenses                                                      Amount in TRL


  Notary fee (approval of the by-laws)                              1.300

  Notary fee for signature statement                                 230

  Notary fee (approval of the books)                                 160

  Notary fee for signature circular                                  250

  Trade register fee (to the Tax Office)                             530

  Announcement fee (in official gazette)                             350

  Chamber of Commerce- registration fee                              400

  Purchase of minute book, stamp, invoice etc.                       185

  Chamber of Commerce - Official Gazette cost                        10


Total                                                              3.415




3.7.1.2 Lack of understanding of women’s co-operatives
From the interviews, a great disparity of understanding about women’s co-operatives
was identified. Some authorities had a deep understanding of women’s co-operatives,
their motivations, their struggles, their goals and their challenges, such as this
representative from one of the municipalities interviewed:

“The goals of more women taking part in business as entrepreneurs, removing the
inequities in education, which were aimed at exclusion in the economy, have also been
integral in achieving the objectives for social purposes. We support women’s co-operatives
applying to available funds and support programs, we help them get grants. In this way we
are trying to raise awareness of women’s co-operatives. ”
                                                                                     77



Whereas other participants only vaguely knew about the existence of women’s co-
operatives. This was reflected in the interviews with the stakeholders. Interviews with
representatives from the women’s co-operatives mentioned 21 times the lack of
understanding of women’s co-operatives from stakeholders and the wider community. This
could mean central government or local government, civil society or the NGO sector as well
as the geographical community. Importantly, participants identified the authorities’ lack of
understanding of what it means to be a women’s co-operative. As this member claims:


“The local authorities see us as a private company and do not support us. As we saw that they
would have supported us if we were an NGO, the same founding members also established an
NGO. For example, the governorship gave us a dough making machinery after we demanded as
an NGO. We use this machinery at the co-op.”


The wider community and general public were also identified, as were husbands. Their lack
of understanding has very personal repercussions for members of women’s co-operatives.
As one founder states:


“Women were worried about signing the partnership contracts; some had to get their husbands’
approval and some gave up being a member because of the fear of a possible legal collection of
debt.”


Seven members related that they felt pressure from their husbands regarding either
time spent on the women’s co-operative or money invested.

3.7.2 Internal challenges
Internal challenges are challenges that arise within the women’s co-operative. These
are challenges that can be controlled or changed by women’s co-operatives and
their members. These challenges are experienced by all of respondents in varying
degrees, as demonstrated in the following response to an interview:

“The problems we had are not specific to us but to most of the co-operatives. We know that most
of the co-operatives are facing such problems. ”


3.7.2.1. Lack of understanding about women’s co-operatives and
associative skills
While there is a lack of understanding about women’s co-operatives by authorities,
the wider community and husbands, many members and beneficiaries also do not
fully comprehend the inner workings of women’s co-operatives or their dual social
and economic nature.

Some of members, founders, presidents and board chairs also acknowledged the
lack of associative skills. “Associative skills” is a general term used to describe the skills
and knowledge required to effectively manage and lead a women’s co-operative.
These consist of but are not limited to: encouraging women to participate, co-
operative leadership skill building for founders and members of the co-operative,
trust building, co-operative policy development, developing good governance
procedures, membership drives, collective decision-making, co-operative
management through elected representation, how to work with or on a board
and/or awareness campaigns. This quote from a founder also speaks to the lack of
associative skills for running a women’s co-operative:

“We started by not knowing too much about how to start and run a co-operative or have
a co-operative vision. It was good at the beginning, everything went well. However, later
members became self-centred, started to think the co-operative as a business rather than
a social co-operative. That was the main problem. ’

Balancing the social and economic aspects of women’s co-operatives may also
bedifficult. Here a member highlights this:

“Some members insisted that the co-operative was in a way an NGO; other groups
insisted that the co-operative had to earn money and make profit. Then problems started
to arise. ”

3.7.2.2. Lack of business skills
The survey, interviews and micronarratives illustrated that the founders, board and
members all lacked, to varying degrees, the skills to run the business of their co-
operative. This could be business skills such as management, leadership, financial
literacy, operations, supply and marketing, and also specific skills for the production
of the goods or services offered by the women’s co-operative such as milk cow
husbandry. This is identified by the director of a women’s co-operative:

“It was a little difficult for the women members to understand the main business of
founding a co-operative and therefore their responsibilities in the organization, because
it was founded mostly by housewives and women without work experience.”

For members, founders and the boards of women’s co-operatives learning is
accomplished while doing the task and through experience. Testimony to this is the
number and diversity of trainings women have expressed that they took. Training
topics included: financial literacy, entrepreneurship, computer and internet usage,
child development, and early child education.

3.7.2.3. Lack of operational capacity
Women’s co-operatives have had trouble with producing goods or services.
This is sometimes due to lack of proper equipment, other times because of lack
knowledge of proper operating procedures. Here a member is quoted stating one
of their main challenges was a:
                                                                             79



“Lack of equipment and capital support for the workplace that we wanted to build for
production.”

In other cases interviewees spoke about trying to shift to a high level of operational
capacity.

Pomegranate is highly produced in our region. We wanted to establish a facility
that will run 12 months and produce different pomegranate products such as sour
pomegranate syrup. We even had TRT (Turkish Radio and Television) shoot a film
about it. Our main purpose was to create a brand and do sales professionally. We
had interviews with Agriculture and Credit Co-operatives Union and developed
some valuable collaborations. Their support would be fruitful but we could not
reach to a good standard in producing the syrup because we did not have the
proper workplace.

We brought together the place with tools etc. we brought from home. So in fact
it is not very suitable for production. And it is not big enough either. So we cannot
produce the orders that we get.

3.7.2.4. Interpersonal issues
Women’s co-operatives are also social constructions. Unhealthy interpersonal issues
can be a make or break for any enterprise or organization, but especially so for
small, local co-operatives. It is important with the co-operative model to have high
levels of trust among the membership especially when women are being asked
to put themselves on the line personally and financially. Interpersonal issues that
are left unchecked can lead to the ruin of co-operatives due to jealousy, greed,
misunderstanding, burn out and frustration, especially in small communities
where information can travel quickly and have negative effects for members or the
women’s co-operative:

™We, as partners could not unite. Our expectations were high, we were impatient to
reach them and when we could not, we got disappointed very quickly. We could not
organize well and quickly disintegrated.”
                                                                             81   4

4
Understanding the Impact of
Women’s Co-operatives

An important component of this research was to be able to answer the following
question: “What is the contribution of the co-operatives to the empowerment of
women?” This question was unpacked in the terms of reference for this research
according to the impacts of co-operatives that could be determined on women’s
personal capacities, feelings of honor and self-confidence and capacity for
overcoming challenges; on women’s solidarity; and on the evolution of women’s
gender roles.

The research results demonstrated that women’s co-operatives in Turkey have had
an important impact on individuals, households and communities. Through the
research, women spoke extensively about their personal experiences of impact, as
well as the impact experienced in their households, such as by their children or their
spouses; as well in their community, including both the community of local women,
as well as the geographic community. Impact was understood as empowering
women, as contributing to lifelong education and learning, and contributing to their
ability to obtain an income through employment. Importantly, these do not occur
in silos, but reinforce each other and can be understood to have a multiplier effect
on the women who engage with the co-operatives as members or beneficiaries.

The impact women’s co-operatives have had in Turkey varies depending on the co-
operative itself. It is important to note that this study did not do a formal impact
assessment of women’s co-operatives as a whole or individually. There is no baseline
or control group and no measurable metrics are employed. Rather, through the
survey, interviews and micronarratives, members and stakeholders reflected and
commented personally on the impact women’s co-operatives have had. What
follows are self-assessed gains and impacts by the women’s co-operatives’ members
and beneficiaries. These stories and reflections are especially meaningful.

4.1 How many people have women’s co-operatives had an impact on?
Looking at the survey tool, respondents were asked how many women benefited
annually and the sum of their answers was used to provide an average annual total.
Through this calculation, the total number of women who benefit annually from
active women’s co-operatives is an estimated 7,206 (Figure 36).
                              AVERAGE NUMBER OF WOMEN WHO BENEFIT
          Figure 36
                              ANNUALLY FROM CO-OPERATIVE36


                                            Aktif                  Tüm kadın kooperatifleri
 Toplam                                     7.206                              10.076




When combining both active and inactive women’s co-operatives, this number
increases to 10,076 women benefiting annually from women’s co-operatives in
Turkey. While the direct economic benefit might have ceased for the inactive
women’s co-operatives, the lasting skills gained and the empowerment of women
through improved self-confidence is not lost but a continued benefit. Because
this study is not an impact assessment of women’s co-operatives on women,
communities and the economy, the complete picture of impact and the multiplier
effect is not captured. A study that does so is highly recommended.

Due to the broad nature of enterprise women’s co-operatives, these types of
women’s co-operatives were split in Figure 37 based on whether they provided
childcare services to see if there were any noteworthy distinctions between
childcare women’s co-operatives and enterprise women’s co-operatives in general.
As this analysis examines only active women’s co-operatives, it is not possible to
come up with any concrete trends for small arts, consumers and manufacturing and
marketing women’s co-operatives regarding benefit to women as there was only
one co-operative in each of these categories. 

Overall, it appears that most women’s co-operatives benefit between 1-50 women
annually when looking at both agricultural and general enterprise women’s co-
operatives. An interesting finding when comparing general enterprise women’s co-
operatives versus childcare women’s co-operatives is that overall, childcare women’s
co-operatives appear to help more women annually as all but one childcare co-
operative benefited 200+ women while only approximately 12 per cent of general
enterprise women’s co-operatives benefited the same number of women. This
figure (Figure 37) also shows that there is some variation between women’s co-
operatives of the same type in terms of benefit to women, as both enterprise and
agricultural women’s co-operatives contained women’s co-operatives that helped
no women through to benefiting over 300 women.



36	 In one instance, a women’s co-operative put forward a value dramatically higher than all other women’s
   co-operatives. This co-operative was one of the active consumer co-operatives and the value was 41,480.
   To maintain the integrity of the calculation and to avoid skewing the data, this number has been excluded
   from the table.
                                                                                                           83



                                                      NUMBER OF WOMEN ON AVERAGE WHICH BENEFIT
                                    Figure 37
                                                      FROM THE CO-OPERATIVES’ ACTIVITIES EACH YEAR BY
                                                      ACTIVE COOPERATIVE TYPE
                                                      (PERCENTAGE OF EACH TYPE) (N=63)



                                                 AVERAGE NUMBER OF WOMEN BENEFITING FROM CO-OP

                                                 0          1-50       51-100     101-200        201-300   301+


                     Agricultural (n=18)         6%         56%         22%         11%            0%      6%

    Enterprise: Non-Childcare (n=34)             3%         68%         15%          6%            3%      9%

            Enterprise: Childcare (n = 8)        0%          0%         13%          0%           50%      38%

                           Small Arts (n=1)      0%         100%         0%          0%            0%      0%

                        Consumers (n=1)          0%          0%          0%          0%            0%      100%

Manufacture and Marketing (n=1)                  0%         100%         0%          0%            0%      0%



                           Figure 38 presents active women’s co-operatives filtered by region.




                                                      NUMBERS OF WOMEN ON AVERAGE BENEFIT FROM
                                    Figure 38
                                                      THE CO-OPERATIVES’ ACTIVITIES EACH YEAR BASED
                                                      ON REGION (ACTIVE) (N=63)


                                                      AVERAGE NUMBER OF WOMEN BENEFITING FROM
    REGION                                       0          1-50       51-100      101-200       201-300   301+

        Mediterranean (n=2)                      0%         50%          50%          0%            0%      0%

        Eastern Anatolia (n=2)                   0%         100%         0%           0%            0%      0%

        Central Anatolia (n=11)                  9%         55%          9%           9%            9%      9%

        Southeastern Anatolia (n=14)             0%         50%          29%          0%            0%     21%

        Marmara (n=17)                           6%         53%          6%           6%           18%     12%

        Aegean (n=10)                            0%         60%          10%         10%            0%     20%

        Black Sea  (n=7)                         0%         57%          14%         14%            0%     15%
In all regions, there are a greater number of women’s co-operatives which benefited
1-50 women annually than any other volume category. Furthermore, with the
exceptions of the Mediterranean and Eastern Anatolia, all regions had at least one
co-operative state they benefited more than 300 women annually. This data does
not really present any clear distinctions between regions and average number of
women benefiting from the co-operative annually, which suggests region is not an
important factor when trying to target this variable. That being said, one potential
finding is that since the Mediterranean and Eastern Anatolia regions only have two
active women’s co-operatives which benefit 100 or less women, it can be suggested
that women are not getting as much support from women’s co-operatives in these
regions compared to other regions in Turkey based solely on the existence of fewer
women’s co-operatives.

Figure 39 demonstrates the positive experiences and impact women’s co-operatives
have on members and beneficiaries. Even though it can be argued these numbers
have been tallied conservatively and would have been higher if the analysis had
“read between the lines” of some of the stories, it is important to be as objective
as possible.37 Even with conservative tallying, 197 stories from the micronarratives
emerge portraying an overall positive experience with their women’s co-operative.


                               COMMON THEMES THROUGHOUT
           Figure 39
                               MICRONARRATIVE STORIES


 COMMON THEMES                                                                                  #

  Overall positive experience with women’s co-operative                                        197

  Women’s co-operative assisted in gaining self                                                 74
  confidence

  Women’s co-operative allowed for learning                                                     69

  Importance of generating own income                                                           66

  Women’s co-operative lead to gaining pride                                                    41

  Women’s co-operative did not receive adequate support                                         39




37	Many stories mentioned the idea of becoming stronger (either personally or in terms of the women’s
   co-operative itself ) but if the story did not outright say the women’s co-operative led to gaining
   self-confidence or contributed to their pride, it was not included in the tally. Some stories are very
   straightforward and could not be confidently considered “positive” or “negative” stories, they are just simply
   neutral. This also contributes to the somewhat conservative total for positive experience with a women’s
   co-operative.
                                                                            85



4.2 Empower women
One of the objectives of this research study was to understand the impact of
women’s co-operatives in Turkey on women’s empowerment. This was understood
as how women’s co-operatives support and enhance personal capacities, feelings
of honor and self-confidence and capacity for overcoming challenges; on women’s
solidarity; and on the evolution of women’s gender roles. What is understood using
the qualitative nature of the micronarratives and interviews is that women at the
core of women’s co-operatives (board members and founders) as well as those
with less of a commitment than the core (members, beneficiaries) are equally, if not
differently, affected by the impact of their women co-operative.

From the micronarratives, as illustrated in Figure 40, 252 members and beneficiaries,
or 94 per cent, expressed that in their experience and according to their
understanding women’s co-operatives clearly empower women in Turkey.



                       PARTICIPANTS’ SELF-ANALYSIS ABOUT WHETHER
        Figure 40
                       WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES EMPOWER WOMEN
                       (N= 268)




Figure 40: Participants’ self-analysis about whether women’s co-operatives empower
w      o      m      e       n            (    N      =          2     6     8   )
                                                                                  	
			
The micronarrative stories and interviews also demonstrated that one of the main
impacts of women’s co-operatives is empowerment of women through economic
independence. Forty-one (41) stories were about gaining pride through belonging
to co-operative, an economic enterprise. First, here is one of the stories from an
active women’s co-operative member to illustrate this:

“I met the co-operative two years ago. It was a time that my life became very difficult
because of economic problems and I shared my worries with my colleagues and I was
able to handle them with their support. Last year in a festival we opened a stand and sold
bakery products handmade jams and pancakes and we earned a very good amount of
money. I was very proud of that and I am able to cover the expenses of my children on my
own. Moreover I can see the pride on my children’s eyes and I am very pleased to honor
them.”

And the following is a quote from the interviews from a women’s co-operative
founder, who relates the importance of relieving women of the burden of complete
economic dependence:

“Women who are not economically independent are not strong enough socially. It costs
her to even going out, economical independence makes her life easier in many ways and
it changes the way her family sees her.”

Through her experiences with the women’s co-operative – working, earning her
own money, gaining skills, being outside of the home and networking – a woman
gains resources and autonomy. Through her involvement with the women’s co-
operative she is a part of the community in a different way than as a mother or wife
– as an income earner, as a business person.

Interviewees identified a number factors related to their involvement with women’s
co-operatives including increased self-confidence and improved self-esteem,
improved home life, engaging in wider issues, and becoming more viable in the
community. From an analysis of the micronarrative stories, 74 stories relate to
the theme of gaining self-confidence. The following are two stories that speak to
gaining self-confidence and the importance of this for women:

“At the beginning I was considering co-operative work just to cook and serve however
when I started I figured out that it wasn’t just like that. I am a very energetic person and
I participated in many other works and activities of co-operative. In a year I met many
different people participated in many activities. I am very pleased to produce things and
also to generate income from them. People are showing their pleasure to us when they
eat the food we prepared and this pleases us and increases our self-confidence. I am very
thankful that I became a member of the co-operative. Even we have to sacrifice from
many things as time etc. we are doing our job willingly.”
                                                                               87



“Before co-operative I was only a housewife and I was spending my entire time for
housework. When I met the co-operative I started to participate in the co-operative’s
activities, travels, working times and my life became more colorful. My days and my
thoughts had enlightened. I gained self-confidence and by standing on my feet; I
contributed my family and my relatives and my friends. I am supportive of all women
women’s co-operatives and I believe that woman women’s co-operatives also touch
women’s heart while supporting them economically. Today I feel myself much stronger
and decisive.”

As a founder of a women’s co-operative states about the members:
“Their self-esteem started to increase, and as their self-esteem increased, other women
started to come and participate. We were expecting this to happen and this was the
reason we started a co-op.”

Further to this, one of the stakeholders interviewed affirms:
“Women start to communicate with companies and start taking part in both social and
economic life. They get out of their homes and gain self-confidence and feel valuable. I
think that this model is suitable for Turkey. ”

The boost in self-confidence and self-esteem as well as what she learns from the
women’s co-operativescan be transferred to other parts of a woman’s life, including
a better understanding of their rights. As one member states:
“As they learnt their rights, they started to request their rights at home.”

Another space she begins to occupy through the co-operative is the community. As
one founder declares:
“The co-op model gives women the opportunity to join social life and the community.
The women can get out of home. This also has a positive effect. ”

According to the director of one women’s co-operative, through women’s co-
operatives, women begin to gain access to spaces they previously did not have
access to:
“We think that our co-op plays a great role in the empowerment of women. It is well
known and supported by local and international levels. The success of women has been
a great example and that gives us much ambition, motivates us. That made our works
visible and we gained recognition.”

Women start to question and work with local government and institutions to
provide better services in the community. They also offer better services to the
community, such as childcare centres and training.
Members’ and beneficiaries’ responses about their various forms of participation in
women’s co-operatives are extremely positive, as can be seen in Figure 41. This is the
case for active women’s co-operatives and for the final year of activity when the now
inactive women’s co-operatives were active. While co-operatives are supposed to be
participatory by nature, as noted in Chapter 2 and according to international co-
operative principles, women’s co-operatives in Turkey demonstrate remarkably high
responses for the participation of members and beneficiaries based on participant
responses to the micronarratives. To have 99 per cent answer affirmatively about no
discrimination and opportunities to gain knowledge and skills is exceptional. For
97 per cent to respond “yes” or “sometimes” to the statement “I can become a board
member without obstacles” is not common in other organizational structures in the
private sector (i.e. firms). “Solidarity in membership” (96 per cent) and “I participate
in decision-making” (93 per cent) also show the high level of commitment to the
women’s co-operatives. And finally, members and beneficiaries of active women’s
co-operatives are seen to be positive (90 per cent) when it comes to accessibility.



                         MEMBERS AND BENEFICIARY’S PARTICIPATION IN
        Figure 41
                         WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES (N=268)


 Agreed With Statement                                                       Active      Inactive
 (Answered Yes or Sometimes)                                                 (n=205)     (n=63)


 Any woman can join – no discrimination                                         99%           92%

 Co-op provides opportunities to gain knowledge and skills                      99%           83%

 If I want/feel capable, I can become a Board member without
                                                                                98%           89%
 obstacles

 Solidarity in membership                                                       96%           83%

 I participate in decision-making                                               95%           84%

 Women can easily access co-op when they have problems                          91%           84%




The interviews and micronarratives also demonstrate that women not only use
the skills that they gain in the co-operative, such as governance, management,
technical, and business skills, but there is a transfer of those skills to their other work
in the community, be that when working with the local government or private
businesses or agencies. Transferring these skills to other contexts is especially vital
for a more complete understanding of empowerment that goes beyond a woman’s
co-operativeinto all other aspects of her life. Women’s co-operatives therefore can
be understood to have a multiplier effect on women that engage with them as
                                                                                   89



members or beneficiaries; of being able to offer social services through organizing
and operating the co-operative, and also able to access other services because
women have the skills and knowledge and self-confidence to do so. This also speaks
to education and learning as an impact.

4.3 Provide education and lifelong learning
All methods of data collection point to women learning new skills, knowledge
and aptitudes through their involvement in their women’s co-operative. From the
micronarrative stories, 69 emerged under the theme of learning from the women’s
co-operative. Learning could be about gaining hard skills such as business or
entrepreneurial skills as this member expresses:
“We learned not to be afraid of loan and credit. Now some of our members decided to borrow
from a bank and start or improve greenhouse vegetable production.”


Or other hard skills such as computer skills, as this story from a member relates:

“When the trainings were conducted in our co-operative I participated in IT training.
Before then I was even afraid of opening a computer however the facilitator from FSWW
explained everything to us very clearly and my self-confidence increased and even I can’t
say that I am a very good I started to use the computer much more easily. Until that
training every time I open the computer I remind of that training and I am very thankful
to the facilitator and our co-operative for teaching me that. With me a lot of other
women also participated in that training and encouraged.”

In this story from an active women’s co-operative member what can be seen is
learning not only the hard skills of marketing, sewing and sales, but also vital soft
skills for the co-operative such as working with others, finding happiness in work
and feeling pride in work:

“Before I met co-operative I was a housewife and I was feeling myself useless. I learned to
patch and decorate clothes. I also learned how to do packaging, marketing and gained
experience in atelier. I met new friends and working with my colleagues with joy is just like
a therapy to me. We are singing eating and laughing at the atelier we have a very friendly
working place. I am very happy to own an occupation and to have such a joyful business.
I am coming to here with joy and happiness every day.”

Empowerment and growth in self-esteem also comes with learning new skills and
gaining knowledge. According to a women’s co-operative founder:

“We had members who continued their education, got drivers’ license, started to work.
Their self-esteem increased, they started to express their feelings better. ”
In terms of how they learned to run their co-operative, findings from the survey
show that women are mostly employing informal learning methods in learning to
run their co-operative. For example, in Figure 42, within both active and inactive co-
operatives, learning on the job or with the help of other members were identified as
the most common methods members used to learn to run the co-operative.



                           HOW WOMEN LEARNED TO RUN THEIR
         Figure 42
                           CO-OPERATIVE (N=101)




The importance of working with and learning with other women/members is
further highlighted in a quote from a member:

“We combine our strength and learn a lot from each other.”

Early childhood learning programs and lifelong learning arevital elements to healthy
societies and women’s co-operatives that offer child learning or adult learning
services play a much-needed social role.

4.4 Create jobs, livelihoods and equitable growth
Women’s co-operatives play a role in helping women in Turkey overcome challenges
they face with respect to their employment status, lack of financial autonomy and lack of
leadership opportunities in businesses. As noted in Chapter Two, increasing women’s low
participation in the labour force and economic life in Turkey is a priority for the national
government.


Women’s co-operatives play a role in helping women overcome these challenges.
According to the survey, from the active women’s co-operatives a conservative estimate of
women earning income totals 1,422 (Figure 43). In terms of types of women’s co-operatives,
of the women’s co-operatives where 100 and over women earn income, two are enterprise
and one is agricultural.
                                                                                91



                        NUMBER OF WOMEN EARNING INCOME THROUGH
        Figure 43
                        CO-OPERATIVE (ACTIVE COOPS) (N=63)




Of the micronarrative stories, 66 of them were about the importance of earning
income independently. This does not occur in a silo: the ability to earn income is
often interrelated with life-long learning and education, demonstrating the multi-
faceted and multiplier effect of the impact that women’s co-operatives have on
their members and beneficiaries. Two such stories from members of active women’s
co-operatives demonstrate this:

“I was married having a son and a daughter and I was a victim of domestic violence. I
was just staying at the home because I didn’t know how to raise my children without any
money. My daughter passed the university exam this year and we applied for scholarship
and when I want to office I met some other woman there. We speak about our dreams
and hopes and we decided to establish a co-operative. During the training sessions I
won back my self-confidence and with my colleagues support I ended my marriage and
moved in a new house with my children. With the support of co-operative my life had
changed and today all I want to do is to help other women living similar things at home.”

“I am university student and participated in co-operative for to generate income and
support my family. I am earning my money in a very peaceful atmosphere and with the
money I got I am trying to cover my own expenses and not to be a burden to my family.
Every expense I cover myself is my support to my family and that relieves me and makes
me feel strong.”

Women’s co-operatives can provide the first access for their members to the labour
market outside the home. And while a woman may not earn a lot of income
through the co-operative, the money she makes in many cases will be the first she
has earned independently. The founder of one women’s co-operative describes this
situation clearly.

“Many of our co-op members earned money for the first time at the co-op. They started
to develop new ideas as their business skills developed.”

By completing a self-analysis of their stories in the micronarrative data collection
method, 98 per cent of members/beneficiaries perceived that co-operatives help
women access the labour market (Figure 44). This is 263 out of 268 participants.



                       PARTICIPANTS’ SELF-ANALYSIS ABOUT WHETHER
        Figure 44
                       WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES HELP WOMEN ACCESS
                       THE LABOUR MARKET (N= 268)
                                                                                   93



Furthermore, while the goods and services that women’s co-operatives produce
and offer do not stray too far from the “women’s realm” sectors, working for her
“own” company – the women’s co-operative – a woman has a greater opportunity
to grow or expand into roles of greater responsibility, for instance on the Board of
Directors, than if she was just an employee.

4.5 Ensure good governance and effective institutions
Due to the democratic nature of the co-operative model, women’s co-operatives
have a good governance model embedded in their practices, when employed
effectively. As with any co-operative, good governance takes thoughtful work,
policies and actions. If implemented appropriately, co-operatives can create a
business structure that is equitable and fair, which opens opportunities for women.
As the member of one women’s co-operatives states about the organizational
difference between a co-operative and an association:

“The association is more individually driven kind of entity; everything is under the chair’s
control. The co-op is more democratic. The women share responsibilities. I also think that
it is more advantageous in terms of economic empowerment.”

Through women’s co-operatives, women learn the skills to govern and manage
their businesses. Women’s co-operatives are 100 per cent governed by women. In
private companies in Turkey, only eight and a half per cent of board members and
seven per cent of directors are women (First Turkey Women Director’s Conference
2013).

As “institutions”, women’s co-operatives are and can be examples of good
governance unto themselves. They are also vessels of good governance that
support the transfer of good governance skills and knowledge to the rest of the
community. For example, in collaborating with local government and institutions,
women’s co-operatives help to build awareness of community needs and
encourage governmental activities that relate to the community, children and
women. In some instances, according to KEDV’s experience supporting women’s co-
operatives in the regions of Diyarbakir, Mardin, and Izmir, services of a more social
nature offered by women’s co-operatives were taken up by the local government
and institutions, thereby expanding, even if only incrementally, the ingredients of
good governance (democracy) and effective institutions (servicing the needs of the
community).
                                                                                95   5

5
The Legal Framework for
Co-operatives in Turkey

A key element of the supportive framework for co-operatives, including women’s
co-operatives, is the legal framework within which co-operatives are formed and
are regulated. In this chapter an answer is sought to the question “how does the
current legal framework [in Turkey] support or hinder co-operative formation and
operation”. To this end, this chapter attempts to present a general assessment of
the legal framework in Turkey, including how co-operatives are formed, expanded,
enter new lines of business, and stay sustainable. This framework is compared to
what are considered international good practices in co-operative legislation; and
general recommendations are made to support the sustainable growth of women’s
co-operatives.

As was discussed in section 2.4, co-operatives have a long history in Turkey. Legally,
government support for co-operatives was for the first time enshrined in the Turkish
Constitution in 1961, whereby the government first bore the explicit obligation to
support and develop co-operatives in the country. New laws were passed in 1969 to
facilitate co-operatives to aggregate into national unions.

Today, there are several laws that affect the regulation of co-operatives in Turkey, the
most important being Law 1163, the Turkish Co-operative Law. Other laws that are
applicable to co-operatives include Law 1581, the Agricultural Credit Co-operatives
and Unions, which is a specific law applicable only to co-operatives that provide
financing facilities to agricultural co-operatives. Similarly, Law 4572, the Agricultural
Sales Co-operatives and Credit Unions, is a special law only pertaining to co-
operatives that have activities in selling agricultural products. Both of these laws
default to Law 1163 on issues where there are questions or gaps in their language.

For the sake of the analysis presented here, this report builds on two primary
documents to better understand the legal environment within which women’s
co-operatives in Turkey operate. The first is the third revised edition of the ILO’s
“Guidelines for Co-operative Legislation”, published in 2012. This is a key document
on co-operative legal frameworks, which provides a contextual back drop against
which components for co-operative laws are proposed.38 The second document,
Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan 2012-2016, addressed as well in
section 2.5, provides a context for the legal environment in Turkey as it pertains
to co-operatives, and legal reforms aspired to by the Government of Turkey.
This chapter also draws on the literature review, surveys, and interviews where
appropriate.

In examining international good practices in co-operative legislation, Turkey’s
national co-operative legislation as it exists, and the aspirations as it pertains to
legislative reform described in the 2012–2016 Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and
Action Plan, a series of general recommendations emerge that affect women’s co-
operatives in Turkey. The main limitation in this analysis is that legal and regulatory
reforms are complex and shifting processes, which have impact beyond women’s
co-operatives or co-operatives more generally. These processes are not always
clear, as evidenced by the difficulty in obtaining precise information on the status
of planned legal reforms in Turkey beyond 2013. The result is series of general
recommendations that can act as rule of thumb when engaging in reforms of co-
operative legislation in Turkey to ensure that these reforms support the inherently
economic and social nature of women’s co-operatives; and their autonomy.

5.1 Lessons from the Guidelines for Co-operative Legislation39
The Guidelines for Co-operative Legislation make several assertions relevant to
understanding Turkey’s co-operative legislation.

First, the Guidelines reject the idea of presenting a “model a co-operative law”. The
Guidelines state that “Model laws are often simply transferred or copied without
the legislator adapting their underlying legal concepts to the particularities of
its jurisdiction” (Henrÿ, 2012). Turkey’s co-operative law, Law 1163, is the result of
a unique evolutionary process, specific to Turkey’s particular socio-cultural, geo-
political, and legal-economic history. It is this same history that has shaped the
mode of Turkish legislation as a whole, of which Law 1163 is only one small part.
As noted above, Turkey has numerous laws40 that overlap with Law 1163, and still
more that work in parallel to govern agricultural and construction co-operatives
independently. For the purposes of this report only Law 1163 will be considered.




38	Another support tool for learning from each other and bettering co-operative law globally is CLARITY (Co-
   operative Law and Regulation Initiative) sponsored by the US Overseas Co-operative Development Council
   (OCDC). See http://www.clarity.co-op/
39	This is the third revised edition.
40	Other laws include, but are not limited to: Agricultural Credit Co-operatives and Unions Law No 1581;
   Agricultural Sales Co-operatives and Credit Unions Law 4572; Corporate Tax Law 5520; Income Tax Law 193;
   Value Added Tax Law 3065; and Commercial Law 6102.
                                                                                                    97



Second, the Guidelines assert that co-operatives that are succeeding in a “globalised
economy” tend to develop from single to multi-purpose/multi-stakeholder
enterprises serving both members and non-members alike, as is the case for many
community-based co-operatives or social co-operatives (Henrÿ, 2012). The ability of
co-operatives to adapt is credited to the openness of co-operatives that encourage
diversity among members, and the commitment of co-operatives to work with
other co-operatives to better serve their members. Co-operative legislation
therefore has to frame effectively this diversity and encourage a paradigm marked
by co-operation rather than competition, without undermining the ability of co-
operative members to make these decisions themselves.

Another contemporary issue discussed in the Guidelines is the need for both
new and existing co-operatives to align themselves with concepts of sustainable
development, as enshrined in Principle 7 of the International Co-operative Alliance’s
Statement on Co-operative Identity - Concern for Community.41

The Guidelines understand sustainable development as also reflecting an
adherence to principles of social justice; implying meeting social needs and social
equality which members of co-operatives define and achieve for themselves.
Co-operatives in theory naturally promote practices of social justice given their
inclusive, democratic nature that provides members with equal opportunity to
voice concerns and have a say in decisions that have their interests at stake.

The elements of co-operative identity mentioned here - namely, democracy,
community, inclusivity, and co-operation – all work on some level to distinguish co-
operatives from joint-stock companies and it is for this reason why the Guidelines
firmly insist on a, “call for ending the companization of co-operatives through legislation”
(Henrÿ, 2012). Today, however, co-operative identity itself is increasingly being challenged
by a tendency for legislators to attempt to harmonizeco-operative and company laws.
Limited access to capital and a perceived imbalance in competitiveness between co-
operatives and joint-stock companies has resulted in a policy response that tends to “assist”
co-operatives by governing them more as if they were joint-stock companies, but this is at
the expense of the co-operative identity - the very element that preserves co-operatives
implicit commitment to sustainable development.


The Guidelines, drawing on the ILO Recommendation on Co-operatives (Number 193)
suggest that legislators adhere to the following objectives for creating co-operative laws.
These objectives are:


41	 R193 - “Promotion of Co-operatives Recommendation.” 2002. No. 193. Recommendation concerning
   promotion of co-operatives. Geneva, 90th ILC Session (20 June 2002). Accessed April 28, 2014 at http://
   www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R193. (see “Annex”
   for Extract from the Statement on the Co-operative Identity, adopted by the General Assembly of the
   International Co-operative Alliance in 1995)
1.	 Institutionalizing co-operatives

2.	 Imposing an obligation to preserve the co-operative identity

3.	 Include substantive content that provides for

      a. Social, economic, and cultural objectives

      b. Balance the associative nature of the co-operative (too much focus on the
      association decreases competitiveness) against the enterprising nature of the
      co-operative (too much focus on enterprise undermines co-operative identity)

      c. Provide equal treatment to other forms of enterprisesfacilitate primary and
      secondary order organizations of co-operatives (Henry, 2012)

These objectives shall be discussed in greater detail in the subsequent sections and
examples provided with respect to Law 1163.

5.2 The Turkish Co-operative Law
5.2.1	 General legislative features and sources of law
Law 1163 is the Turkish Co-operative Law. It does not contain a preamble or
other text that references the international co-operative principles.42 Law 1163
locates Turkish co-operatives somewhere between “Societies” and “Associations,”
distinguishing co-operatives from the other kinds of legal personscontemplated
within the various Turkish Codes.43




42	 R193 - “Promotion of Co-operatives Recommendation.” 2002. No. 193. Recommendation concerning
   promotion of co-operatives. Geneva, 90th ILC Session (20 June 2002). Accessed April 28, 2014 at http://
   www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R193. (see “Annex”
   for Extract from the Statement on the Co-operative Identity, adopted by the General Assembly of the
   International Co-operative Alliance in 1995)
43 In Turkish law a “society” is the coming together of persons who work towards a common objective with
   no intention to make or share profits. An “association” on the other hand is recognized as a for profit entity.
   Whereas societies are governed in the Civil Code, by the Law of Societies, associations are governed by the
   Commercial Code under the Law of Associations (see “Introduction to Turkish Law,” Ansay, T. & Wallace, D.,
   2011. Kluwer Law International at pp. 103-118.)
                                                                                                       99



Law 1163 has nine sections, which are as follows:
1.	 Information of Establishing a Co-operative
2.	 Acquisition and Loss of Membership
3.	 Rights and Liabilities of Membership
4.	 Profit, Division of Surplus, and the Application of Interest
5.	 Co-operative Organs
6.	 Associations, Central Associations, National Associations
7.	 Liquidation
8.	 Ministerial Duties and Authority
9.	 Miscellaneous



If it is not clear whether a group of persons have come together to exist as a co-
operative, the default law is the Turkish Joint-Stock Companies law. 44 This is
because co-operatives are more closely associated with “associations” as opposed
to “societies.”45

Law No. 1581, the Agricultural Credit Co-operatives and Unions, is a specific law
applicable only to co-operatives that provide financing facilities to agricultural co-
operatives. Where Law1581 is silent on a matter the authority defaults to Law1163.
Similarly, Law 4572, the Agricultural Sales Co-operatives and Credit Unions, is a
special law only pertaining to co-operatives that have activities in selling agricultural
products. Law 4572 also defaults to Law1163 where it is silent.

5.2.2 Definition and purpose of co-operatives
Article 1 of Law 1163 provides the following description of co-operatives:

Co-operatives are bodies with variable members, variable capital, and legal identity
that are established by real and legal entitiesin order to ensure and maintain certain
economic interests and especially the needs of their members toward professional
life and living standards by means of mutual assistance, solidarity and service as
trustees to each other.




44	 Law on Co-operatives, Law 1163. dated 24 April 1969
45	 Akbaş, K. “Nonprofit Law in Turkey.” Working Papers of the Johns Hopkins Comparative Nonprofit Sector
   Project, No. 51. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Centre for Civil Society Studies, 2014. Available at
   ccss.jhu.edu. (see “While co-operatives are generally considered to be part of the “Third Sector”—i.e., not
   part of government and not part of the business sector—they are not considered part of the nonprofit
   sector as defined by the Comparative Nonprofit Sector Project. This is so because most co-operatives
   distribute profits to members and shareholders, thus violating the “non-profit distributing” criterion outlined
   in the definition used by the CNP Project.” at pp. 20)
It is worth noting in this description that only economic interests are mentioned,
suggesting that the law contemplates co-operatives as a vehicle for economic
development. This does not align with the recommended definition of a co-
operative as provided for in ILO Recommendation 193 which defines a co-operative
as:

An autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common
economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly owned and
democratically controlled enterprise.46

5.2.3 Range of anticipated co-operative activities
The scope of activities that co-operatives are permitted to engage in is not limited
by the text of Law 1163. There is, however, a high degree of discretion given to
public authorities in approving the establishment of a proposed co-operative.47 It
is thought that such discretion could have an impact on co-operative innovation
and entrepreneurship. The results of the survey conducted seem to indicate that
women’s co-operatives in Turkey usually produce goods or services that fall within
the realm of “women’s work”, as described previously in section 3.5. Women’s co-
operative’s future successes and sustainability may indeed depend on their ability
to expand their business beyond economic areas traditionally reserved for women,
which will also be discussed in section 6.1.3 “What women’s co-operatives want”.

5.2.4 Forms and modes of establishment
In order to establish a co-operative in Turkey, a minimum of seven founders must
submit an application to one of three Ministries. The MoFAL is responsible for
authorizing and registering agricultural co-operatives; the MoEU for construction
co-operatives; and the MoCT for all other co-operatives. This divided approach to
administering co-operative establishment does not align with the Guidelines that
instead recommend a single administrative body that oversees all co-operative
registrations (Henrÿ, 2012).




46	 R193 - “Promotion of Co-operatives Recommendation.” 2002. No. 193. Recommendation concerning
   promotion of co-operatives. Geneva, 90th ILC Session (20 June 2002). Accessed April 28, 2014 at http://
   www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R193. (see “Annex”
   for Extract from the Statement on the Co-operative Identity, adopted by the General Assembly of the
   International Co-operative Alliance in 1995)
47	Discretion is exhibited in the following ways: guidance and support for establishment and organizing of co-
   operatives and unions, implementation the law including monitoring and auditing the co-operatives, and
   notifying the courts if there are reasons for closure and advice on allocation of social security and public
   funds. These are examples not a complete list.
                                                                             101



The application for establishment must contain rules / by-laws that
contemplate the following particulars:
    •	 the name of the co-operative and where it is headquartered
    •	 the purpose of the co-operative and its field of operation
    •	 conditions precedent for membership - and provisions relating to member
   termination
    •	 the number of member shares and the form of co-operative capital (up to ¼
   of the co-operative’s capital must be in cash)
    •	 whether the co-operative permits in kind capitalization
    •	 specifics relating to member liability for the co-operatives financial
   obligations
    •	 the range of powers and duties of controllers as well as details as to how
   they are elected
    •	 information in regards to how the co-operative is to be represented
    •	 details as to the formulas for determining the annual surplus, and
    •	 biographical information about the applicants, or founders

In addition to these obligatory rules, the law suggests that details related to the
governing of the general assembly, decision making procedures, operational
procedures, relationships with existing co-operative unions, and the anticipated life
span or duration of the co-operative seeking establishment be included.

5.2.5 Membership rights, obligations and governance
To become a member of a Turkish co-operative you must be a legal person capable
of exercising your civil rights, and must be able to benefit from the services of the
co-operative. At the establishment of a co-operative there must be seven members,
however, the number of members can be limited to suit the objectives of the co-
operative.

In Turkish co-operatives there is an immediate financial obligation imposed on
all members, as well as ongoing financial obligations in some cases. Membership
requires the purchase of a minimum of one capital share. The minimum allowable
cost of a capital share was recently raised to 100 TL. Any member is eligible
to purchase up to a maximum of 5,000 shares. Additionally, members can be
personally liable for debts of the co-operative if agreed to in advance and in writing.
This liability is proportionate to the held share capital of the members, but can
be limited and unlimited depending on how it is assigned in the rules of the co-
operative. No member can be held liable for any co-operative debts without having
first been made aware of such liability and agreeing to take on the liability (Keles,
2013).

ILO recommendations and the Guidelines are silent as to specifics of this nature.
Member capitalization and assignment of debt are practical realities of co-
operatives, and in most cases around the world, this is given the proper autonomy
to be contemplated internal to the co-operative rather than prescribed by the
government. It would be difficult to achieve some legislative text that prescribes
this sort of practice in a universally practical way given the range of co-operative
activities and objects, hence the silence from the ILO and Guidelines on this issue.

Membership in a Turkish co-operative provides for the right to participate in the
general assembly on a one member, one vote basis irrespective of share capital.
In some circumstances the voting rights of a member may be assigned by that
member to one other member, but no member is permitted to hold the voting
rights of any more than one additional member.

5.2.6 Financial aspects
Turkish co-operatives outside of the agricultural sector tend to rely primarily on
direct member capitalization. To encourage the purchase of additional capital shares
by the members, interest may be accrued on these shares. The rate of interest is tied
to state bond rates and can change with the national standard over time.

If a co-operative is able to achieve a surplus from the income-expenditure
differential, the distribution of the surplus is made proportional to patronage by
the members. However, it is important to note that non-member generated
revenue may be distributed in proportion to shares held if such an arrangement is
specified in the co-operative’s rules. In the event that the rules do not specify that
non-member generated revenue be distributed amongst members in proportion
to the number of shares held, this revenue is to be used for the further growth and
development of the co-operative.

Before any distribution of the income-expenditure difference is made, Article 39
of the Turkish law calls for a minimum 10 per cent of the difference be allocated
to a reserve, and a further 5 per cent be allocated to a special reserve only to be
drawn upon in extraordinary circumstances. This and the above-noted distribution
rules are governed by the terms set out in the constituting documents of each co-
operative.
                                                                            103



5.2.7 Approaches to governance
Members in a Turkish co-operative are primarily responsible for governing the co-
operative. Member participation in the general assembly provides the platform
for members to exercise control over the co-operative and its activities. The law
provides for certain rights to be reserved only for the general assembly. These rights
include the following:

The right to modify the rules/by-laws;
    •	 The right to elect the directors to sit on the board of liquidation, the board
   of directors, and auditors;
    •	 The right to make decisions regarding operational and surplus accounting;
    •	 The right to make decisions about real estate investments/divestments;
    •	 The right to determine manufacturing and construction methods; and,
    •	 The right to choose the number of buildings to be owned and operated
   by the co-operative, as well as the number of members permissible in the co-
   operative

Absent from the enumerated general assembly rights and powers, but
recommended in the Guidelines are the following:
    •	 Control over the objects of the co-operative
    •	 Policies related to member admission/termination/withdrawal
    •	 Valuation and quantity of shares
    •	 Conditions for share payments/subscriptions
    •	 General assembly procedures
    •	 Surplus distributions
    •	 Amendments to the constituting documents (Henry, 2012)

The above-noted powers of general assembly expand upon those contained in the
Turkish law. The Guidelines have a much broader deference to the membership
on decision-making concerning the nature of the co-operative. Whereas the
enumerated Turkish rights only allow members to modify by-laws and elect
directors, and the remaining members rights have an economic character that
seems to deal largely with asset management. This is not unexpected given the
level of control exercised by State authorities over co-operative establishment.
Notwithstanding, the Guidelines are clear that the general assembly’s importance
cannot be understated as it is where a co-operative exhibits, applies, and preserves
its democratic autonomous nature.

Once elected, the co-operative’s board of directors is tasked with governing the day
to day operations of the co-operative. The Turkish law takes a different approach
from the Guidelines in that the eligibility criteria for board members are prescribed
as opposed to being substantively at the discretion of the membership. The board
can be comprised of no less than three directors, who must be Turkish citizens to
qualify. There are also several restrictions on who may be eligible to serve on a co-
operative board. For example there is a restriction that a board member may not
serve on any other co-operative boards in a similar field. More striking though is the
ineligibility of any person who may have a conviction in relation to embezzlement,
crimes against “State security,” against “constitutional order of the State,” theft,
corruption, bribery, misuse of duties, forgery, thievery, cheating, fraudulent
bankruptcy, misuse of a trust, and crimes against “the personality of the State.”48 The
convictions with respect to fraudulent activities or derogation of fiduciary duty serve
a protective capacity to the members, although the convictions mentioned here that
could be construed to have a political character could indicate to a preclusive policy
towards co-operatives that may have an activist, or political orientation.

5.2.8 Registration and means of control
The registration of Turkish co-operatives is managed by the relevant Ministry as
mentioned above in section 5.2.4. These ministries also exert a large amount of
control over the co-operatives that fall under their jurisdiction. The three ministries
may elect to exercise this control at their own discretion throughout the life of a co-
operative. Ministerial discretion affords authorities the right to oversee all aspects of
a co-operative’s accounting and record keeping, the ability to dismiss co-operative
board members directly, the power to dissolve a co-operative, and the discretion to
appoint superior organizations or associations to supervise a co-operative.

Further ministerial oversight is achieved through what the law refers to as “duties” in
Articles 86 - 91. Article 86 allows a ministry to directly supervise a co-operative, and to
assist with “administration.” Article 87 mandates that a government agent be present
at all general assembly meetings to ensure compliance with all rules and procedures.
The co-operative is expected to pay a fee for the government agent’s presence
at these meetings. The ministries that oversee co-operatives in Turkey also supply
co-operatives with sector specific model rules or by-laws, designate accounting
methods to be implemented by co-operatives, and have the capacity to appoint
auditors /controllers to examine the books of a co-operative in order to assess and
make mandatory recommendations. Failure to implement the recommendations
could result in heavy fines or even jail time for members of the board of directors.

5.2.9 Conversion options and procedures
Law 1163 does not contemplate voluntary conversion of co-operatives into other
forms of enterprise or legal personhood. In general, for co-operatives to thrive, it is
essential that they maintain autonomy over their activities. This aligns with findings in
the literature review, noted in section 2.5. Part of this autonomy extends to allowing
for co-operative members to determine the fate of the co-operative. The co-
operative law should allow members to freely elect to dissolve, amalgamate, divide,


48	 Law on Co-operatives, Law 1163, Article 56. Dated 24 April 1969.
                                                                              105



or convert a co-operative with the consent of the majority - so long as creditors are
not left without recourse to obtaining their interests. At this point Law 1163 is silent
on the subject; however, that being said, co-operative dissolution is administered by
the ministries. Hence the bottleneck or back log, thus creating the status of closed,
because the co-operatives are waiting what to be officially dissolved. 

5.2.10 Tax treatment
Co-operatives in Turkey are afforded special tax treatment; however these privileges
are not afforded to all co-operatives equally. The co-operative specific legislation is
not the primary source of tax law for co-operatives, rather the Constitution of the
Republic of Turkey captures co-operatives in Article 73 wherein it states, “everyone
based on his/her financial ability is obligated to pay taxes to be used for public
services” (Okan & Okan. 2013).

Although some tax exemptions exist for co-operatives, the exigible tax bases
for co-operatives include:
     1.	 Corporate Tax (Law 5520, 2006)
     2.	 Income Tax (The Income Tax Law 193, 1960)
     3.	 Value Added Tax (Law 3065, 1985)
     4.	 Other Real Estate, Vehicle Purchase, Duties, and Stamp Taxes

Co-operatives may be eligible for certain exemptions from corporate taxes, which are
not consumer or transportation co-operatives. This is the case if the co-operative’s
contesting documents assert the following: they must not distribute profit over
capital; shares cannot be distributed to the Board; reserve funds are not distributed to
shareholders; and, business activities are conducted only with members. If all of the
aforementioned criteria are met, the co-operative can only qualify for the exemptions
if they have integrated vertically with a higher level organization as per Article 93 of
Law 1163 (Okan & Okan. 2013).

Income taxes (Income Tax Law 193, Article 94) are collected from co-operative
members who earn income from their participation in a co-operative. The co-
operative’s income, if distributed amongst its members, is not directly taxable.
However, if the co-operative is conducting a revenue generating activity and income
is not distributed amongst the members, or used to supply the reserve, it can be
deemed taxable (Okan & Okan. 2013).

Based on the Value Added Tax Law 3065, except for certain situations defined for
agricultural and construction co-operatives, co-operatives pay value added tax for
their commercial goods and services. The rates of the tax is determined as to their
sales of goods and services.
5.2.11 Co-operation among co-operatives
Turkish co-operatives are encouraged to integrate vertically and horizontally
to achieve co-operation among co-operatives. The impetus to achieve this co-
operation through integration is mandated in some cases, for example through tax
exemption as discussed above. The co-operative sector in Turkey is organized into
a hierarchy starting with co-operatives as the base organizational unit, followed by
associations, central associations, and national co-operative unions.

The boards of the super-organizations are elected from designated representatives
from the general assemblies of the super-organization’s constituents. Co-operative
unions are unique from the other super-organizations in that they have territorially
defined boundaries within which no parallel organization operating in the same
field can exist. Also unique to the co-operative unions is the existence of a “Board
of Consultants.” The Board of Consultants is comprised of members of the board of
directors along with various State representatives that serve to facilitate oversight of
integration activities.

As noted in section 5.1, the Guidelines identify the need for co-operative legislation
to balance the potential strength of co-operative integration with the autonomy of
co-operative members to make decisions. For a co-operative, this means that the
members should be able to choose to integrate vertically or horizontally to form
unions, associations, or confederations. Having the capacity to integrate allows
co-operatives to retain competitiveness by not concentrating in a particular field,
while preserving independence and the democratic governance of individual co-
operatives. The Turkish model does allow for relevant ministries to play a larger in
encouraging this integration.

In order to facilitate integration amongst of co-operatives, the law should provide
a means for adequate representation of co-operative members of individual
co-operatives, as they are integrated vertically and horizontally. The principle
of subsidiarity is often invoked in these circumstances, calling for a bottom-up
approach to decision making. As mentioned above, the Turkish law contemplates
a representative hierarchy, however what was made clear in the survey conducted
as part of this research isthe lack of representation in this hierarchy for women’s co-
operatives. Most respondents were not aware of possibilities for vertical integration
and spoke to a feeling of isolation within the co-operative sector, although women’s
co-operative are starting to move towards more vertical integration (see sections
3.6.2 and 6.2.3).

As co-operatives organize into more complex forms via integration, it becomes
increasingly important that dispute resolution mechanisms are put in place. Dispute
resolution refers to practices and policies that encourage non-judicial conflict
management (i.e. arbitration, mediation). The co-operative law should contain
                                                                            107



provisions outlining dispute resolution mechanisms that co-operatives must use to
resolve conflicts arising within co-operatives, amongst co-operatives in a vertically
integrated structure, or between co-operatives that may be horizontally integrated.
Non-judicial dispute resolution is typically non-adversarial and is interested in not
only resolving discrete conflicts, but also in repairing relationships and empowering
conflicting parties to create their own form of resolution.

5.3 Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan 2012-2016
In response to the United Nations mandated International Year of Co-operatives in
2012, the MoCT, via the Directorate General of Co-operatives, undertook a broad
assessment and information gathering campaign in order to develop the Turkish
Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan 2012-2016. The Action Plan identifies that
a co-operatives’ mandate is to provide socially responsible free enterprise while
upholding civic values. The Action Plan also asserts that the progress of the co-
operative sector in a given country is tied to its “membership culture,” which also
reflects back on the progress of the society as a whole. Finally, the Action Plan
highlights that Turkish co-operatives have, for the most part, “failed to achieve the
desired economic and social functions”(MoCT, 2012:4).

The Action Plan proposes that co-operatives have an increasingly significant role to
play in strategies for alleviating poverty and towards achieving a variety of benefits
in Turkey. These benefits include expanding access to finance, creating new jobs,
improving market regulation, and increasing social capital. Although these aims
are very broad, the Plan puts forward a strategic framework, outlining the problem
areas and some general remedies that can be employed to achieve its targets.

5.3.1 Public organization and the provision of co-operative services
The Action Plan suggests that one of the underlying factors that has hampered the
development and success of Turkish co-operatives is the limited ability of public
institutions, or governmental agencies, to provide co-operatives with the support
and programs they need to thrive. The proposed relief for this is threefold:

   1)Increase the monitoring capacity of the ministerial authorities,
   2) Task some of the super-organizations to deliver services to co-operatives, and
   3) Implement a data collection and analysis system to provide greater accuracy
   and performance of remedial interventions in the future.
5.3.2 Training, consulting, information and research programs
The subjects identified in the heading have as a common element the aim to
provide better education for the co-operative sector. The deficiency identified here
is a lacking infrastructure resulting in misconceptions or poor execution among
individuals involved in co-operatives. The proposed solution is the creation of the
KGEP (Training Project of Co-operative Entrepreneurship), an institution that takes a
holistic and long term strategy to increase the overall knowledge base from which
co-operators may draw upon, and to impart this knowledge on children in primary
schools, to co-operators through training programs and through trade unions, and
to co-operative supervisors and board members through a specialized training
program that will result in the granting of a certificate. Additionally, the Action Plan
calls for the implementation of an annual reporting scheme for the co-operative
sector with reportssupplied nationally.

5.3.3 Organization and co-operation among co-operatives
The Action Plan identifies a lack of coordination and co-operation amongst co-
operatives, as well as a generally poor uptake of integration initiatives. Rather than
passively accommodating the proliferation of insular co-operatives, the mandate
here is to take measures to ensure co-operatives begin working together and they
have the institutional and government support to facilitate this. To achieve better
co-operation the Plan proposes the establishment of new super-organizations, the
promotion of co-operative mergers, increased focus on multi-purpose co-operative
enterprise, and extending co-operation outside the national borders by working
with international co-operatives. There is also an identified need to explore sectors
where there is currently little to no co-operative, where activities may be conducive
to the co-operative model, and to make a concerted effort to encourage the spread
of co-operatives into these fields.

5.3.4 Enhance access to capital
As mentioned above in sections 3.5 and 5.2.6, Turkish co-operatives are primarily
capitalized by the members. In the case of agricultural co-operatives, there is a long
history of institutional financial support from the state and their utilization to bolster
development and modernization. For a period of time construction co-operatives
were supported by governmental institutions as well, but this support has since
been terminated.

The Action Plan proposes an additional increase to the minimum price of members’
capital shares, while it is worth noting the current minimum value of 100 TL was a
significant increase that was only made very recently. Additionally, the proposition
call for the elimination of the upper limit on the number of shares that can be held
by a member - currently the cap is 5,000 shares.
                                                                                                   109



To assist co-operatives in obtaining external funding, the Action Plan calls for
the creation of a guarantee fund for co-operative credits. This fund is to provide
assurances to lending institutions and help mitigate the risks associated with
funding co-operatives. The proposal also entails the creation of a lending institution
specifically to support the co-operative sector.

5.3.5 Enhancing audit systems
In the Action Plan there is some discussion of corruption within co-operatives
and limited knowledge of auditing practices amongst members of co-operatives.
The Plan does not detail how the current audit practices will be enhanced. It
does however call for the implementation of international best practices for
external audits, as well as regulatory reform to institute more effective internal
audit mechanisms. The assumption is that already discussed initiatives focused on
education and training would support the strengthening of current audit practices.

5.3.6 Enhancing management capacity
There is a real and apparent concern that members of co-operatives lack the
training and understanding to operate and manage co-operatives successfully.
This concern extends to co-operative board members, controllers, and managers.
The solution proposed in the Action Plan calls for co-operative harmonization with
principles of corporate governance. This proposition translates into a shift towards
more transparency achieved by requiring large scale co-operatives to maintain an
online presence, more generally increasing information sharing strategies amongst
co-operative members, and the allowance for hiring non-member executives for
positions on co-operative boards.	

5.3.7 Legal infrastructure improvement
The Action Plan is very general on this issue. It merely calls for legal reform to bring
Turkish co-operative law in line with international principles and requirements.

5.3.8 State responsibility post-2012
Although this heading does not refer to one of the listed strategic targets and
activities, there is mention throughout the Action Plan of how the state must
augment its approach to co-operatives. It is expected that the legal reforms will
trigger a co-operative sector that is more in line with the internationally accepted
co-operative principles.49




49	R193 - “Promotion of Co-operatives Recommendation.” 2002. No. 193. Recommendation concerning
   promotion of co-operatives. Geneva, 90th ILC Session (20 June 2002). Accessed April 28, 2014 at http://
   www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R193. (see “Annex”
   for Extract from the Statement on the Co-operative Identity, adopted by the General Assembly of the
   International Co-operative Alliance in 1995)
It is suggested that the state also focus its support of co-operative activities
rather than co-operatives generally, this way achieving a higher level of support
for objectives that have a social or public character. Finally and perhaps most
importantly, the Action Plan calls on the state and stakeholders to specifically
increase access to capital for disadvantaged individuals participating in co-
operatives.

5.4 Moving forward
Based on the preceding analysis, there are three main areas where Turkey’s co-
operative legislation could be adjusted to better reflect the Guidelines and align
with the spirit of the Action Plan.

First, what emerges from the above discussion is an observation that neither the
Guidelines nor the Turkish Law specifically speak to “women’s co-operatives.”
The Action Plan does make reference to bolstering the activities of women’s co-
operatives through various funding, education, and training programs, as well as
increased governmental support and oversight for co-operatives who strive to
battle poverty and provide other forms of support for the community. Certainly, the
survey results confirm that respondents almost universally state that all of the above
initiatives would be well received by members of women’s co-operatives in Turkey.
However, a recurring problem seems to be the Turkish categorization and definition
of co-operative enterprises, as women’s co-operatives are unaccounted for.

Co-operatives in Turkey, being neither “Associations” nor “Foundations” occupy
a unique place. Women’s co-operatives then find themselves in precarious
positions wherein women come together to provide what amounts to community
services, self-financed by small scale enterprises, while being subject to the same
tax and fee regime as the large scale industrial co-operatives. Since women’s
co-operativesfinance their own activities they are subject to tax regimes and
administrative costs that are consistent with other businesses in Turkey. As such it
seems that at the very least, the community as well as social nature of women’s co-
operatives might warrant closer attention, and inform subsequent accommodation
through legal or policy reforms.

Expansion of the Turkish definition of co-operatives that is inclusive of social and
community oriented objectives may serve as a starting point to help women’s
co-operatives, or other social and community oriented co-operatives, to gain
                                                                                                 111



recognition for the community or social benefit they supply.50 The Action Plan’s
mandate to bring the co-operative sector in line with international standards
could begin with expanding the definition of co-operative enterprise in Turkey to
acknowledge the social or community benefit of some types of co-operative.

The second issue has to do with the costs that women’s co-operatives assume
when they are conceived of as private entities. As mentioned above, co-operatives
are subject to tax regimes and administrative fees that correspond with for-profit
enterprise. And as noted previously in this report, a common response by survey
respondents is that women’s co-operatives find these taxes and fees prohibitive. All
the more sobecause so many women’s co-operatives are unable to access capital or
to qualify for subsidies. The Action Plan calls for financial support for women’s co-
operatives. Any significant movement in this direction would supply a great benefit
to the members of these co-operatives.

The third issue isthe discretion as exercised by government ministries in fulfilling
their roles as regulators of co-operatives. The Action Plan does not refer to limiting
state interventions into co-operative enterprise that undermine co-operative
autonomy. Indeed, any government plays a key role to support and monitor co-
operative activity in order to be effective in the supply of programs, funding,
and education to co-operatives and their members. It is premature to come to
conclusions about how state authority should be exercised. However, any reforms
should be made to correspond with the internationally accepted co-operative
principles and state regulators should be conscious of the unique social and
economic nature of women’s co-operatives.




50	 This report does not advocate for treatment of all women’s co-operatives to be specified on the basis
   of the gender composition of the members. Rather, the point being made is that co-operatives, like any
   other enterprise, that set out to provide community service and for community benefit, should primarily
   be categorized with respect to that community function. Should a women’s co-operative in Turkey set out
   to become a high grossing private enterprise, it too should be subject to taxes and fees accordingly. Any
   proposal founded on gender-based categorization of tax treatments and administrative fees is inherently
   problematic and should be avoided at all costs.
                                                                          113    6



6
Support Programs for Women’s
Co-operatives


Two questions that the research sought to address were the following:
What are the main support programs provided by government and other
stakeholders and how effective are these?

What kind of support programs might women’s co-operatives need to be more
effective?

As has been presented so far, supporting co-operatives and women’s co-operatives
specifically needs to be understood in terms of a supportive infrastructure of laws,
organizations, and programs that allow co-operatives to thrive long-term. This
infrastructure includes the legal framework for women’s co-operatives, which was
discussed in Chapter 4. It further includes the programs and organizations that
have or could have a role in providing a critical package of support services that
encourage women’s co-operatives to thrive.

This chapter explores the two above questions by drawing primarily on the data
presented from the surveys and stakeholder interviews. The data identifies a
number of issues including:

     (1) High demand for support from women’s co-operatives;
     (2) The broad usability of the programs that women have accessed;
     (3) Differences in needs and interests of women’s co-operatives according
     to what their co-operatives actually do (e.g. enterprise vs. agricultural co-
     operatives);
     (4) Certain constraints within the programs offered as compared to what is
     desired by the women’s co-operatives themselves; and
     (5) The differing roles of different organisations involved with women’s co-
     operatives. These issues allow for the formulation of certain recommendations
     for future support programs.
It is important to note that in responding to these two questions, the research was
not an attempt to conduct a formal evaluation of the support programs available
to women’s co-operatives. Almost 30 such programs have been identified (see
Appendix 6), which have various objectives and outcomes. Differing levels of data
exist on the programs and as has been noted in a report produced by the MoFSP
and the WB on women’s entrepreneurship and the labour market, a lot of data on
such programs is restricted and formal evaluations are difficult to identify (Gökşen
et al, 2014). Therefore one key recommendation emerging from the analysis is that
designing new support programs for women’s co-operatives would benefit from a
more complete understanding of the impact of existing highly-solicited programs,
which will be discussed later in this chapter.

6.1 Main support programs: Availability and usability
6.1.1	Availability
The Table of Support Programs provided in Appendix 6 describes which programs
have been available to women’s co-operatives over the past ten years. This does not
mean that these were programs that targeted women’s co-operatives specifically,
rather that these are programs that exist or existed which women’s co-operatives
had access to. First, highlights and observations about this list of programs will be
presented. Second, there is a detailed discussion of the women’s co-operatives’
experiences with programs based on survey results.

According to our search, more than half of the programs available to women’s
co-operatives over the past ten years are offered by organizations from outside
Turkey (the EU, UNDP, embassies and consulates). The rest are offered by regional
development agencies, the national government (MoFSP, MoFAL) and national
NGOs, such as KEDV. Specific priorities are identified under each program. Some aim
to support women’s economic participation and entrepreneurship, whereas, others
aim towards social development. Once received, the duration of the funding varies
from six months to 24 months.

The programs are available for specific types of organizations, mostly civil society
organisations or understood differently, NGOs (e.g. the EU programs, GFC, UNDP
programs). Others include small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Some of
theprograms available for NGOs can at times consider co-operatives to be eligible
only if they can prove that the profit is not shared among the members (e.g. Direct
Aid Program Austrian Consulate, some development agencies at the regional
level programs). The programs available for private sector organizations offered by
development agencies working at the regional level in Turkey consider women’s
co-operatives if they meet the criteria (i.e. scale of business and level of revenue) as
designated by development agencies and plans.
                                                                          115



The amount of the funding provided varies from 10,000TL to 1,500,000TL. It can
make up from 25 per cent to 90 per cent of the overall budget of the project
being funded. The programs targeting NGOs provide less funding, but a greater
percentage of the budget, while the programs targeting the private sector provide
more funding but a smaller percentage of the project budget. 

The types of activities supported within the programs differ. For social purpose
programs targeting NGOs, the funding can be used for most kind of expenses if
they are related to the project activities. These expenses can be human resources,
travel, purchase/rent of equipment, project office costs, publication. For programs
targeting SMEs or the private sector, the funding can be used for specific expenses
– mostly equipment purchase, travel, visibility and expertise – but not for the
operational costs of the business.

From the 45 stakeholders interviewed, there were 38 from organisations that do
or could support women’s co-operatives in various ways. Some of the funding
programs that stakeholders spoke about were formal programs with intake criteria,
objectives and funding amounts attached; whereas, others were less clear. Others
had yet to start, such as the MoCT’s new program of KOOPDES (Co-op Support).

Co-operatives were asked if they had ever applied to support programs and
subsequently, if they were approved for this support. Sixty-nine per cent of
respondents applied to support programs, of which two-thirds of applications
were approved. Figure 45 provides the breakdown between active and inactive co-
operatives.



                              NUMBER OF WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES WHO
          Figure 45
                              APPLIED FOR SUPPORT PROGRAMS
                              (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE) (N=101)

                                   Applied       Approved            Useful51

 Active (n = 63)                      76%          54%                 98%
 Inactive (n = 38)                    47%          39%                 88%




There is a difference between active and inactive co-operatives in accessing support
programs. According to the survey results, 76 per cent (48/63) of active women’s
co-operatives applied to one or more sources of funding programs, as compared to
47 per cent (18/38) of inactive ones. Furthermore, 27 active co-operatives applied


51	Usefulness based on successful application.
to more than one funding program, ranging from as low as 2 applications to a
high of 12 applications from an agricultural women’s co-operative located in the
Southeastern Anatolia region. Only eight inactive women’s co-operatives applied
for more than one source of funding program, ranging from two to six applications
per women’s co-operative. What the survey did not consider is those with same
funding/support sources that were available when the inactive co-operatives were
still active.

There is no difference in the aggregate approval rate of active versus inactive
women’s co-operatives: 62 per cent (active) vs. 62 per cent (inactive). Thus, if they
apply for funding, they have about a 62 per cent approval rate and nearly all of them
find the funding useful: 98 per cent for active and 88 per cent for inactive (although
there was only one inactive women’s co-operative that did not find the funding
useful, which skews the results due to the small sample).

When broken down by type, there does not appear to be any evidence that type
of women’s co-operative would affect whether or not a co-operative is likely to be
approved for support programs (Figure 46). This is partially due to the extremely
small sample sizes of consumer, manufacturing and marketing and small arts co-
ops. When comparing agricultural development women’s co-operatives versus
enterprise women’s co-operatives, only 46 per cent of agricultural co-operatives
applied for support (69 per cent had applications approved) compared to 73 per
cent of enterprise co-operatives who applied for support (with 74 per cent having
at least one application approved).



                       SUPPORT BASED ON TYPE OF CO-OPERATIVE
        Figure 46
                       (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE) (N= 101)



                                          Applied         Approved          Useful       Unaware


 Agricultural Development (n=28)             46%             69%              29%          7%

 Enterprise (n=64)                           73%             74%              55%          6%

 Consumers Co-op (n=2)                       50%              0%              0%           50%

 Manufacturing and marketing (n=2)           50%             50%              50%          0%

 Small Arts (n=4)                            75%             75%              50%          0%

 Other: Feminist Solidarity (n=1)           100%             100%            100%          0%
                                                                                   117



 An important finding from the survey is that women’s co-operatives believe that support
 programs are useful. In almost all cases of active co-operatives who had received support
 from a specific institutionfound the support useful. The only exceptions to this was in the
 cases of the MoFSP and a particular municipal government, where one co-operative from
 each had not found the support useful, as can be seen in Figure 47.




                          SUPPORT RECEIVED AND WAS IT USEFUL
          Figure 47
                          (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)


Supportive institution                            Received        Useful         Useful
                                                  Support        Support       (per cent)

Ministry of Customs and Trade                          1             1            100%
Ministry of Family and Social Policy                   4             3             75%
Ministry of Agriculture                                5             5            100%
Municipal Government                                   14           13             93%
Governorship                                           7             7            100%
Provincial Directorate of Customs and Trade            4             4            100%
Provincial Directorate of Agriculture                  4             4            100%
Provincial Directorate of National Education           4             4            100%
Development Agencies                                   3             3            100%
European Union                                         6             6            100%
United Nations                                         4             4            100%
International Foundations                              3             3            100%
Sabancı Foundation                                     3             3            100%
KEDV                                                   22           22            100%
KOSGEB                                                 2             2            100%
Social Aid and Solidarity Funding (SYDTF)              3             3            100%
Chambers of Commerce                                   2             2            100%

 		



 It does not appear that women’s co-operatives from certain regions approval rate vary
 greatly (Figure 48). Despite somewhat supportive approval rates, all but one co-operative in
 the Southeastern Anatolia region applied for support programs. The high level of awareness
 and willingness to apply for support programs is an important finding for this region
 since the Southeastern Anatolia region is the only region where all but one co-operative
 surveyed were active. According to interviews, reasons for this are in part because of KEDV’s
 established presence working in the region, engaging with municipalities as well as other
 organisations with a stake in women’s co-operative.
                         REGIONAL BREAKDOWN (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)
          Figure 48
                         (N=101)


                               Applied          Approved            Useful         Unaware of Programs


      Mediterranean (n=8)        38%               13%               13%                  25%

    Eastern Anatolia (n=6)       83%               50%               33%                  17%

    Central Anatolia (n=17)      59%               53%               53%                   6%

    Southeastern Anatolia
                                 93%               64%               64%                  0.0%
                  (n=14)

          Marmara (n = 31)       65%               45%               45%                  10%

           Aegean (n = 16)       85%               85%               69%                  23%

          Black Sea (n = 9)      44%               33%               33%                  22%

			
	

In terms of which support programs were most solicited in which regions (Figure 49),
co-operatives in Marmara, Southeastern Anatolia, Central Anatolia, and the Aegean
regions received the most support, with individual women’s co-operatives often
receiving support from more than one source. Co-operatives from Eastern Anatolia,
the Black Sea, and the Mediterranean regions received the least amount of support.
The supporting institutions with the broadest operational capacity serving all regions
are KEDV, the EU, and municipal governments.
                                                                                               119



                                                 REGIONAL BREAKDOWN OF THE SUPPORTIVE
                                     Figure 49
                                                 INSTITUTIONS ACCESSED BY WOMEN’S
                                                 CO-OPERATIVES (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE) (N=101)


                                      Eastern    Central    Southeastern
                     Mediterranean                                         Marmara   Aegean   Black Sea
                                      Anatolia   Anatolia     Anatolia
                         (n=8)                                              (n=31)   (n=16)     (n=9)
                                       (n=6)      (n=17)       (n=14)


            MoCT          0%            17%        0%            0%          3%        0%        0%

           MoFSP          0%             0%        0%            7%          6%        6%        0%

           MoFAL          0%             0%        12%           7%          3%        6%       11%

    Municipalities        0%            17%        24%          21%          19%      13%        0%

    Governorship          0%             0%        6%           21%          10%      13%        0%

 Prov. Directorate
    Customs and           0%             0%        6%           14%          3%        0%        0%
             Trade

      Prov. Direct
                          0%             0%        12%           7%          6%        6%        0%
      Agriculture

 Prov. Directorate
          National        0%             0%        0%            7%          3%       13%        0%
        Education

    Development
                          0%            17%        0%            0%          3%        6%       11%
        Agencies

               EU         13%            0%        18%          14%          16%       6%        0%

              UN          0%             0%        18%           7%          3%        6%        0%

     International
                          0%             0%        0%            7%          10%       0%        0%
      Foundations

         Sabancı
                          0%             0%        6%            0%          3%        6%        0%
      Foundation

            KEDV          0%             0%        12%          36%          32%      44%       11%

          KOSGEB          0%             0%        0%            7%          6%        0%        0%

    Social Aid and
Solidarity Funding        0%             0%        6%            7%          10%       6%        0%
           (SYDTF)

     Chambers of
                          0%             0%        0%            7%          3%        0%        0%
      Commerce
When co-operatives are divided by type, there are some patterns in the data (Figure 50).
First, almost all support from the EU, KEDV, MoFSP and municipal governments went to
enterprise co-operatives. This in part has to do with the sheer number of enterprise
women’s co-operatives compared to the other types. Although only three agricultural
women’s co-operatives stated that they had applied for support from MoFAL, five co-
operatives claimed to have received support from the Ministry. It also appears that
agricultural women’s co-operatives are more likely to receive support from government
bodies than from outside organizations, as 14 out of 19 cases of program support were
through publicbodies. When looking at enterprise women’s co-operatives, this distinction is
less pronounced as 32 out of 85 cases of support were provided from government bodies.




                         SUPPORT RECEIVED FILTERED BY TYPE
         Figure 50
                         (ALL WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES) (N=101)


                                                         Marketing/
                          Agricultural    Enterprise                    Small Arts    Consumers   Other
                                                           Manu
                            (n=28)         (n=64)                         (n=4)         (n=2)     (n=1)
                                                           (n=2)

 MoCT                          0%             2%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 MoFSP                         0%             6%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 MoFAL                        18%             2%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 Municipalities                4%            22%            50%            0%             0%       0%
 Governorship                  7%             8%            50%            25%            0%       0%
 Prov. Directorate
                              11%             2%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 Customs and Trade
 Prov. Directorate
                               4%             5%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 National Education
 Development
                               0%             6%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 Agencies
 EU                            0%            14%             0%            50%            0%      100%
 UN                            0%             6%             0%            25%            0%      100%
 International
                               0%             5%             0%            0%             0%      100%
 Foundations
 Sabancı Foundation            0%             5%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 KEDV                          7%            36%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 KOSGEB                        4%             3%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 SYDTF                         7%             5%             0%            0%             0%       0%
 Chamber of
                               0%             3%            50%            0%             0%       0%
 Commerce
                                                                             121



Based on the survey results, support programs provided by KEDV and municipal
governments are the most solicited for support. The largest portion of active co-
operatives received support from KEDV: 22 co-operatives that had applied for this
support reported receiving it successfully. The second highest provider of support
programs were municipal governments: 17 women’s co-operatives applied for
support, 14 of which received it successfully. Two specific instances where many
active women’s co-operatives applied but did not receive support were through
the European Union (13 applications with six receiving support) and Sabanci (15
applications and only three receiving support). For all other provided categories,
less than 10 women’s co-operatives applied. This includes government ministries,
the Chambers of Commerce, Provincial Directorates, KOSGEB and development
agencies.

6.1.2 What the women’s co-operatives did with the support
Survey respondents were asked to identify the source of their support and what they did
with that support (Figure 51). As has been noted already, the most common response was
that it came from KEDV that supported women’s co-operatives. The next most common
source of support was municipal government, which helped with the location of the co-
operative and start-up development. The EU was also identified as helping with training
and start-up. The UN has also helped with training and community services.
                            WHAT WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES DID WITH
     Figure 51
                            THE SUPPORT (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)




                                                                                                           Accessing Funding/


                                                                                                                                Accessing Funding/




                                                                                                                                                                  Networking Advice
                                        Operational Costs




                                                                       Community




                                                                                              Assistance




                                                                                                                                                     Hire Staff
                                                                                              Technical
                             Improve/




                                                            Pay Rent




                                                                                                                                                                                      Location
                                                                                   Training
                 Start Up




                                                                        Services
                              Expand




                                                                                                                  Loan


                                                                                                                                       Loan
        MoCT       0            0            0                0           0          1           2                0                    0                0              0                0
       MoFSP       0            0            0                0           2          3           3                0                    1                0              0                0
       MoFAL       3            3            0                0           0          1           2                1                    2               0               0                0
Municipalities     6            4            4                3           3          1           3                0                    3               1               1              12
Governorship       2            2            4                2           6          2           1                0                    2               0              1                 2
  Prov. Direct
 Customs and       1            1           2                 1           0          0           0                1                    2               0              0                 2
        Trade
  Prov. Direct
        Food,
                   3            3           2                 0           1          2           3               2                    3                2              1                 0
  Agriculture
and Livestock
  Prov. Direct
     National      0            1           0                 0           0          2           1               0                    0                3              0                 0
   Education
Development
                   2            0           0                 0           1          0           3               0                    0                0              0                 0
    Agencies
           EU      4            2           2                 3           4          6           5               3                    1                2              1                 1
          UN       2            3           1                 1           4          5           2               2                    0                0              0                 1
International
                   0            1           3                 2           2          0           2               1                    0                2              0                 1
 Foundations
     Sabancı
                   2            1           0                 0           1          2           1               1                    0                1              0                 0
  Foundation
        KEDV     11            14           4                 2          13        22           15             10                   14                 1           20                   8
     KOSGEB        0            2           1                 0           0          0           1               0                    0                0              0                 0
       SYDTF       0           0            0                 0           1          0           0               1                    0                0              1                 0
         CoC       0           0            0                 0           0          0           0               0                    0                0              0                 0

       TOTAL     36           37        23                  14           38        47           44             22                   28               12           25                  27
                                                                            123



As can be seen in Figure 51, the most common types of support, from the most
to the least, were the following programs: (1) training; (2) technical assistance; (3)
community services; (4) expansion support; and (5) start-up support. Stakeholders
spoke about a wide range of programs including technical assistance, training, start-
up assistance and funding. In terms of training, programs for marketing, business,
branding, and communications were offered. By far the most mentioned in the
interviews were training courses on entrepreneurship. Trainings were offered to
managers, members and staff. Land, equipment and space were offered mostly
by municipalities. The awareness building type support programs ranged from an
informal mentioning of women’s co-operatives to other stakeholders to official
networking sessions to heighten the exposure of women’s co-operatives within
the wider community. No co-operative content or associative skill specific trainings
were mentioned in the interviews, although as will be seen in the following section,
this is highly requested (see Figure 51).

Based on the survey results, when comparing to the other supporting organizations,
it appears that KEDV’s programs had the broadest application: recipients
mentioned using support for every provided category (Figure 51). Other programs
appear to have been more specialized in certain areas. Twelve of the recipients
of municipal government support specifically received support for location, a
number significantly higher than all providers, including KEDV. From these results, a
prospective women’s co-operative particularly interested in support towards finding
a location for their co-op would ideally want to turn to their municipal government
for support. While not all municipalities or local authorities were knowledgeable
about women’s co-operatives (as seen in the stakeholder interviews) these
stakeholders are one of the most important facilitators for women’s co-operatives’
success.
                       WHAT WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES NEED TO IMPROVE
        Figure 52
                       BUSINESS BASED ON ACTIVE AND INACTIVE STATUS
                       (N=101)


                               Technical     Product/    Financial/
                               Support/      Business  organizational                          Networking/
            Space   Training    Advice     Development    support     Equipment        Staff    Partnering

   Active
            48%       49%         59%           73%            63%            56%      24%         49%
   (n=63)
 Inactive
            47%       66%         55%           42%            61%            39%      24%         39%
   (n=38)




6.1.3 What women’s co-operatives want
According to the survey, when asked what does your co-operative needs to
improve its business, there are some differences based on status of the women’s co-
operative. The top three answers for active co-operatives are: (1) product/business
development; (2) financial/organizational support; and (3) technical support and
advice. The top three responses from inactive co-operatives were: (1) training; (2)
financial/organizational support; and (3) technical support/advice (Figure 52).

Region did not impact what kind of support women’s co-operatives requested: no
difference emerged based on the location of the women’s co-operatives. One factor
that did affect how women answer was based on the type of women’s co-operative.
Enterprise co-operatives requested specifically: (1) product/business development;
(2) financial/organizational support; and (3) training. Agricultural development co-
operatives, on the other hand, requested (1) financial/organizational support; (2)
technical support/advice; and (3) equipment (Figure 53).
                                                                                                                                     125



                                                         WHAT WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES NEED TO IMPROVE
                                  Figure 53
                                                         BUSINESS BASED ON TYPE (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)
                                                         (N=101)




                                                                        organizational
                                                          Development




                                                                                                             Networking/
                                                                                         Equipment




                                                                                                              Partnering
                                                                          Financial/
                                             Technical
                                             Support/


                                                            Product/
                                                            Business
                                  Training




                                                                           support
                                              Advice
                          Space




                                                                                                                                  Other
                                                                                                     Staff
                                                                                                                           Finance, cheaper
         Agricultural                                                                                                      input, field to
                          36%     54%          68%          54%            71%           61%         21%      39%
  Development (n=28)                                                                                                       cultivate, support
                                                                                                                           from ministry



     Enterprise (n=64)    55%     59%          56%          70%            63%           47%         27%      52%          -


Consumers Co-op (n=2)    100%     100%         50%          50%           100%           100%        50%      50%          -


   Manufacturing and
                          0%      50%          50%          50%             0%           0%          0%       50%          -
     marketing (n=2)

      Small Arts (n=4)    25%     0%           25%           0%            25%           25%         0%        0%          Finance

                                                                                                                           Friendship,
               Other:
                          0%      0%           0%            0%             0%           0%          0%        0%          communication
      Publishing n=1)
                                                                                                                           without hierarchy



                         According to the interviews with women’s co-operatives, there is little difference
                         between what supports are needed for active and inactive women’s co-operatives.
                         The top types of support programs active and inactive women’s co-operatives
                         requested are: (1) supports that take into consideration their co-operative nature;
                         (2) more local support; (3) more vertical and horizontal networking and sharing; (4)
                         capacity to pursue support; and (5) more than entrepreneurship. A small difference
                         is that inactive women’s co-operatives are often in need of more foundational
                         supports such as space, operations management and financial support, which is
                         not surprising as these co-operatives would be expected to require basic elements
                         to restart their co-operative business.

                         In the interviews with women’s co-operatives, of those who mentioned training
                         as a support they received, half stated that they find the women’s co-operative
                         specific training (on establishment and management of women’s co-operatives)
useful because of its relevance in terms of content and learning style.These kinds
of trainings are designed for women and were on topic for the development of
skills to run a women’s co-operative. These women’s co-operative specific trainings
address the need for the associative skills for successful co-operatives, as stated by
the founder of one active women’s co-operative:

“We went to KEDV for co-op management and capacity building trainings for women.”

The 45 stakeholder interviews also provided insights into the limitations of
support programs for women’s co-operatives. The top four limitations identified by
stakeholders in the interviews were: (1) policies; (2) funding; (3) awareness; and (4)
training.

The number one limitation identified by stakeholders was policies governing
women’s co-operatives. While these include tax laws, fees, policies and regulations,
as discussed in the legal review in Chapter 4, they also highlight the issue of
accessibility to programs due to organizational structure.

Women’s co-ops are important tools for developing the joint action culture and
entrepreneurship among low income women. Because of this, decisions need to
be taken and action needs to be taken quickly for the co-ops to overcome these
problems. One of the most important problems that the co-ops face is that they are
in the same category as commercial enterprises which make them face important
financial problems. So policies to strengthen women’s co-ops that have important
role in empowering women should be developed quickly.

The second highest support limitation identified by stakeholders was around
funding. Stakeholders spoke about funding issues in many different ways. For
example, comments from stakeholders in the interviews spoke about loan
programs, loan programs tied to business counselling programs or to technical
support, and grant programs.

Women’s co-operatives should be given funding, training and technical support.

The third most common limitation in support programs discussed by stakeholders
was awareness about women’s co-operatives. In Chapter 3, external and internal
challenges were discussed of which lack of awareness of women’s co-operatives
for authorities was identified. This could be about the existence of women’s co-
operatives, women’s co-operatives in their community, impact of women’s co-
operatives or supports needs for women’s co-operatives. As one of the directors of
women’s co-operatives states:
                                                                                127



“Many institutions don’t know about women’s co-operatives. The co-ops should be
supported to raise awareness about their needs. If institutions become aware of the co-
ops, they would take concrete steps to support them.”

On par with awareness about women’s co-operatives was training. As noted earlier,
training is the main type of support provided to women’s co-operatives. However,
none of the stakeholders in the interviews discussed the associative nature of
co-operatives and the unique skillset and knowledge base that is needed to
successfully manage a co-operative. Only one stakeholder acknowledged the need
for different delivery of trainings to members, staff or managers of women’s co-
operatives.

“We organize informing meeting on the grant programs to support the applicants….
And we provide project writing trainings. I think co-ops can be supported by assigning
experts to work with co-ops one on one on their project (i.e. developing the idea and
writing the proposal).”

Other support program limitations presented were programs availability and
accessibility, business support, providing space and equipment, lack of procurement
programs directed at women’s co-operatives, and supporting other organizations
that support women’s co-operatives.

“The institutions and organizations can help women’s co-ops in overcoming challenges,
if they could provide concrete supports instead of verbal appreciation. For example,
by allocating space, land, equipment with protocol; providing business development
support; purchasing services and goods; providing logistics (i.e. utilities, transportation
etc.); and supporting visibility and relations with the private sector.” (Municipal
representative)

There were a number of stakeholders that discussed the role of publicis it pertains
to supporting women’s co-operatives. There was no consensus about which
Ministry should take the lead on supporting and regulating women’s co-operatives.
There was consistency in responses from publicstakeholders that the women’s
co-operatives should have a more predominant place in the strategic plans of
government institutions and recognition that different type of government support
programs needed to have the flexibility to be accessible to women’s co-operatives.

Thirty-nine (39) of the micronarrative stories noted that there was inadequate
support from different institutions and structures. Women identify the potential
clearly in the co-operative they have founded, but lament the lack of sustained
engagement, understanding, and follow-up from different institutions that
could support their co-operative. Two members of active women’s co-operatives
described this situationas follows:
“It has been two years until we establish our co-operative and I remember many institutions
and people giving us promises on how they are going to support us. There were some
members from political parties and some were from local authorities. We were very excited
and motivated. However we observed that they were only false promises and gave us
empty hopes. If those promises were kept our co-operative may be in a much better position
and we needed less support and help now. I wish they would support us now.”

“We tried to reach every institute that can support us and explained our mission because
our aim was very good for public and we were the first woman co-operative in our
region. We were aiming to support women for them to contribute to their families. Today
we still carry our best wills about co-operative however nonetheless our entire effort we
couldn’t get any support from local administrations. We never understood why they
were so hands-off attitude to us. We weren’t asking any money we were just asking their
support and for example for to use one of their empty rooms as kitchen by paying our
rent however they stand clear of this also. We continue our existence with the support of
the Chamber of Commerce now. Even all these difficulties I am feeling so proud that we
are doing good things to see even 10 of 300 women on their feet and the feeling that my
effort is empowering them takes away all my disappointment and tiredness.”

6.2 What kind of support programs might be more effective?
6.2.1	 Support programs that consider women’s co-operatives
Despite the high percentage of applications, relatively high approval rates and very
high usability rates for programs that support women’s co-operatives seen in the
survey, these numbers need to be understood within the context of these being
the total number of programs women’s co-operatives can apply to and represent
over a decade potential programs. What the survey does not show is the universe
of support programs women’s co-operatives cannot apply too. While any support
program will have parameters, some of these parameters may be unnecessarily
binding. For example, programs are often designed for applicants that are either
enterprises or NGOs. Instead of women’s co-operatives being able to access both
kinds of programs, they are shut out of both because of either the economic and
social nature of women’s co-operatives. The enterprise programs seem to not
address the social aspects of women’s co-operatives; and the NGO programs do not
always allow for an economic aspect. This was confirmed in numerous interviews
where participants from women’s co-operatives were able to freely relate their
experiences with programming. The following quote from members of active
women’s co-operatives demonstrates these restrictions:

“Because our co-op has very limited resources, we need funding to start and develop
new programs. We used some project funding. But in most cases, the co-ops are not
considered to meet the requirements for the funding. Or they are already exempted. We
hope to use these supports more. Because we are direct organizing of women with needs,
we really could work effectively in collaboration with the public and other institutions.
                                                                                         129



Unfortunately there are few programs for this. We attend the trainings of KOSGEB and
development agencies, we prepare proposals. But these institutions either say that they
do not have programs for co-ops or say we cannot access these programs because we
distribute our profit (even if it is paying fees to members for the labour spent during
production of co-op’s products). ”

6.2.2 Support programs that are local
The survey and interviews demonstrate that the role of institutions that are closer to the
women’s co-operatives, such as municipal governments, development agencies, and NGOs
are the most solicited for support and offer the largest variety of support. The survey and
interviews further demonstrate that such institutions are perceived as understanding the
local context and issues better and are therefore often best placed to address binding
constraints that affect the success of women’s co-operatives, such as lack of space to
sell or produce goods, to support through procurement of goods or services or to build
awareness and critical attention about women’s co-operatives. The following quotes from
members of active women’s co-operatives demonstrates this:


“…if it was not for the Metropolitan Municipality we were on the point of depletion.”


“Collaboration with the municipalities is very important for the women co-ops since they are
local women organizing. In recent years, great results came out from these collaborations. There
are great examples of collaboration between the women co-ops and the municipalities like
Kartal, Kağıthane, Bahçelievler in Istanbul, Balçova, Ödemiş, Seferihisar, Menemen, Mordoğan in
İzmir, Biga, Karabiga in Çanakkale, Burhaniye in Balıkesir, Bostaniçi in Van. The municipalities also
support the women co-op initiatives in Bergama and Urla in İzmir. ”


The municipalities can also take advantage of collaboration with women co-operatives.
Partnership with women’s co-operatives would be direct contact with the people who
know what they and their communities need. And this would be an important opportunity
for effective service provision and usage of the resources.


6.2.3 Understanding the role of local supportive organizations
Co-operatives around the world experience a similar natural progression and
growth of their sector. With progression comes the need for second tier supportive
institutions. These institutions can come in the form of federations, unions,
networks, and associations and aim to support the first tier or primary co-operatives
in a variety of ways. Second tier institution building usually comes when there are
enough first tier co-operatives to support the costs of the development of such
institutions; and when the value-added of such institutions in terms of training
and representation is more evident. This was presented inpart in Chapter 3, in a
discussion on external stakeholders; and in Chapter 5, in the discussion of how
the ILO Guidelines present the role of co-operative integration, and itspresence in
Turkey’s co-operative law.
As discussed in Chapter 3, survey data indicated that women’s co-operativeshave
limited links with the rest of the co-operative sector in Turkey, including second
and third co-operative institutions such as NCUT. Instead, women’s co-operatives
are more connected to their local institutions (e.g. municipalities) and to NGOs,
associations and foundations. The establishment of women’s co-operative
owned second tier supportive institutions is established in Turkey. Organisations
such as SIMURG, KIA and KEDV, play an important role in providing the supportive
infrastructure for women’s co-operatives.

Simurg Kadın Kooperatifleri Birliği (SIMURG - Women’s Co-operative Union) has as a
mission to lead members’ social, cultural and economic activities and their members’
efforts to live in healthy and safe environment; to protect the members’ interests; to
increase their organizational capacity; and to provide communication, coordination
and collaboration between members. According to information provided by KEDV,
which has provided technical support in the creation of SIMURG, and interviews
with women’s co-operative members, such a union structurehas beenanticipated
for several years, but it took time to emerge because it was considered very
expensive. SIMURG was finally established in February 2014 with seven founding
members, which are women’s co-operatives. The members are currently planning
their first general assembly.Its first general assembly was held in June 2015. SIMURG
is currently working on its capacity and resources to support the women’s co-
operatives’ membership and to be able to provide regular and ongoing assistance
to the women cooperatives throughout Turkey. 

Kadın Kooperatifleri İletişim Ağı (KIA - Women’s Co-operative Communication
Network) has as a mission is to provide a platform on which women’s co-operatives
can share knowledge and experience, develop inter-communication, increase their
capacity to develop social and economic initiatives, and build alliances for their
common objectives. KIA’s principles include: inclusivity, transparency, accountability,
participation and respect for differences while sharing the perspective of an
independent women’s movement. KIA is a communication network, so it is not a
legal entity, but rather an informal network. It is made up of women co-operatives,
not individuals, and as of writing of this report, had more than 50 members. It was
established in April 2008.

KEDV has played a role in the early development stages of many of the enterprise
women’s co-operatives. As demonstrated in the survey, literature review, and
interviews, KEDV has played a foundational role in helping women to “find” the co-
operative model when they are searching for the right organizational structure for
their purposes. As one senior co-operative leader noted in an interview:

“I think KEDV’s technical, education supports and also its support in project making have
been the crucial element in the formation of our co-op. If it wasn’t for KEDV we wouldn’t be at
                                                                               131



the point where we are standing right now. Because it is a new women’s movement we got
the support we needed in all levels and when we needed it. ”

SIMURG, KIA, and KEDV are either owned by or inherently part of the women’s co-
operative sector. As a result, they are well placed to understand the nature of the
support that is relevant and requested by women’s co-operative members. This
role aligns with the ILO Guidelines and the spirit of Turkey’s co-operative law, as
discussed in section 5.2.11. These organisationsstrengthen and have the potential
to do more networking amongst women’s co-operatives and with other partners;
to share experiences and to provide guidance to new co-operatives based on their
experiences on law, policies, development processes and skills; to provide training
to women interested in starting a women’s co-operative and provide regular, fit for
purpose, follow-up to ensure sustainability; and to support in funding applications
to external agencies.

What these organisations do is as important as how they do it. Put differently: as
part of the women’s co-operative sector, they can reinforce women’s co-operatives
autonomy as well as their co-operative identity as social and economic actors. This
was expressed in an interview with one key external stakeholder:

“NGOs (associations, federation etc.) and public institutions supporting establishment
and development of the women’s co-ops should aim to respect and empower these co-
ops’ autonomy and independence while supporting them. It should be paid attention
that the co-ops are managed by the members and not the supporter associations and
foundations. These associations and foundations should not be more than “consultants”
and should never intervene the co-ops’ operation. By this means, the co-op member
women can learn to run their enterprise, the co-op has a real co-op identity.”

6.2.4 Capacity to pursue support
Many women’s co-operatives have limited capacity to prepare funding proposals.
According to participants in the interviews from women’s co-operatives, both
active and inactive and survey respondents, they do not have the human resources,
knowledge or capacity to apply for funding, to write proposals, and often miss
deadlines because they are unable to get proposal or money or capacity together
in time. The following quote is from a representative of an agricultural women’s co-
operative:

“We wanted to apply SODES for a project but we could not find anybody to write a
project for us. We do not know what kind of support we may get from District Agricultural
department but even if we knew we do not have the capacity to provide the conditions. ”
So even if a program has been identified as appropriate and the co-operative is eligible,
data from the survey and interviews demonstrated it is difficult to bring together members
and the members with the right skills and knowledge to be able to write the proposal or
grant. This was touched upon in Chapter 3 within the challenges section.


6.2.5 More than entrepreneurship
Supporting women’s entrepreneurship is a key priority for the Government of Turkey
and other stakeholders. Women’s co-operatives have mixed experiences with such
programs. Women’s co-operatives or members of women’s co-operatives have been
able to take advantage of training type programming such as business planning,
marketing, operations, management, and budgeting. It is beyond the scope of
this research study to have conducted an in depth study into the content of each
training program that members or women’s co-operatives attended; however,
respondents stated that many trainings are offered and have been taken under the
rubric of entrepreneurship.

While business and technical trainings offered to women’s co-operatives under the
auspices of entrepreneurship were received, members of women’s co-operatives
did not find them as useful as they could be. From interviews with co-operative
representatives it has emerged that trainings do not match their learning needs or
wanted outcomes, nor do they address co-operative enterprises or women specific
issues. As was discussed in Chapter 3, about how women learned to run their
co-operative, most identified experientially – in their co-operative or from other
members. As noted above, there was limited or no training available to help build
associative skills, co-operative management and governance.
                                                                            133   7



7
Conclusion and Recommendations:
From Surviving to Thriving


The research conducted to produce this report has demonstrated that women’s co-
operatives in Turkey are a different from other co-operatives in the country. They are
founded by women, for women, and have a wide range of activities and impacts,
which are dual in nature: economic as well as social. They face similar challenges
to other co-operatives in Turkey, as well as unique challenges because of their
multipurpose nature and their activities. Many are surviving, but their potential to
“thrive” is clear in the desire of the women members and beneficiaries themselves.
Their ability to do so will in part be determined by how external actors that engage
with women’s co-operatives respond to and nurture this desire.

This final chapter is therefore framed according to the structure of the report,
presenting high-level key findings as related to making recommendations that are
linked to strengthening programs and potential legal reforms. An effort is further
made to address binding constraints – understood as internal and external challenges
– that the women who participated in the research identified themselves. Twenty
two recommendations are made. The recommendations are not in order of priority,
rather presented following the structure of this report. Not all high-level findings
lead to specific recommendations. Furthermore, this is not an attempt to summarize
every finding of the report, rather those linked directly to possible, practical, and
constructive recommendations. Where possible, recommendations are made to
specific stakeholders.

7.1 Key findings and recommendations
Chapter 2: Women’s Participation in Labor Force and the Co-operatives in Turkey
Finding 1: Examples of women being empowered through co-operatives exist in
Turkey and around the world. This demonstrates the potential role of co-operatives to
meet the Turkish government’s desire to increase women’s participation in the labour
force and to empower women. However, little empirical research or data exists on
women in co-operatives in Turkey, or women’s co-operatives specifically.
Recommendations:
     1. That the Ministry of Customs and Trade include in its update of data collection
         on co-operatives, gender disaggregated indicators (female vs. male co-
         operative members) as well as gendered indicators of co-operative activities,
         for example women in leadership positions, women that obtain loans or
         inputs from co-operatives, and women’s participation in General Assemblies.
         These indicators should apply across Government of Turkey ministries that
         regulate co-operatives.

      2. That union level co-operatives be encouraged and supported to better
          understand the role of women in their respective sectors and respond
          to indicator requirements that are collected by the Government of Turkey
          ministries that regulate co-operatives (as per recommendation one).

      3. That institutions that foster or support research in Turkey do research on
          women in co-operatives in Turkey.

Finding 2: Turkey has an ambitious Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan to support
co-operative development and there are also strategic targets to support co-operative
development generally, and women’s co-operative development specifically. However,
women’s co-operatives are not very present in the Action Plan, nor are they present
in other public events involving co-operatives in Turkey, including the ICA Global
Conference and General Assembly in Antalya in November 2015.

Recommendations:
     4. That when the Ministry of Customs and Trade revisits the Action Plan at its
         conclusion in 2016, women in co-operatives and women’s co-operatives are
         more explicitly addressed.

      5. That the Ministry of Customs and Trade explore with other key stakeholders
          in women’s co-operatives the design and comprehensive strategic plan to
          support women’s co-operatives in Turkey. This plan would benefit from: (1)
          Recognizing the dual economic and social nature of women’s co-operatives;
          (2) Identifying the roles and responsibilities of different stakeholders,
          highlighting the importance of local government in the success of women’s
          co-operatives; (3) Identifying support strategies (see below); (4) Identifying
          sources of financing for activities; and (5) Providing measureable, time-
          bound targets of support to existing women’s co-operatives and for new co-
          operatives to be established.
                                                                                135




Chapter 3: The Emergence of Multipurpose Women’s Co-operatives
Finding 3: Women’s co-operatives that have been started by women, for women,
are largely autonomous, and have a dual social and economic nature. Women’s co-
operatives demonstrate exceptionally strong participation rates and present real
opportunities for leadership in business and in their communities.

Finding 4: Women’s co-operatives in Turkey are not linked extensively with the rest of
Turkey’s vast co-operative sector or with the Government of Turkey, but have been
organizing themselves horizontally and vertically in the last five years, and value the
relationships within the women’s co-operative sector more than others.

Recommendation:
     6. That government ministries respond to the women’s co-operative sector’s
         desire to integrate with themselves and with the broader co-operative sector
         and not encourage active integration if not desired.

Finding 5:Women’s co-operatives predominantly provide goods and services in areas
traditionally described as “women’s work”. This is because the founders and members
turn to what they already know how to do. This is partly due to the expectations of
gender roles and partly because women often lack the skills to manage a business.
Needless to say, they choose a good or service with which they are familiar and
without doing a proper feasibility study to assess the potential for sales for this good or
service.

Recommendations:
     7. The stakeholders, especially KOSGEB, development agencies and chambers
         of commerce, could direct their support towards helping women’s co-
         operatives in their early stage with feasibility studies regarding the proposed
         goods and/or services. This could be accomplished through desks of support
         for women’s co-operatives within these organizations. These organizations
         play an important role in funding and knowledge transfer. Women’s co-
         operatives could greatly benefit from this kind of support. On the other hand
         because women’s co-operatives have a role to play in local development,
         they should be recognized as players in the local economy and sustainable
         economic development for women and communities, which would support
         the mandate of the identified stakeholders. 

Finding 6: Women’s co-operatives often reflect community needs and women’s needs.
They have connections to and are becoming community leaders and local knowledge
brokers. They can be well placed to provide goods and services for local stakeholders
and the municipality.
Recommendations:
     8. That policies for the allocation of public resources be dedicated to women’s
         co-operatives to provide social services (e.g. child care, community services,
         disabled people resource centres etc.) within communities. This should
         involve the full complement of stakeholders.

      9. That policies be developed that enable public institutions and governments to
          procure goods or services from women’s co-operatives. This should involve
          the full complement of stakeholders.

Finding 7:  Women’s co-operatives that provide community services (e.g. child care)
have higher income potential and that these services can function as the engine of
economic stability for women’s co-operatives.

Recommendations:
     10. Recognize women’s co-operatives that offer child care services as legitimate
         business providing these services. This would not mean exemption from
         regulations governing child care services, but that all jurisdictions – including
         MoFSP and MoNE – accept women’s co-operatives as suppliers of this
         service. 

Finding 8: All women’s co-operatives face internal and external challenges that affect
their long-term survival. External challenges include financial challenges (e.g. lack of
access to finance, high fees) and a lack of a general understanding of how women’s
co-operatives are different and what women’s co-operatives do. Internal challenges
include lack of capacity amongst members (e.g. co-operative skills, business skills),
operational capacity (e.g. equipment, office space) and interpersonal issues. [Internal
challenges are addressed below, in supportive programs].

Recommendations:
     11. That the Ministry of Customs and Trade and/or the new Union of Women’s
         Co-operatives (SIMURG) explore with relevant stakeholders in the financial
         sector alternative, non-grant, forms of financing for women’s co-operatives in
         Turkey, including social impact funds or bonds, which can be used to provide
         investment capital for women’s co-operatives. Such financing could be
         paired with appropriate capacity building programs to support the effective
         use of this capital within the co-operatives.

      12. A more in depth study specifically on the take-up, reality and challenges of
          social security issues for women and women’s co-operatives be conducted.
                                                                               137



Chapter 4: Understanding the Impact of Women’s Co-operatives
Finding 9: Women which are members and beneficiaries of women’s co-operatives
provided numerous examples of personal, household and community impact of their
co-operatives. Impact was understood as empowering women, as contributing to
lifelong education and learning, and contributing to their ability to obtain an income
through employment. These impacts reinforce each other and have a multiplier effect
on the women who engage with the co-operatives as members or beneficiaries.

Finding 10 Active and inactive women’s co-operatives have a strong legacy, which
includes the following: income earned, skills development, capacity built, community
needs filled or transfer of skills outside of the co-operative, and extensive interaction
with local women, local governments, supportive organizations and institutions.

Chapter 5: Legal Review
Finding 11: The Government of Turkey’s Co-operatives Strategy and Action Plan moves
Turkey towards more autonomy for co-operatives and to align laws in Turkey with
recognised international legal frameworks for co-operatives.

Recommendations:
     13. That the Ministry of Customs and Trade continue to provide leadership in
         pursuing these reforms and report on them regularly to stakeholders in
         Turkey. This would include adding the ICA co-operative principles to the legal
         definition of co-operatives in Turkey as well as adhering to these principles.

      14. That the Ministry of Customs and Trade and other relevant Ministries identify
          clearly relevant ongoing legal reforms in Turkey that impact co-operatives
          where the autonomy of co-operatives from government can be reinforced.
          In particular, for women’s co-operatives, as it pertains to their legal status.

      15. That the Ministry of Customs and Trade expand their understanding of
          Article 1 of 1163 to include a range of activities relating to both economic
          and social nature.

      16. That other relevant laws be adapted according to the updated Article 1 of
          1163 so that the appropriate tax exemptions and/or ability to partner with
          government bodies be addressed.

Chapter 6: Support Programs for Women’s Co-operatives
Finding 12: Women’s co-operatives use and appreciate support programs that are
available, however have difficulty accessing a wide variety of programs, because of
their dual social and economic status.
Recommendation:
     17. That all stakeholders identify clearly in their terms of reference that women’s
         co-operatives and/or co-operatives in general are eligible for programs.

Finding 13: Women feel there is a surfeit of entrepreneurial trainings and insufficient
programs that are specific to co-operative governance and business. Furthermore,
existing support programs do not recognize the different phases that a women’s co-
operative might be in (e.g. start-up, operationalization or growth).

Recommendation:
     18. That stakeholders implementing women’s co-operative support programs
         design specific capacity building strategies to be delivered by key
         stakeholders from start-up to all stages of co-operative development
         for women’s co-operatives, focusing on co-operative/associative skills,
         leadership, business management, women’s empowerment, financial
         capacity, and partnerships/networking.

      •	 Associative skills: Develop skills in participation in a co-operative business
         environment (such as collective decision-making, good governance, co-
         operative management through elected representation, how to work with
         or on a board).

      •	 Leadership skills: Develop capacity of founders and members of the co-
         operative in terms of the leadership skills necessary for the effective governance
         and management of their co-operative and for effective levels of trust.

      •	 Business management: Build capacity to understand operations, legal
         procedures, working with clients, marketing, book keeping, forecasting,
         and /or sales.

      •	 Women’s empowerment : Build capacity of co-operative members to
         understand and to respond to the pressures that exist in women’s economic
         empowerment, engagement in the co-operative, and family life (such
         as work at home, work outside the co-operative and work with the co-
         operative).

      •	 Financial capacity: Build capacity of women’s co-operatives to understand,
         to assess, and to access funding and other types of resources available to
         women’s co-operatives needs to be reassessed by the funding organization.

      •	 Partnerships and networking: Build capacity of women’s co-operatives to
         partner and network with organizations, government or associations that
         can then be champions of their work.
                                                                               139



Finding 14: The support with the broadest reach and the most utilization are those
offered by women’s co-operatives support organizations (e.g. KEDV) and municipal
governments, which demonstrates the important role these stakeholders play in
the success of women’s co-operatives. However, little data is available on the broad
effectiveness of programs, as few evaluations are available.

Recommendations:
     19. That the most solicited stakeholders for support be supported to conduct
         thorough impact evaluations of their support to women’s co-operatives, as
         a means of building a toolbox of good practices on women’s co-operative
         development in Turkey.

     20. That the Ministry of Food, Agricultural and Livestock conduct through impact
         evaluations of its support programs for women’s co-operatives that it has
         helped create, to better understand the impact of its efforts on women.

     21. That stakeholders supporting women’s co-operative development design
         support programs that target key supportive organisations such as SIMURG,
         KIA and other women’s economic development organizations, in order to
         build their skills to provide sustained support to co-operatives; to support
         awareness building campaigns on the nature and impact of women’s co-
         operatives in Turkey that target specific audiences, including elected officials,
         public sector employees, and the general public, women in particular; and
         to support awareness building on collaboration models and good practices
         to link women’s co-operatives with the poor, community mobilisation, as
         well as working on issues linked directly to women’s empowerment (e.g.
         prevention of violence against women).

     22. That the women’s supportive organisations engage with the Union of
         Municipalities of Turkey to begin exploring how to mainstream opportunities
         for municipal governments to increase business opportunities for women’s
         co-operatives in ways which could include the following:

     •	 Supporting women’s co-operatives’ economic initiatives by allocating/
        renting parks, green areas and idle spaces/buildings to the women co-
        operatives;

     •	 Supporting women co-operatives’ to participate in municipal tenders; and

     •	 Purchasing goods and products from women’s co-operatives, such as child
        care and food products.
                                                                        141   R
References
R193. 2002. “Promotion of Co-operatives Recommendation. ” No. 193.
       Recommendation concerning promotion of co-operatives. Geneva, 90th
       ILC Session (20 June 2002). Accessed April 28, 2014 at http://www.ilo.org/
       dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:R193.
       (see “Annex” for Extract from the Statement on the Co-operative Identity,
       adopted by the General Assembly of the International Co-operative
       Alliance in 1995)

Akbaş, K. 2014. “Nonprofit Law in Turkey.” Working Papers of the Johns Hopkins
        Comparative Nonprofit Sector Project, No. 51. Baltimore, MD: Johns
        Hopkins University Center for Civil Society Studies.

Aman, G. 2014. Success and failure among agricultural cooperatives in Turkey.
       Thesis. Robert D. Clark Honors College.

Ansay, T. & Wallace, D. 2011. “Introduction to Turkish Law.” Kluwer Law
       International pp. 03-118.

Başaran, B. and Inan, H. 2014. Industrialization in Rural Areas; S.S. Mursall
       Agricultural Development Cooperative Sample. In the National Agricultural
       Economy Congress.

Beşpınar, F. Umut. 2010. “Questioning Agency and Empowerment: Women’s Work-
       Related Strategies and Social Class in Urban Turkey.” In Women’s Studies
       International Forum, 33:523–32. Elsevier.

Boudet, AM. and Agar, M. 2014. Female Entrepreneurship in Turkey. The World
       Bank.

Bonnan-White, J., Hightower, A. and Issa, A. 2013. “Of Couscous and Occupation:
       A Case Study of Women’s Motivations to Join and Participate in Palestinian
       Fair Trade Cooperatives.” Agriculture and Human Values 30 (3): 337–50.

Canadian Co-operative Association, Developpement international and
       Societe de cooperation pour le developpement international. 2012.
       Creating Wealth, Reducing Poverty and Building a Better World: Canadian
       Co-operatives in International Development. Ottawa. Canada.

Cakmuk, Erol. 2004. “Structural change and market opening in Turkish agriculture.”
      In EU- Working Papers. 10. Centre for European Policy Studies.
Can, M., Sayılı, M, and Kalanlar, Ş. 2014. Kırsal Kalkınmada Tarımsal Kalkınma
        Kooperatifleri Daha Etkin Rol Alabilir mi? Başarılı Bir Kooperatif Örneği.
        National Agricultural Economy Congress.

Capra International. 2013. Thematic Evaluation on the Cooperative Model: Final
        Evaluation Report Presented to the Canadian International Development
        Agency.

Çelik Ateş, H., Ermi, T., and Çağla Örmeci Kart. M. 2014. Gülbirlik Ortaklarının
        Kooperatiften Beklentileri. National Agricultural Economy Congress.

Central Union of Turkish Agricultural Credit Co-operatives. 2015. http://int.
        tarimkredi.org.tr/index.php/en.html (retrieved Apr 2015).

Cooperatives UK. 2014. “The Global Co-Operative Sector.” Accessed July 12. http://
       www.uk.coop/2012/economy/worldwide.

Cracogna, D., Fici, A. and Henry, H. Eds. 2013. International Handbook of
      Cooperative Law. London: Springer.

Datta, P. B. and Gailey, R. 2012. “Empowering Women through Social
       Entrepreneurship: Case Study of a Women’s Cooperative in India.”
       Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 36 (3): 569–87.

Datta, R. 2003. “From Development to Empowerment: The Self-Employed Women’s
         Association in India.” International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society 16
         (3): 351–68.

Dayıoğlu, M. 2008. “Mother’s and Children’s Employment in Turkey.” The Journal of
       Developing Areas 42 (1): 95–115.

Economist Intelligence Unit. 2015. Country Report: Turkey. London. UK.

Erdal, G.,Çall, A., Karakaş, G., and Balc, M. 2014. Amasya İli Boyalı Köyü Kiraz
        Üretimi ve Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi. In the National Agricultural
        Economy Congress.

Erman, T., Sibel K. and Rittersberger-Tılıç, H. 2002. “Money-Earning Activities and
        Empowerment Experiences of Rural Migrant Women in the City: The Case
        of Turkey.” In Women’s Studies International Forum, 25:395–410. Elsevier.

Esim, S. 2003. Learning to Organize the Unorganized: Women Home-Based Workers
         from Turkey Visit Self Employed Women’s Association in India. https://www.
                                                                          143



        academia.edu/855519/Learning_to_Organize_the_Unorganized_Women_
        Home-based_Workers_from_Turkey_Visit_Self_Employed_Womens_
        Association_in_India.

Esim, S. and Omeira, M. 2009. “Rural women producers and cooperatives in
        conflicts settings in the Arab States.” in FAO-IFAD-ILO Workshop on Gaps,
        trends and current research in gender dimensions of agricultural and rural
        employment: differentiated pathways out of poverty. Rome. Italy.

Esim, S. 2010. Gender equality in the world of work. ILO. Geneva.

First Turkey Women Director’s Conference. 2014. retrieved December 11, 2014
         http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/women-employment-in-turkey-shows-
         high-rise-but-low.aspx?pageID=238&nID=58384&NewsCatID=347

Gökşen, F., Altan Olcay, Ö., Alnıaçık, A. and Ceren Deniz, G. 2014. An analysis of
       public programs related to women’s entrepreneurship and access to labour
       markets. Ankara.

Gulcubuk, B. 2010. “The dimensions of women’s contribution to the workforce in
       agriculture:

The Turkey case.” In International Business & Economics Research Journal. 9, 5.

Gulcubuk, B. 2015. Change in rural development approaches in the world and
      Turkey examination. World Development Conference. Bangkok. Thailand.

Gun, S. 2005. Organizations and Problems in Turkish Agriculture. XVIII International
         Turkish Cooperative Congress, Turkish Cooperative Association Publication.
         98:67-76.

Hart, K. 2009. Modernist Desires among Recent Immigrants in Western Turkey.
        Thesis. Buffalo State College.

Henry, H. 2012. Guidelines for Co-operative Legislation: 3rd Revised Edition.
       International Labour Office, Geneva.

ILO. 2008. “Country Brief 1: Advancing Women’s Employment in Lebanon: ILO in
        Action.” International Labour Organization.

ILO. 2009. Enhancing the Participation of Rural Women Producers in Cooperatives
        in Yemen . Policy Brief 6. Geneva, Switzerland: International Labour
        Organization.
International Labour Organization & International Cooperative Alliance. 2014.
        Cooperatives and Sustainable Development Goals: A Contribution to the
        Post-2015 Development Debate A Policy Brief. Policy Brief. Brussels, Belgium:
        International Cooperative Alliance, International Labour Organization.
        http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/documents/
        publication/wcms_240640.pdf.

International Co-operative Alliance. 2015. Resource Guide for Advance Training
        of Co-operatives on Entrepreneurship Development of Women and Gender
        Equality.

International Co-operative Alliance. 2015. Website. http://antalya2015.coop/

Jones, E., Smith, S. and Wills. C. 2012. “Women Producers and the Benefit of
        Collective Forms of Enterprise.” Gender & Development 20 (1): 13–32.

Karahocagil, P. and Ozudogru, H. 2011. “Agricultural development co-operatives
       in Turkey the example of Sanliurfa province.” In Journal of Animal and
       Veterinary Advances. 10 (30): 372-377.

Keleş, R. 2013. “Turkey.” In International Handbook of Cooperative Law. Eds.
        Cracogna, D., Fici, A. and Henry, H. London: Springer.

KIA. 2015. Website mission statement. Retrieved May 5, 2015.

Law on Co-operatives, Law No. 1163. Dated 24 April 1969

Majurin, E. 2012. How Women Fare in East African Cooperatives: The Case of Kenya,
        Tanzania and Uganda . Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: International Labour
        Organization.

Ministry of Customs and Trade. 2015. Co-operative Statistics Release. Ankara.

Ministry of Customs and Trade. 2012. Turkish Co-operatives Strategy and Action
        Plan 2012 -2016. Ankara.

Ministry of Development. 2014. The Tenth Development Plan: 2014-2018. Ankara.

Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock. 2015. Website. Retrieved May 5,
        2015.

Müftüler-Bac, M. 1999. “Turkish Women’s Predicament.” In Women’s Studies
       International Forum, 22:303–15. Elsevier.
                                                                            145



Mulayim, Z G. 1997. “The Fundamental Problems of Turkish Co-operatives and
       Proposals For Their Solutions.”Frederich Ebert Stiftun. Istanbul. Second
       Edition.

National Co-operative Union of Turkey. 2013. National Co-operative Union of
       Turkey: 2013 Year of Study and Report. Ankara. Turkey.

Nippierd, A. 2002. Gender Issues in Co-operatives. International Labour Office,
       Cooperative Programme Geneva: ILO: 6.

OECD. 2014. OECD Economic Surveys: Turkey 2014. OECD Publishing.

Okan, N. and Okan. C. 2013. Policy Studies on Rural Transition No. 2013-13 An
       Overview of Cooperatives in Turkey. FAO Regional Office for Europe and
       Central Asia.

Özdemir G., Keskin, H. and Özüdoğru, H. 2011. “Türkiye’de Ekonomik Krizler ve
      Tarımsal Kooperatiflerin Önemi.” in Journal of Tekirdag Agricultural Faculty.
      8(1):101-113.

Özdemir G. 2013. “Women’s Cooperatives in Turkey.” Procedia-Social and
     Behavioral Sciences 81: 300–305.

Sahin, F. 2014. “Women’s Rights in Turkey.” Turkish Policy Quarterly 11 (1): 39–46.

Simsek, M. 2015. Outlook for Turkey. http://www.maliye.gov.tr/KonusmaSunumlari/
        SunumMerkezi/index.html?ktp=UEZ

Tesfay, A. and Tadele, H. 2013. The Role of Cooperatives in Promoting Socio-
        Economic Empowerment of Women: Evidence from Multipurpose
        Cooperative Societies in South-Eastern Zone of Tigray, Ethiopia. In
        International Journal of Community Development 1 (1): 1-11.

Theis, L. and Hammond Ketilson, L. 1994. Women in Co-Operatives. Research
         in Action. Saskatchewan, Canada: University of Saskatchewan Printing
         Services. Website: http://www.usaskstudies.coop.

Theriault, L., Skibbons, R. and Brown, L. 2008. A Portrait of Co-operatives and
        Credit Unions in Atlantic Canada: Preliminary Analysis.Canadian Social
        Economy Research Partnerships.
TurkStat. 2015. Women and Statistics Press Release No 18619. Website http://www.
        turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=18619

TurkStat. 2016. Labor Force Statistics. Website http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/
       PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=21574

Union of Beet Growers Cooperatives. 2015. Website http://en.pankobirlik.com.tr/

United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. 2015. R etr ie ved
      J a n 2 1 , 2 0 1 5 . h t t p s : / / s u s t a i n a b l e d e ve l o p m e n t . u n . o rg / i n d e x .
      php?page=view&type=400&nr=1579&menu=35

Van Vliet, M. 2006. Networking Diversity Including Women and Other Under-
        Represented Groups in Co-Operatives. #06.01. Research Reports Series.
        Saskatchewan, Canada: Centre for the Study of Cooperatives, University of
        Saskatchewan.

Varol, F. 2013. An Analysis of Women’s Co-operatives in Urban Turkey in Terms of
         Women’s Empowerment. Unpublished Thesis.
           147   AP
Appendix
     Appendix 1       WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE)



                                                                              Regulating
                                                 Region (7
      Title of the co-op                                       Province     Ministry (MoCT   Status
                                                 regions)
                                                                              or MoFAL)

      Akeka Kadın Girişim Üretim ve Satış         Central
1                                                                               MoCT         active
      Kooperatifi                                 Anatolia      Ankara
                                                  Central
2     Akkaya Köyü Tarımsal Kalkınma Koop.                       Ankara          MoFAL        active
                                                  Anatolia

3     Amasya Tarimsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi       Black Sea      Amasya          MoFAL        active

      Ankara Zeytindalı Kadın Çevre Kültür        Central
4                                                               Ankara          MoCT         active
      İşletme Kooperatifi                         Anatolia
      Ardeşen Kadınlar Tarımsal Kalkınma
5                                                Black Sea        Rize          MoFAL        active
      Kooperatifi
      Artvin Kadın Girişimciler Turizm
6                                                Black Sea       Artvin         MoCT         active
      Geliştirme ve İşletme Kooperatifi
      Avanos Kadın Girişimci Dayanışma ve         Central
7                                                              Nevşehir         MoCT         active
      Yardımlaşma İşletme Kooperatifi             Anatolia
      Bağlar Kadına Yönelik Şiddetle            Southeastern
8                                                              Diyarbakır       MoCT         active
      Mücadele ve İşletme Kooperatifi             Anatolia
      Bahçelievler Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
9                                                Marmara        İstanbul        MoCT         active
      İşletme Kooperatifi
      Balçova Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
10                                                Aegean         İzmir          MoCT         active
      Kooperatifi
      Bandırma Nisa Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
11                                               Marmara        Balıkesir       MoCT         active
      İşletme Kooperatifi
      Begonvil Kadın Girişimi Üretim ve
12                                                Aegean        Muğla           MoCT         active
      İşletme Kooperatifi
      Besnili Aktif Kadınlar Yardımlaşma        Southeastern
13                                                                              MoCT         active
      Dayanışma ve İşletme Kooperatifi            Anatolia     Adıyaman
      Bethesna Kadın Girişimi Üretim ve         Southeastern
14                                                             Adıyaman         MoCT         active
      İşletme Kooperatifi                         Anatolia
      Beyoğlu Lider Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
15                                               Marmara                        MoCT         active
      İşletme kooperatifi                                       İstanbul
      Biga kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
16                                               Marmara       Çanakkale        MoCT         active
      Kooperatifi
      Bostaniçi kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme     Eastern
17                                                                Van           MoCT         active
      Kooperatifi                                 Anatolia
                                                                                            149




                                                                             Regulating
                                                Region (7
     Title of the co-op                                       Province     Ministry (MoCT   Status
                                                regions)
                                                                             or MoFAL)

     Çanakkale Girişimci Kadınlar Üretim ve
18                                              Marmara       Çanakkale        MoCT          active
     Pazarlama Kooperatifi
     Defne Kadın Girişimi Üretim ve İşletme
19                                               Akdeniz        Hatay          MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     Devrek Merkez Dedeoğlu ve
20   Çolakpehlivan Köyleri Tarımsal             Black Sea     Zonguldak        MoFAL         active
     Kalkınma Kooperatifi
                                               Southeastern
21   Dokuma El Sanatları Kooperatifi                          Şanlıurfa        MoCT          active
                                                 Anatolia
     Eskipazar Kadın,Çevre,Kültür ve İşletme
22                                              Black Sea      Karabük         MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     Filmmor Kadın Çevre ve Kültür İşletme
23                                              Marmara        İstanbul        MoCT          active
     Koop.
     Gökova Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
24                                               Aegean        Muğla           MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
                                               Southeastern
25   Gültepe Kadın Tarımsal Kalkınma Koop.                    Diyarbakır       MoFAL         active
                                                 Anatolia
     Güzelyurt Gaziemir Tarımsal kalkınma      Southeastern
26                                                             Aksaray         MoFAL         active
     Kooperatifi                                 Anatolia
     Hanımeller Ev Ürünleri Tüketim
27                                               Aegean        Denizli         MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi

28   Hıdırlık Tarımsal kalkınma Kooperatifi      Aegean         İzmir          MoFAL         active

     İlk Adım Kadın Çevre Kültür İşletme
29                                              Marmara        İstanbul        MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     İnsanca Yaşam Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
30                                              Marmara        İstanbul        MoCT          active
     İşletme Kooperatifi
     İpekyolu Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme    Southeastern
31                                                             Mardin          MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi                                 Anatolia
     Karabiga Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
32                                              Marmara       Çanakkale        MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     Karaburun İlçe Mrk. Yayla Tepeboz
33   Hasseki Salman Sarpıncık Anbarseki          Aegean         İzmir          MoFAL         active
     Tarımsal Kalkınma Koop.
                                                                               Regulating
                                                   Region (7
     Title of the co-op                                          Province    Ministry (MoCT   Status
                                                   regions)
                                                                               or MoFAL)

     Kartal kadın, çevre Kültür ve İşletme
34                                                 Marmara                       MoCT         active
     Kooperatifi                                                 İstanbul
     Kızıltepe Kadın Destek Çevre Kültür ve       Southeastern
35                                                                               MoCT         active
     İşletme Kooperatifi                            Anatolia      Mardin
     Kimya Hatun Kadın Çevre Kültür ve              Central
36                                                                Konya          MoCT         active
     İşletme Kooperatifi                            Anatolia
     Kocabeyli, Karaçavuş, Süngütepe
                                                  Southeastern
37   ve Saatli Köyleri Tarımsal Kalkınma                           Kilis         MoFAL        active
                                                    Anatolia
     Kooperatifi
     Manisa Merkez tarımsal kalkınma
38                                                  Aegean        Manisa         MoFAL        active
     kooperatifi
     Menemen Kadın Girişimi Üretim ve
39                                                  Aegean                       MoCT         active
     İşletme Kooperatifi                                           İzmir
     Merkez Trilye Belediyesi Tarımsal
40                                                 Marmara        Bursa          MoFAL        active
     Kalkınma Kooperatifi
     Mezopotamya kadın Çevre Kültür ve            Southeastern
41                                                               Şanlıurfa       MoCT         active
     İşletme Kooperatifi                            Anatolia
                                                    Central
42   Mihalgazi Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi                     Eskişehir       MoFAL        active
                                                    Anatolia
     Nahrin Kadın Girşim Üretim ve İşletme        Southeastern
43                                                                Mardin         MoCT         active
     Koop.                                          Anatolia
     Nar Çiçeği Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme       Central
44                                                               Eskişehir       MoCT         active
     kooperatifi                                    Anatolia
     Nar Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
45                                                 Marmara       Balıkesir       MoCT         active
     Kooperatifi

46   Nilüfer Kadın Çevre Kültür İşletme Koop.      Marmara        Düzce          MoCT         active

     Nusaybin Kadına Yönelik Şiddetle
                                                  Southeastern
47   Mücadele İletişim Çevre Kültür İşletme                       Mardin         MoCT         active
                                                    Anatolia
     Kooperatifi
     Ödemiş Ev Eksenli Çalışan Küçük Sanat
48                                                  Aegean         İzmir         MoCT         active
     Kooperatifi
     Ödemiş Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
49                                                  Aegean         İzmir         MoCT         active
     Kooperatifi
                                                    Central
50   Sarıcakaya Tarımsal Kalkınma Koop.                          Eskişehir       MoFAL        active
                                                    Anatolia
     Sarıyer Mahalle ve Köyleri Kadın Çiftçiler
51                                                 Marmara       İstanbul        MoFAL        active
     Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi
                                                                                                151


                                                                                 Regulating
                                                    Region (7
     Title of the co-op                                           Province     Ministry (MoCT   Status
                                                    regions)
                                                                                 or MoFAL)

     Sarıyer ve Civarı Girişimci Kadın Çevre
52                                                   Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT          active
     Kültür ve İşletme Kooperatifi
     Tarihi Eyüp Oyuncakları ve benzerleri
53   Kadın çevre Kültür ve işletme                   Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     Tarihi Manisa Bezi Dokuma ve diğer iş ve
54   hizmetler Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme         Aegean        Manisa          MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     Tomurcuk Eğitim Kültür Dayanışma
55                                                   Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT          active
     İşletme Kooperatifi
     Turhal Girişimci Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
56                                                   Black Sea                     MoCT          active
     İşletme kooperatifi                                            Tokat
     Tülmen Kırsal Kalkınma Tarım                  Southeastern
57                                                                Şanlıurfa        MoFAL         active
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia
     Umut Işığı Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme      Southeastern
58                                                                                 MoCT          active
     Koop.                                           Anatolia     Diyarbakır
     Yağcılar Köyü Kadın Tarımsal kalkınma
59                                                   Marmara      Çanakkale        MoFAL         active
     kooperatifi
     Yenipazar Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
60                                                   Aegean                        MoCT          active
     Koop.                                                          Aydın
     Yeniyaylacık Köyü Tarımsal Kalkınma             Central
61                                                                Nevşehir         MoFAL         active
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia
     Yüksekova İlçe Merkezi Tarımsal
62                                                 Doğu Anadolu                    MoFAL         active
     Kalkınma Kooperatifi                                          Hakkari
     Zeytin Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
63                                                   Marmara       Balıkesir       MoCT          active
     Kooperatifi
     4 Eylül Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme           Central
64                                                                  Sivas          MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia
     Aktif kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
65                                                   Marmara       Sakarya         MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi
     Amargi Kadın Bilimsel ve Kültürel Araştırma
66                                                   Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT         inactive
     Yayıncılık ve Dayanışma Kooperatifi
     Antakya İpekevi Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
67                                                   Akdeniz        Hatay          MoCT         inactive
     İşletme Koop.
     Avcılar Ev Eksenli Çalışan Kadınlar
68                                                   Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi
                                                                                Regulating
                                                    Region (7
     Title of the co-op                                           Province    Ministry (MoCT   Status
                                                    regions)
                                                                                or MoFAL)

69   Ayazağa Işıltı Kadın Kooperatifi               Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT         inactive

     Başak Kadın Çevre Kültür ve Tüketim
70                                                  Marmara       İstanbul        MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi
     Bitlis Kadın Eli Çevre Kültür ve İşletme        Eastern
71                                                                  Bitlis        MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia
     Bitlis Merkez Mah. 2. Tarımsal Kalkınma         Eastern
72                                                                  Bitlis        MoFAL        inactive
     Koop.                                           Anatolia
                                                     Central
73   Büyük Teflek Tarımsal Kalkınma Koop.                          Kırşehir       MoFAL        inactive
                                                     Anatolia

74   Çağdaş Kadın Kültür ve İşletme Koop.           Marmara        Sakarya        MoCT         inactive

     Davutoğlan Köyü Tarımsal Kalkınma               Central
75                                                                 Ankara         MoFAL        inactive
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia

76   Değirmençay Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi       Akdeniz       Mersin         MoFAL        inactive

77   Deprem kadınları Toplum Birliği Kooperatifi    Marmara                       MoCT         inactive
                                                                   Sakarya
     Erkadın Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme           Eastern
78                                                                                MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia     Erzincan

79   Ertuğrul Köyü Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi     Aegean        Denizli        MoFAL        inactive

     Gaziantep Kadın Çevre Kültür Kalkınma         Southeastern
80                                                                Gaziantep       MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi                                     Anatolia
     İlkadım İncirliova Kadın Çevre Kültür ve
81                                                   Aegean        Aydın          MoCT         inactive
     İşletme Kooperatifi

82   İMECE Kadın Kooperatifi                         Aegean       İstanbul        MoCT         inactive

     Kadem Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
83                                                   Aegean        Muğla          MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi

84   Karabörk Kuşköy Tarımsal Kalkınma Koop.        Black Sea      Giresun        MoFAL        inactive

     Karaburun Kadınları Agro Turizm İşletme
85                                                   Aegean         İzmir         MoCT         inactive
     Koop.
     Kırkörük Kadına Yönelik Şiddetle Mücadele
                                                     Central
86   İletişim Çevre Kültür İşletme Kooperatifi                     Ankara         MoCT         inactive
                                                     Anatolia
     Kooperatifi
     Kocaeli Çınar Kadın Çevre Kültür İşletme
87                                                  Marmara        Kocaeli        MoCT         inactive
     Kooperatifi
     Kozadan İpeğe Ev Eksenli Çalışan Kadınlar       Central
88                                                                 Ankara         MoCT         inactive
     Küçük Sanat Kooperatifi                         Anatolia
                                                                                                  153


                                                                                   Regulating
                                                       Region (7
      Title of the co-op                                             Province    Ministry (MoCT   Status
                                                       regions)
                                                                                   or MoFAL)

89    Kösbucağı Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi           Akdeniz        Mersin        MoFAL        inactive

      Muratlı Öncü Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
90                                                     Marmara                       MoCT         inactive
      Kooperatifi                                                     Tekirdağ
      Niksar El Sanatları Sokak Atölyeleri              Central
91                                                                                   MoCT         inactive
      Kadın,Çevre,Kültür İşletme Kooperatifi            Anatolia       Tokat
      Pınar Kadınİnsiyatifi İstihdam Çevre Kültür
92                                                      Akdeniz                      MoCT         inactive
      İşletme Koop.                                                    Adana
      Seyhan Kadın İnsiyatifi İstihdam Çevre
93                                                      Akdeniz        Adana         MoCT         inactive
      Kültür ve İşletme Kooperatifi
      Simge Kadın Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
94                                                     Marmara                       MoCT         inactive
      Kooperatifi                                                     Kocaeli
                                                        Eastern
95    Sungu Tarımsal Kalkınma Kooperatifi                               Muş          MoFAL        inactive
                                                        Anatolia

96    Topraktaki Kadın Eli Temin Tevzi Kooperatifi     Karadeniz     Gümüşhane       MoCT         inactive

                                                      Southeastern
97    Uludere Kadın Kooperatifi                                                      MoCT         inactive
                                                        Anatolia       Şırnak
      Verim kadın inisiyatifi istihdam çevre kültür
98                                                      Akdeniz                      MoCT         inactive
      işletme kooperatifi                                              Adana
      Yapraklı ve Köyleri Tarımsal Kalkınma             Central
99                                                                                   MoFAL        inactive
      Kooperatifi                                       Anatolia      Çankırı
      Yeni Umutlar Kaıdn Çevre Kültür ve İşletme
100                                                    Marmara                       MoCT         inactive
      Kooperatifi                                                     İstanbul
      Yeşilırmak havzası kadın inisiyatifi çevre ve
101                                                    Black Sea       Tokat         MoCT         inactive
      kültür kooperatifi
     Appendix 2       STAKEHOLDERS LIST
                      (25 OUT OF 45 WILLING TO BE IDENTIFIED)


Avanos Municipality
Balçova Municipality
Bitlis Provincial Directorate of Agriculture, Food and Livestock
Çanakkale Union of the Agriculture Co-operatives
Chief Advisor on Co-operatives to the UN/ILO
Consultant to the National Co-operatives Union of Turkey
DG for Agriculture Credit Co-ops
DG for Child Services under Ministry of Family and Social Policy
GAP İDARESİ BAŞKANLIĞI (Southeast Anatolia Project Management Head Office)
German Co-operatives Confederation (DGRV)
General Directorate of Women’s Status under Ministry of Family and Social Policy
Head of Local Administrations / Düzce Governorship
Kağıthane Munipality, Istanbul
Kartal Municipality
Konya Chamber of Commerce
KOSGEB Çanakkale (SME Development Agency in Canakkale)
Manisa Provincial Directorate of ISKUR (Employment Agency)
Mardin Milli Eğitim Müdürlüğü
Ministry of Customs and Trade General Directorate for Cooperatives
Ministry of Development/Agency of Development
Municipality of Van
Provincial Directorate of Food Agriculture and Livestock
Seferihisar Municipality, Izmir
SGK (National Social security institution)
Simurg Women Co-operatives Union
Tepebaşı Municipality’s Özdilek Art Centre
Türkiye Kalkınma Vakfı (Turkey Development Foundation)
Women Co-operatives Communication
                                                                               155



                        PROFILE OF AGRICULTURAL
      Appendix 3
                        WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES

Based on an interview with a stakeholder from the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and
Livestock, about women’s co-operatives, the following was stated:

“Within MoFAL, there are 49 Agricultural Development Cooperatives that are established
by women or which mostly consist of women members. 18 of these cooperatives were
supported by MoFAL’s program by applying positive discrimination. According to the
economic investments evaluation grids of the Program to Support Rural Development
Investments, plus scores are given when the applicant is a women and an agriculture
co-op and a union member. And women farmers can benefit from the machinery-
equipment purchase (50 per cent grant) for 35 types of equipment. Within this group, to
date approximately 5000 women farmers used this support.”

The survey includes 28 agricultural co-operatives, eighteen of which are active and
ten which are inactive. Agricultural co-operatives come from all regions, with most
from either the Black Sea region (seven) or the Central Anatolia region (six). Half
of the agricultural women’s co-operatives operate seven days a week, while six of
them only are operational whenever there is a need. Twenty agricultural women’s
co-operatives work all year long.

None of the agricultural women’s co-operatives provide early childhood care and
education services (including for disabled children). The top three activities at time
of start-up provided by agricultural women’s co-operatives are income generation
activities (24), social-cultural activities (10) and lobbying or skills training (seven).
At present, 17 agricultural women’s co-operatives still provide income generation
activities, eight provide social-cultural activities, six provide lobbying and only three
provide skills training. Unsurprisingly, the three most common goods produced for
income generation are food (13), “agricultural goods products” (12) and livestock
(10). When looking at various activities provided for members that the co-operatives
addresses, the majority of inactive agricultural co-operatives said that they provided
none of the activities suggested. For this reason, when looking at these activities,
this report will only speak to the 18 active co-operatives. Seven of the active
agricultural women’s co-operatives stated that their co-operative addressed none
of the suggested activities. A plurality of agricultural co-operatives stated that
they addressed income generation and socializing/solidarity for members (nine),
followed by providing better status for women within the community (eight) and
providing marketing and sales opportunities (eight).
When asked reason for start-up, agricultural women’s co-operatives were told to
rank reasons, with the most important as “1”. The three most common reasons for
start-up (in which co-operatives ranked the reason in their top three) were income
generation for women (25 – of which 21 placed it as their number one reason),
to empower women (20) and to create solutions for women’s problems (13). All
but one co-operative was supported by either the local government or public
institutions at start-up.

When asked about revenues, agricultural women’s co-operatives have a diverse
range of projected revenue for this year. In terms of profit, only five active
agricultural women’s co-operatives share profit with their members. Seven of the
agricultural women’s co-operatives reinvest profit back into the co-operative, two
are non-profit based on their by-laws and six stated that they have no profit. When
asked about membership size, agricultural co-operatives have a diverse range, with
some having as few as 7-14 while others have over 75 members.

Most agricultural women’s co-operatives have partnered with theDirectorates
of Food, Agriculture and Livestock (21) at district and provincial level while some
others also partner with the women’s co-op union/women’s co-op communication
network (seven), other women’s co-operatives (seven) and the Chamber of
Commerce (seven). These partnerships are most commonly for training (15), sharing
experiences (14) and sharing technical support (13). Twelve agricultural women’s
co-operatives are member of a larger organization, most of which at the regional
level (seven) and some at the national level (five). Nine of the agricultural women’s
co-operatives were not aware of larger organizations that they could become
members or did not know how to join one.

In terms of support programs, one unique finding was that although only three
agricultural women’s co-operatives stated that they had applied for support from
the MoFAL, five co-operatives claimed to have received support from the ministry.
It also appears that agricultural women’s co-operatives are more likely to receive
support from government bodies than from outside organizations as 14 out of 19
cases of program support were through government bodies. When asked what
women’s co-operatives needed to improve their business, the top three things
mentioned by agricultural women’s co-operatives were financial/organizational
support (20), technical support/advice (19) and equipment (17).

When asked about success among active co-operatives, most agricultural women’s
co-operatives stated they were successful but want to improve (10), while five were
struggling but surviving and three were either fairly successful or very successful.
                                                                          157




     Appendix 4        CHILDCARE AND WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES


Childcare women’s co-operatives are a small proportion of active women’s co-
operatives. In the micronarratives, only 16 women stated that they had received
early childhood care/education services from their co-operative.

In the survey, eight co-operatives identified themselves as providing childcare
services, although at start-up originally 13 had done so. Two of the co-operatives
being studied did not provide early childhood services at start up, but have
gained this service. All of the co-operatives which provide child-care services are
considered enterprise women’s co-ops. Five of the childcare women’s co-operatives
are located in the Marmara region, two are from the Eastern Anatolia region and
one is from the Aegean region. There are no childcare women’s co-operatives in the
Mediterranean, Central Anatolia region, Southeastern Anatolia region or the Black
Sea region.

Besides early childhood care and education services, these co-operatives provide
many other activities. At least six childcare women’s co-operatives also provide
income generation activities, capacity building programs for women, social-
cultural activities, guidance to services, raising public awareness and lobbying.
The two least common activities provided by these co-operatives are education
for disabled children (one) and community needs assessment (two). Almost all
childcare women’s co-operatives use their daycare centres or play rooms for income
generation (six) while most also provide training for income generation (five).

In terms of activities the co-operatives address for their members, only five of the
childcare co-operatives provide childcare and education services for members.
The two co-operatives from the Southeastern Anatolia region do not provide this
service for members, instead operating as a co-operative that provides such services
for clients for free to lower socio-economic families. Other activities for members
which at least five co-operatives provide include training/capacity building, good
governance skills and socializing/solidarity. When asked about reason for start-
up, six childcare co-operatives identified“to provide early childcare and education
services” within their top three reasons. Other primary reasons included: to
empower women, to create solutions for common issues for women and to provide
jobs for women.

Even among the eight childcare women’s co-operatives, there is a diverse range
of projected revenue for the current year, ranging from a low of 10,001-25000 to
100,001-250,000. In all cases the member share is 1-100TL. Of the six co-operatives
who stated that they received income from early childcare services, this source was
worth anywhere from 15 per cent-100 per cent of total income. The two which did
not receive income from early childcare services received most of their income from
sales (100 per cent and 75 per cent respectively). When asked about profits, none of
the childcare co-operatives shared profits with their members as six were non-profit
based on their bylaws, one re-invested profit into their co-operative and one stated
that they have no profit. In seven cases (i.e. the majority), 6-25 women are earning
income through the co-operative.

When looking at other benefits to women and to members, all except one co-
operative stated that 250 or more women benefit on average annually from their
co-operative. The highest estimate provided by one co-operative was 800 women.
When asked how many women who are not members are benefiting from the co-
operative, two chose 6-10, two chose 26-50, one said 51-100 and two estimated 100
and over.

There are some interesting trends when looking at partnership and support. All
childcare co-operatives partner with the women’s co-op union/women’s co-
ops communication network and with other NGOs. Most childcare women’s
co-operatives partner with other women’s co-operatives (six) as well. These
partnerships are used by all childcare co-operatives for training and networking and
by most (seven) for technical support and sharing experiences. Four are also part of
a communications network.

Most childcare women’s co-operatives face similar challenges. All childcare co-
operatives placed the general legal environment in their top three challenges, while
seven of the eight co-operatives placed finding a location/premises, and accessing
credit/grants in their top three (in the case of accessing credit/grants, all put as most
important).

In terms of programming, all childcare co-operatives applied for support from KEDV,
while most applied for support from the municipal government (six), of which all
were approved and the support was found useful. In all other categories three
or less co-operatives applied. Support from KEDV was used by all childcare co-
operatives for training, were used by seven for community services, networking
and technical services and were used by six childcare co-operatives for access to
funding or grants. Of the municipal support, most applicants used the program for
location (five) and three also used municipal support for community services.

When asked about other sources of support beyond the programs provided, most
childcare co-operatives received alternative support from other co-ops or the co-op
network (five) while half of childcare co-operatives also received support from family
members, friends, the local community and volunteers. Alternative support was
                                                                                                                                                                        159

             used by six childcare co-operatives for assistance with the co-op’s management,
             communication and networking and dialogue/negotiation. Other common uses of
             alternative support (used by 5 co-operatives) were to start-up business, to improve/
             expand business, to obtain legal advice, to gain space to run activities and to assist
             with leadership.

             Seven of the eight childcare co-operatives considered themselves successful, but
             wanting to improve (while one was very successful). In terms of improvements,
             support that would improve their business most identified by childcare co-
             operatives included product/business development and networking/partnering
             (identified by six co-operatives), followed by training (identified by five), financial/
             organizational management support (four) and equipment (four).




                           Appendix 5                          PROFILE OF ENTERPRISE WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES


             Within the survey 64 women’s co-operatives identify as being enterprise co-
             operatives. Forty-two of these are active and 22 are inactive.

             Enterprise women’s co-operatives are much more diverse than other types of
             women’s co-operatives. For this reason, when asked about activities offered at
             start-up and at present, there are enterprise women’s co-operatives which cover all
             the suggested activities. (Figures 55 and 56). Childcare women’s co-operatives are
             also considered enterprise women’s co-operatives.


                                                               ACTIVITIES AT STARTUP BY TYPE (
                                  Figure 55
                                                               ACTIVE AND INACTIVE) (N=101)
                                                      programs for women




                                                                                                                                                 Guidance to services
              Income generation




                                                                                                                               Community needs
                                                       Capacity building




                                                                                                                                                                         disabled children
                                    Social-cultural




                                                                                             Raising public



                                                                                                              Raising public
                                                                           Skills training




                                                                                                                                                                           Education for
                                                                                                                                 assessment
                                                                                              awareness



                                                                                                               awareness
                  activities


                                      activities




Enterprise      72%                  67%                50%                48%                39%              31%              30%              25%                       72%
                                          ACTIVITIES AT PRESENT BY TYPE
        Figure 56
                                          (ACTIVE AND INACTIVE) (N=101)




                                                   programs for women




                                                                                                                         Guidance to services




                                                                                                                                                                  care and education
            Income generation




                                                                                                                                                Community needs
                                                    Capacity building




                                                                                                                                                                                       disabled children
                                                                                                                                                                    Early childhood
                                Social-cultural




                                                                                           Raising public
                                                                         Skills training




                                                                                                                                                                                         Education for
                                                                                                                                                  assessment
                                                                                            awareness


                                                                                                             Lobbying
                activities


                                  activities




                                                                                                                                                                        services
Enterprise 63%                  52%               39%                   39%                38%              28%         28%                     17%               63%                  52%




The most common activity provided currently by enterprise co-operatives is income
generation, followed by social-cultural activities. That being said, other common
activities available at present from enterprise women’s co-operatives include capacity
building for women (25), skills training (25) and raising public awareness (24).

Enterprise women’s co-operatives produce goods and provide services for income
generation. The most common goods produced for income generation at present
include food (36), handicrafts (32) and “other” (22). When asked to specify “other”
goods, answered provided were silk production and drying, stitching, and second
hand goods. Looking at services provided for income generation from enterprise
women’s co-operatives, the three most common activities for enterprise women’s
co-operatives were handicraft/gift shops (29), restaurants or food sales (24) and
trainings (20). The least common service provided by enterprise women’s co-
operatives were guesthouses (4).

Enterprise co-operatives were started for a variety of reasons. Providing jobs for
women, empowering women socially and creating solutions for common issues for
women were placed in the top 3 reasons for a significant majority of all enterprise
women’s co-operatives. The least common chosen reason for start-up among
enterprise women’s co-operatives was to provide goods to the community.

Enterprise women’s co-operatives exist in all regions, the most common being the
Marmara region (23), followed by the Aegean region (11) and both Central Anatolia
and Southeastern Anatolia (9 each).

The most common services in enterprise co-operatives were income generation
(36), skills building for production and manufacturing (32), socializing and solidarity
(31), training (30) and good governance (27). None of the suggested activities had a
particularly low amount of women’s co-operatives supplying them, with the lowest
                                                                                      161



           being access to public services (18).

           Among active enterprise women’s co-operatives, there is a diverse range of
           projected revenues for the current year. It is common for enterprise women’s co-
           operatives to make anywhere between 0-100,000 TL a year, while some projected
           revenues even higher (Figure 57).



                                   REVENUES FOR THIS YEAR FOR ACTIVE ENTERPRISE
                      Figure 57
                                   WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES

                                   # of Active Enterprise       per cent of Active Enterprise
Projected Revenue This Year
                                  Women’s Co-operatives           Women’s Cooperatives
            (TL)
                                           (n=42)                          (n=42)

          0-5000                             7                              17%

        5001-10,.00                          5                              12%

       10.001-25.000                         9                              21%

       25.001-50.000                         9                              21%

      50.001-100.000                         9                              21%

     100.001-250.000                         3                               7%

     250,001 and over                        1                               2%

Prefer not to say/Don’t know                 4                              10%



           When asked about sharing profits with members, only four of active enterprise
           women’s co-operatives said that this was something that they did. When asked to
           explain why they did not share profits with members, 30 were non-profit co-ops
           based on their by-laws, nine re-invested their profits into their co-operative and 18
           stated that they had no profit to share.

           The following (Figure 58) depicts membership size of all active enterprise women’s
           co-operatives in 2014. This shows that most enterprise co-ops are between 7-24
           members, however, it is possible for enterprise women’s co-operatives to be of all
           membership sizes.
        Figure 58       NUMBERS OF MEMBERS FOR ACTIVE ENTERPRISE
                        WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES


     # of Members          # of Active Co-operatives        per cent Of Active
                                     (n=42)                Cooperatives (n=42)

     7-14 members                      14                           33%

     15-24 members                     11                           26%

     25-34 members                     6                            14%

     35-49 members                     5                            12%

     50-74 members                     1                            2%

  75 and over members                  2                            5%




When asked how many women are benefiting from the co-operative, there is
significant diversity in the numbers provided among enterprise women’s co-
operatives. Amounts range from as low as five to a high of 1000. Fourteen active
women’s co-operatives chose 100 and over, 14 chose between 20 - 99 and nine
stated less than 20. In terms of income generation for women, there is less diversity
in answers, yet they still span a fairly large range. Most active enterprise women’s
co-operatives state that between 6-15 women are earning income through the co-
operative (23), followed by 16-25 (five) and 0-5 (five). Seven enterprise women’s co-
operatives chose over 26 (with one saying over 100), while one co-operative said
none.
     Appendix 6         SUPPORT PROGRAMS AVAILABLE TO WOMEN’S CO-OPERATIVES


SUPPORT PROGRAMS AVAILABLE TO WOMEN CO-OPERATIVES123
Type of Support: Funding (Grants)


                                         Type of activities                                                  Types of costs
  Institution/     Name of the                                         Amount of
                                       supported within the                                Duration       supported within the            Who can benefit           Who benefited4
 organization       program                                             support
                                            program                                                            program
                                       Participatory
                                       development projects                                                                          Non-profit making
                                       with specific focus on                                                                        organizations including
Australian        Direct Aid                                        20.000 – 40.000      Max. 18         Purchase of equipment                                      İpekyolu Women
                                       women’s employment,                                                                           NGOs, public institutions,
Consulate 6       Program (DAP)                                     Australian Dollars   months          and service                                                Co-op
                                       children and Syrian                                                                           municipalities, non-profit
                                       refugees                                                                                      companies

                                       Purchase of goods and
                                                                    Depends on the
                                       services
                                                                    program.
                                       Trainings
                  Call for                                          Changes between
                                       Awareness raising                                                                             2 types: One for non-profit
Development       proposals                                         25.000 and                           Human resources, travel,
                                       activities                                        Depends on                                  making organizations,
agencies                                                            1.500.000 TRL.                       purchase of services and
                                       Advocacy                                          the program.                                other for profit making
(working at                                                         Funding can be                       equipment, project office
                                       Visibility                                        6 – 12 months                               organizations
regional level)                                                     25-90per cent                        costs, publication
                                       (depending on the
                                                                    of total budget
                                       program type and
                                                                    depending on the
                                       priorities of the specific
                                                                    program type
                                       call)
                                                                                                                                     Non-profit making
                                       Research                                                          Human resources, travel,
Development                                                         Depends on the                                                   organizations including
                                       Feasibility                                                       purchase of services and
agencies          Direct support                                    agency budget.                                                   local governments, public
                                       Piloting                                          1-3 months      equipment, project office
                                                                                                                                                                                     163




(working at       for the activities                                App. 25.000 –                                                    institutions, universities,
                                       Planning                                                          costs, publication
regional level)                                                     90.000 TRL                                                       industrial zones, co-ops and
                                                                                                                                     unions, sector NGOs
                                   Type of activities                                                Types of costs
 Institution/    Name of the                                     Amount of
                                 supported within the                                 Duration    supported within the            Who can benefit        Who benefited4
organization      program                                         support
                                      program                                                          program
                                 Capacity building                                                                           Non-governmental
EU Delegation   Civil Society                                                                    Purchase of services
                                 Advocacy                     Up to 10.000 €      -                                          organizations
to Turkey       Facility
                                 Networking                                                                                  Activists
                                 Activities including
                Grants           capacity and skills
                foremployment    building, networking,
                under IPA        awareness raising            Up to 400.000 €
                                                                                                 Human resources,
                IV (women’s      in line with the             amounting max.                                                 Not-profit making
                                                                                  Up to 18       travel, purchase/rent of
EU              employment,      specific call’s priorities   90per cent of the                                              organizations including
                                                                                  months         equipment, project office
                registered       (employment                  overall budget of                                              NGOs, public institutions
                                                                                                 costs, publications
                employment,      of women and                 the project
                youth            youth, registered
                employment)      employment)

                Grants for
                                 Activities (including        150.000-250.000 €
                education                                                                        Human resources,
                                 awareness raising)           amounting max.                                                 Not-profit making
                under IPA                                                                        travel, purchase/rent of
EU                               to increase girls’           90per cent of the   10-12 months                               organizations including
                IV (girls’                                                                       equipment, project office
                                 attendance to                overall project                                                NGOs, public institutions
                education)                                                                       costs, publications
                                 education                    budget

                                 Basic and vocational
                                 skill building,
                                 developing new
                                                              100.000-200.000 €
                Grants for       learning methods,                                               Human resources,
                                                              amounting max.
                lifelong         activities to facilitate                                        travel, purchase/rent of    Not-profit making
EU                                                            90per cent of the   10-12 months
                learning under   access to learning,                                             equipment, project office   organizations
                                                              overall project
                IPA IV           awareness raising                                               costs, publications
                                                              budget
                                 networking for
                                 the benefit of
                                 disadvantaged groups
                                     Program kapsamında                                                Program kapsamında
     Kurum/
                  Program Adı        desteklenen faaliyet         Destek Miktarı          Süre         desteklenen maliyet          Kimler faydalanabilir?
     Kuruluş
                                            türleri                                                           türleri
                                                                 30.000-300.000
                 Grants for social                               € (varying as to
                                     Activities to increase                                           Human resources,
                 inclusion of                                    the priorities)
                                     disadvantage groups’                                             travel, purchase/rent of    Not-profit making
EU               disadvantaged                                   amounting max.       10-12 months
                                     social inclusion and                                             equipment, project office   organizations
                 groups under                                    90per cent of the
                                     employability                                                    costs, publications
                 IPA IV                                          overall project
                                                                 budget
                                                                                                                                                                -Umut Işığı
                                     Activities to improve       Starts with 6.000
Global Fund                                                                                           All expenses linked to      Non-governmental              Women Co-op
                                     lives of children and       USD, may increase    Up to 6 years
for Children 7                                                                                        the project                 organizations and groups      -İlk Adım Women
                                     youth                       annually
                                                                                                                                                                Co-op
                                     Agricultural                Between 300.000
                                     investments for             – 800.000 TRL
Ministry         Program
                                     processing, storing and     amounting                            Construction                Persons, companies and
of Food,         for Rural
                                     packaging agricultural      to 50per cent        12 months       Purchase of machinery,      co-operatives engaged in
Agriculture      Development
                                     goods; for alternative      of overall                           equipment and materials     agriculture
and Livestock    Investments
                                     energy resources and        investment. VAT
                                     for livestock               excluded
                                                                 Up to 3.000.000
                                     Investments                 € (varying as to
Ministry                                                                                              Construction
                                     (agriculture, livestock,    the specific call
of Food,         IPA Rural                                                                            Purchase of machinery,      Persons and companies
                                     fishery, local goods,       for proposal)        12 months
Agriculture      Development                                                                          equipment, materials        engaged in agriculture
                                     rural tourism) at startup   amounting max
and Livestock                                                                                         and services
                                     stage or for expanding      50per cent of the
                                                                 overall investment
                 MATRA               Activities with focus                                                                        KEDV got funding to bring
                                                                 10.000 - 300.000 €
Netherlands      (Decentral and      on country priorities                                            Expenses directly linked    women co-ops to the
                                                                 (mostly less than    -
Consulate 8      Human Rights        including women’s                                                to the project              international AWID forum in
                                                                 50.000 €)
                 Programs)           rights                                                                                       Istanbul in 2012
                                                                                                                                                                                  165
                                  Program kapsamında                                             Program kapsamında
   Kurum/
                 Program Adı      desteklenen faaliyet         Destek Miktarı         Süre       desteklenen maliyet          Kimler faydalanabilir?
   Kuruluş
                                         türleri                                                        türleri
                                                                                                                                                       -Karabiga Women
                                                                                                                                                       Co-op
                                                                                                                                                       -Ödemiş Women
                                                                                                                                                       Co-op
                                                                                                                                                       - KEDV got
                                  Activities supporting
                                                                                                                                                       funding twice.
                                  social justice, social                                        Human resources, travel,    Non-governmental
                Social                                                                                                                                 One for an IT
Sabancı                           participation and           40.000-200.000                    purchase of services and    organizations
                Development                                                       12 months                                                            training project
Foundation 9                      economic participation      TRL                               equipment, project office
                Grant Program                                                                                                                          and the other
                                  for women, youth and                                          costs, publication
                                                                                                                                                       for a rural
                                  disabled
                                                                                                                                                       development
                                                                                                                                                       project, both
                                                                                                                                                       supported the
                                                                                                                                                       women co-
                                                                                                                                                       operatives
                                  Activities to start or
                                  improve local initiatives                                                                                            -Ipekyolu Women
                Sustainable       (including economic                                           Purchase of equipment                                  Co-op
                                                                                                                            Not-profit making
UNDP 10         Tourism Grant     initiatives, networking,    Up to 90.000 TRL    12 months     and services, travel,                                  -Hıdırlık
                                                                                                                            organizations
                Program           capacity building) for                                        publication                                            Agricultural Co-
                                  sustainable tourism                                                                                                  op

                                                                                                Human resources, travel,    Not profit making
UNDP –                            Activities to support
                Women                                                                           purchase of services and    organizations              -Balçova Women
Sabancı                           gender equality at local    15.000-35.000 TRL   6-12 months
                Friendly Cities                                                                 equipment, project office                              Co-op
Foundation 11                     level
                                                                                                costs, publication
Type of Support: Training and other capacity building

Institution/organization                      Name of the program              Type of activities provided           Who can benefit
Ministry of Customs and Trade/Co-operatives                                    Training programs on co-operatives,   Women’s Co-operatives
                                              KADIN-KOOP (Women’s Co-
Directorate General                                                            production, marketing and             Women entrepreneurs and
                                              operatives Promotion and
(in collaboration with related agencies and                                    entrepreneurship                      producers’ co-operative initiatives
                                              Capacity Building Project)
organizations primarily including DGRV)
                                                                               Support for establishment and
                                              Women’s Co-operatives            management of the co-operatives       Women’s co-operatives
KEDV                                          Communication and Support        Capacity building training programs
                                              Unit                             Business startup and development      Women’s co-operative initiatives
                                                                               support
                                                                               Vocational trainings
İŞKUR                                         Active Labour Force Program                                            Individuals
                                                                               On-the-job trainings
                                              Applied entrepreneurship
KOSGEB                                                                         Training                              Individuals
                                              trainings
MoNE                                          Non-formal education programs    Trainings                             Individuals
                                              Technical support (ongoing)      Trainings, program/project            For not profit making organizations
Development agencies (working at regional     No direct funding. Capacity      preparation, temporary human          including local governments, public
level)                                        building through the agencies’   resources, consultancy, lobbying,     institutions, universities, industrial
                                              own experts or purchasing        networking and other capacity         zones, co-ops and unions, sector
                                              service                          building                              NGOs
                                                                                                                                                              167
Past funding programs used by the women co-ops

                                                               Type of
                                                              activities                                          Types of costs
    Institution/                                                                  Amount of                                               Who can
                          Name of the program                supported                              Duration   supported within the                    Who benefited
   organization                                                                    support                                                benefit
                                                             within the                                             program
                                                              program
                                                                                                               Human resources,
                                                          Activities                                                                   Non-profit
                   Tourism and Environment Grant                                                               travel, purchase
                                                          to protect                               Max 18                              making
                   Program under Eastern Anatolia                               10.000-                        of services and                         Yaşam Women
EU 12                                                     environment                              months                              organizations
                   Development component of MEDA                                300.000 €                      equipment,                              Co-op
                                                          and cultural
                   Program                                                                                     project office costs,
                                                          assets
                                                                                                               publication
                                                                                                                                                       -Bahçelievler
                                                                                                                                                       Women Co-op
                                                          Activities
                                                                                                                                                       -Doğubayazıt
                                                          with focus
                                                                                5.000 – 100.000                                                        Women Co-op
                                                          on women,
                                                                                € (depending                   Human resources,                        -Zeytindalı
                                                          children,
                                                                                on the call                    travel, purchase                        Women Co-op
                                                          disabled and                                                                 Non-
                   Strengthening Civil Society in the                           for proposal,                  of services and                         -Filmmor Women
EU 13                                                     consumer                                                                     governmental
                   Pre-accession Process                                        amounting up                   equipment,                              Co-op
                                                          rights and                                                                   organizations
                                                                                to 90per cent                  project office costs,                   -KEDV got
                                                          environment
                                                                                of the overall                 publication                             funding to
                                                          under specific
                                                                                project budget)                                                        establish the
                                                          calls for
                                                                                                                                                       Women Co-ops
                                                          proposals
                                                                                                                                                       Communication
                                                                                                                                                       Network (KİA)
                                                          Awareness
                                                          raising activities,
                                                          networking,
                                                          meetings and
                                                          researches            5.000 – 10.000 €
                                                                                                               Expert fees, travel,
                   Supporting Civil Society in Turkey:    within the            (amounting up                                          Non-
                                                                                                               per diem, equipment,                    Ilk Adım Women
EU 14              Local Mobilization for Participatory   thematic areas        to 90per cent      6 months                            governmental
                                                                                                               publications, events,                   Co-op
                   Democracy                              as gender,            of the overall                                         organizations
                                                                                                               visibility
                                                          environment,          project budget)
                                                          disabled
                                                          children etc.
                                                          Rights local
                                                          cultures
                                                                 Type of
                                                                activities                                        Types of costs
      Institution/                                                                 Amount of                                                 Who can
                            Name of the program                supported                          Duration     supported within the                          Who benefited
     organization                                                                   support                                                  benefit
                                                               within the                                           program
                                                                program
                                                                                                                                                             -Yaşam Women
                                                             Establishing new                                                                                Co-op
                                                             women’s NGOs,                                                                                   -KEDV got
                     Empowerment Of Women And                networking,                                       Human resources,                              funding to
                     Women NGOs                              trainings,                                        travel, purchase                              do strategic
                     In The Least                            workshops,                                        of services and            Non-               planning with the
                                                                                 15.000-
EU 15                Developed Regions Of Turkey             seminars, peer                      6-18 months   equipment,                 governmental       women co-ops
                                                                                 100.000 €
                     (Southeastern Anatolia, Eastern Black   exchanges,                                        project office costs,      organizations      in the region.
                     Sea And Eastern Anatolia Regions)       awareness                                         publication                                   17 women co-
                     under IPA I                             raising,                                                                                        operatives are
                                                             advocacy and                                                                                    supported. 4 of
                                                             study tours                                                                                     these are given
                                                                                                                                                             sub-grant
                                                                                                               Human resources,
                                                             Training,
                     Strengthening Capacity of                                                                 travel, purchase           Non-
                                                             workshop,
     16              National and Local NGOs on                                  50.000-         12-24         of services and            governmental       Toros Women
EU                                                           advocacy,
                     Combating Violence Against Women                            200.000 €       months        equipment,                 organizations      Co-op
                                                             awareness
                     under IPA I                                                                               project office costs,
                                                             raising costs
                                                                                                               publication
                                                             Dialogue/
                                                             partnership
                                                             building,                                         Costs directly linked
                                                             awareness                                         to the project (except     Non-
                                                                                                                                                             S i m g e Wo m e n
World Bank17         Civil Society Fund                      raising, advocacy   5.000 USD       12 months     for salaries, equipment    governmental
                                                                                                                                                             Co-op
                                                             with focus on                                     purchases, operational     organizations
                                                             the priority                                      costs, research costs)
                                                             designated for
                                                             each year
                                                             Activities to
                                                                                                               Human resources,
                                                             support income                                                               Low income
                                                                                                               travel, purchase/
Social Aid and                                               generating,         Up to 100.000   Up to 18                                 individuals or
                     Social Risk Mitigation Program                                                            rent of equipment,
Solidarity Fund 18                                           employment          USD             months                                   groups without
                                                                                                               project office costs and
                                                                                                                                                                                  169




                                                             and social                                                                   social insurance
                                                                                                               publications
                                                             service provision
                                                                                                     171




(Footnotes)
1. Available only for rural development and agricultural co-operatives.
2.	 Usefulness based on successful application.




(Endnotes)
1.	 Data is based on the most recent available guidelines of the last calls for proposals
2.	 The programs available for individuals or other type of organizations are not included in the table.
3.	 This table does not include the national and regional projects supporting establishment and capacity
   of the women’s co-operatives as managed by KEDV under many grant programs of EU, international
   organizations and private sector.
4.	 While the research study asked participants about support program usage, it did not ask for the specific
   name of the program used. This column has been generated from the corporate knowledge of KEDV.
5.	 1 women co-op used this fund to improve its business.
6.	 2 women co-ops used/using this fund to provide early child education services.
7.	 Approximately 50 women co-ops are directly supported for international knowledge and experience
   sharing within KEDV’s project funded by this program.
8.	 2 women co-ops directly funded as 1 for early child education and 1 for economic initiative. Approximately
   25 women co-ops are indirectly supported through KEDV projects funded within the same program.
9.	 2 women co-ops directly funded for their economic initiatives.
10.	 1 women co-op is directly funded.
11.	 A women co-op is directly funded, received 2 grants.
12.	 4 women co-ops directly funded, app. 35 women co-ops indirectly supported through KEDV’s project.
13.	 1 women co-op directly funded for VAW focused project.
14.	1 women co-op is directly funded. And the women co-ops in the region indirectly supported by KEDV
15.	1 women co-ops directly funded.
16.	 1 women co-op directly funded for an awareness raising project on environment.
17.	 The women co-ops in the 1999 earthquake region directly funded to establish and run the Women and
   Children Centres.
