BANK RESOLUTION
AND “BAIL-IN” IN THE EU:
SELECTED CASE STUDIES
PRE AND POST BRRD
	 BANK RESOLUTION AND
“BAIL-IN” IN THE EU:
	 SELECTED CASE STUDIES
 	PRE AND POST BRRD


 CONTENT

 Introduction	2
 Brief Overview of Each Case Study	              4
 Austria	9
 Heta: Resolution of an Asset Management Vehicle
 Cyprus	18
 Bank of Cyprus (BoC) and Laiki: Resolution via Public Support and Bail-in,
 Including of Uninsured Depositors
 Denmark	24
 Andelskassen: Resolution via Bridge Bank and Bail-in Including of Uninsured
 Depositors
 Greece 	                                                                           29
 Several Greek Banks and Foreign Branches: Resolution via Public Recapitalization
 and Bail-in and State Aid Issues
 Italy	38
 Four Small Banks: Resolution via Bridge Bank and Asset Management
 Vehicle Tools to Avoid Full Bail-in
 The Netherlands	                                                                   45
 SNS Reaal: Resolution via Nationalization and Bail-in
 Portugal 	                                                                         52
 Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.: Resolution via a Bridge Bank Including a Re-Transfer
 Slovenia 	                                                                         61
 Several Domestic Banks: Resolution via Public Recapitalization and Bail-in
 Spain	66
 Savings Banks: Resolution via Public Recapitalization, the Creation of an
 Asset Management Vehicle and Bail-in
 The United Kingdom	                                                      73
 UK Co-operative Bank: Resolution via Negotiated Bail-in Outside the BRRD
 Authors	76
INTRODUCTION




INTRODUCTION

In the aftermath of the 2007/08 financial crisis, and lacking sufficient coordinated guidelines
or legislation, measures to address failing financial institutions in EU Member States were
taken at national level. In an effort to improve cross border coordination as well as to reduce
future dependence on public money, the European framework for managing the failure
of financial institutions was reformed, building upon the Financial Stability Board’s “Key
Attributes”. From January 1, 2015, all EU Member States were required to transpose the Bank
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) into their national law. A key element of the new
powers is the bail-in tool, requiring banks to recapitalize and absorb losses from within,
which was made mandatory as of January 1, 2016.

These case studies have been selected as examples of how some EU countries tackled the
resolution of several failing European banks. Importantly, the case studies are not meant
to be an exhaustive description of all aspects of the resolution of failing banks. The focus of
the case studies is on the application of bail-in features, i.e. statutory private loss absorption
outside liquidation.1 Most cases studies also describe other measures used to deal with
distressed financial institutions, including but not limited to government guarantees,
capital injections, liquidity supports, and the creation of asset management vehicles to put
the bail-in into perspective.

While most cases studied took place before adoption of the BRRD they remain both
interesting and relevant. They highlight the gradual transition from bail-out to bail-in for
the resolution of European banks. A framework for loss absorption was often already in place
and applicable, inspired by international good practice, the BRRD negotiations, and the
EU state aid rules. A common objective for authorities throughout the resolution processes
was to ensure uninterrupted access to banks’ deposits and critical functions. Actions taken
sufficiently early and rapidly can ensure the continuity of critical functions, while minimizing
the impact of an institution’s failure on the economy and wider financial system. However,
experience shows that this process has often been problematic, with the decision to bail-in
being taken only after repeated bail-outs and at a point when there had been substantial
erosion of the “bail-inable” base. Some cases discuss how resolution might have been handled
differently under the provisions of the BRRD, with clearer bail-in requirements and larger
loss absorption likely reducing the need for public support.

The case studies also provide first examples of the No Creditor Worse off than under
Liquidation (NCWOL) test, i.e. the comparison of the treatment of shareholders and creditors
under resolution to the losses that would have occurred under a hypothetical liquidation
scenario. They appear to confirm the assumption that losses are substantively lower under
resolution than under a hypothetical liquidation.

These real life resolution cases are not meant to be examples of good practice. They are
gathered here instead to highlight some of the difficulties, complexities, and practical
challenges encountered when applying bail-in, including the bail-in of uninsured depositors,
retail bond holders, or liabilities guaranteed by a regional state. Issues of finding appropriate


	 The term “bail-in” is defined as the write down and conversion of creditors, however it is also used in a broad sense to refer to “private”
1

  loss absorption by creditors (in contrast to a public bail-out).



2
                                                                                 INTRODUCTION




buyers for recapitalized banks are also mentioned. Furthermore, the case studies point to the
importance of ensuring sound resolution decisions based on proper valuation and the legal
challenges encountered when applying bail-in.

Since most of the cases studied occurred before transposition of the BRRD and/or adoption of
the bail-in tool, they cannot be used to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of resolution
under a fully operational BRRD framework. For instance, authorities had no pre-existing
resolution plans or predefined loss absorbing capacity (MREL/TLAC) available to them in any
of the cases presented, both of which are key elements for the successful implementation
of bail-in. Such conclusions will only become possible over time now the legislation is fully
in place. We hope that, nevertheless, these real life examples of European banks’ resolutions
provide a useful and interesting source of reference. For more details on resolution under the
BRRD, we invite you to refer to the FinSAC Guidebook “Understanding Bank Recovery and
Resolution in the EU: a Guidebook to the BRRD”.


Pamela Lintner and Johanna Lincoln




                                                                                             3
OVERVIEW




BRIEF OVERVIEW OF EACH CASE STUDY
PRESENTED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER:


AUSTRIA	           	
HETA: RESOLUTION OF AN ASSET MANAGEMENT VEHICLE (2014)

The Austrian case study describes the nationalization of Hypo Group Alpe Adria and the sub-
sequent resolution of HETA, its asset management vehicle. The HETA resolution was conduc-
ted under the newly adopted national law transposing the BRRD and without having in place
a resolution plan. A two-year moratorium allowed the competent authorities to verify the
quality of HETA’s assets and prepare for the implementation and application of the bail-in
tool. The HETA case is one of the first resolution cases under the new BRRD regime and the
first instance where covered bonds were tested under resolution.

The second part of this case study highlights the role of courts in the implementation of a
newly created resolution framework pre-BRRD. It discusses how the national law winding
down the failing bank (lex specialis pre BRRD) was subsequently judged ­       unconstitutional
and repealed in its entirety on the grounds that it differentiated within the group of subordi-
nate creditors and declared all securities (incl. public guarantees) expired together with their
respective claims. The ruling did not, however, object to a haircut or bail-in of unsecured
creditors in general.




CYPRUS	
BANK OF CYPRUS AND LAIKI: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC SUPPORT AND BAIL-IN,
INCLUDING OF UNINSURED DEPOSITORS (2013)

The Cyprus case study demonstrates the importance of timely intervention in failing ins-
titutions. Delays in tackling problems result in uncertainty and the flight of capital and are
likely to impede the efficiency of resolution actions. Moreover, the case study raises some
cross-border considerations such as the necessity to prevent and control regulatory arbitrage
between different jurisdictions, and the importance of assessing and monitoring potential
cross-border sovereign risk transfers. The case highlights the importance of having in place
an adequate legal framework as well as the administrative capacity for implementing reso-
lution powers to avoid or minimize bail-out. At the same time difficulties in successfully
deploying bail-in are demonstrated by the unexpected bail-in, including of uninsured depo-
sitors, after the ad hoc adoption of a resolution law in 2013 inspired by the BRRD (which was
then still under negotiation).




4
                                                                                       OVERVIEW




DENMARK	
ANDELSKASSEN: RESOLUTION VIA BRIDGE BANK AND BAIL-IN INCLUDING
OF UNINSURED DEPOSITORS (2016)

The Denmark case study reflects on a series of measures taken to deal with distressed banks
in the aftermath of the financial crisis. Government guarantees, capital injections, liquidity
support, and an integrated asset management division to sell/wind up distressed financial
institutions in an orderly manner, were put in place to encourage industry consolidation and
restructuring. The Danish case describes the resolution of Andelskassen JAK Slagelse under
the BRRD regime via the hybrid application of the bridge bank and bail-in tools. The case
demonstrates a bail-in process, including write-down of uninsured depositors and cont-
ributions of the deposit guarantee scheme (DGS), while ensuring uninterrupted access to
the bank’s deposits and critical functions. It is one of the first BRRD bail-in cases that gives
a concrete example of the NCWOL test (comparison of the treatment of shareholders and
creditors under resolution with the losses that would have occurred under a hypothetical
liquidation scenario). It also highlights the complexities involved in successfully divesting
the resolved bank and difficulties of finding a suitable buyer. Ultimately, the supervisory
authority failed to approve an envisaged transfer to a private acquirer leading to the resolved
bank being wound down.




GREECE	
SEVERAL GREEK BANKS AND FOREIGN BRANCHES: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC
RECAPITALIZATION AND BAIL-IN AND STATE AID ISSUES (2009–2015)

In 2011, Greece was among the first EU countries to legislate on bank resolution. The first part
of this case study summarizes the restructuring and recapitalization process in the context of
a severe economic crisis. The Greek experience shows how all the resolution strategies adopted
have been designed to protect uncovered deposits and how banks have been resolved by using
the bridge bank and sale of business tools (all but one were pre BRRD). The case study reflects
that if the BRRD had been in place during this time uncovered deposits would have been sub-
ject to bail-in, potentially further undermining public confidence in the banking system. It
also underlines the importance of having an independent valuation before and after the reso-
lution process and stresses the need for close cooperation between relevant stakeholders at
national and international level to provide for a seamless resolution process.

The second part of the case study focuses on the interplay between the BRRD and the state
aid regime during the 2015 recapitalizations of Greek banks. It draws attention to poten-
tial issues related to the level of loss absorption/burden-sharing under precautionary public
recapitalization (i.e. temporary financial support to a solvent bank), especially if an institu-
tion's liabilities are not squarely within the scope of the powers set out in the BRRD. It also
elaborates on related cross border mutual recognition provisions. The case study shows how
liability management exercises (LMEs) were launched to meet the burden-sharing condition
for state aid. LMEs involved the consensual conversion of bonds into equity and were accom-
panied by rights issues to increase equity reserves.




                                                                                              5
OVERVIEW




ITALY	
FOUR SMALL BANKS: RESOLUTION VIA BRIDGE BANK AND ASSET
MANAGEMENT VEHICLE TOOLS TO AVOID FULL BAIL-IN (2015)

This case study reports actions taken to address structural issues in the Italian banking sys-
tem, in particular the high level of Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) and the concentration of
banks’ subordinated debt in the hands of Italian households. It demonstrates how, post BRRD
but pre obligatory bail-in, a public bail-out as well as a full bail-in (of retail bondholders)
was avoided in the restructuring of four small weak regional banks. A bridge bank and asset
management vehicle were created and a guarantee scheme on banks’ NPLs introduced. The
Italian case highlights the importance of public communication and questions the success
of the bail-in tool in cases when almost all junior debts are held in fact by “retail depositors”.
The case also shows how a recently set up resolution fund was used to contribute to absorb
losses (at that time without the prior 8% bail-in requirement) by collecting ad hoc ex post
bank contributions. Furthermore, the case study questions how Atlas, a fund mostly financed
by Italian banks and created to buy junior tranches of securitized NPLs acting as a subscriber
of last resort, might increase interconnectedness and risks in the banking sector. Finally, the
case discusses how Atlas’ structure, powers, and objectives fit with the requirements of the
new EU resolution framework.




THE NETHERLANDS	
SNS REAAL: RESOLUTION VIA NATIONALIZATION AND BAIL-IN (2013)

The Netherlands case study examines the nationalization of one of the country’s largest
financial conglomerates in 2013. Losses in SNS Reaal’s substantial real estate portfolio and its
failure to meet its capital ratio requirements led, two years prior to the adoption of the BRRD
and after review of all the possible resolution options, to the nationalization and bail-in of
all shareholders and subordinated bondholders of SNS Reaal. These measures were accom-
panied by a capital injection and restructuring plan, whose costs were partly financed by a
one-off ‘resolution tax’ on the banking sector. The case study concludes that under the BRRD
the results would have likely been the same for shareholders and subordinated debt holders
i.e. full write-down and zero compensation. However, it argues that under the new regime,
the bail-in of senior debtholders would have been possible, and there would have also likely
been recourse to the Single Resolution Fund.




6
                                                                                      OVERVIEW




PORTUGAL
BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.: RESOLUTION VIA A BRIDGE BANK INCLUDING
A RE-TRANSFER (2016)

The Portuguese case study describes the implementation of the bridge bank tool in the reso-
lution of Banco Espírito Santo S.A. (BES), a systemically important institution. BES business
and most of its assets and liabilities were transferred to a bridge institution, called Novo
Banco, with new members of the management bodies appointed by Banco de ­            Portugal. A
residual institution, still called BES, was intended for liquidation. Novo Banco was capita-
lized with funds from the Portuguese Resolution Fund as single shareholder, financed by
loans from the state and some private banks. About a year after the original transfer, Banco
de Portugal re-transfered some non-subordinated bonds back from Novo Banco to BES to
make up for an over-evaluation of the assets. The case study highlights the importance of
sound ex ante and ex post valuations by an independent valuer to decide the extent of loss
absorption (for the creditors left behind at BES) and determine transfer prices. The case study
additionally demonstrates difficulties in the sale process of the restored Bridge Bank: Novo
Banco, originally set up for two years, had to be extended and the ­ Resolution Fund’s equity
stake has yet to be sold.




SLOVENIA	
SEVERAL DOMESTIC BANKS: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC RECAPITALIZATION
AND BAIL-IN (2013)

The Slovenian case study describes different measures taken by the government and the
Bank of Slovenia, including the public recapitalization of several national banks in 2013,
the creation of a state-owned asset management vehicle (BAMC) to deal with distressed
assets, and the sovereign guarantee to the Central Bank for providing Emergency Liquidity
Assistance (ELA). The case study describes how these bail-out measures were accompanied
by private loss absorption pre BRRD, required under national resolution legislation adop-
ted in 2013 (and the Commission’s state aid “Banking Communication”). It also highlights
the importance of judicial review and the role of the European Courts’ preliminary rulings,
which endorsed in principle the right to enforce “burden sharing” on private investors. The
case study finally considers how the process would have been different, and the required
recapitalization via bail-in more unambiguous and most likely considerably larger (while
reducing the need for state aid), if the BRRD had been in place.




                                                                                             7
OVERVIEW




SPAIN
SAVINGS BANKS: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC RECAPITALIZATION,
THE CREATION OF AN ASSET MANAGEMENT VEHICLE AND BAIL-IN (2012)

The Spanish case study describes the EU financial sector assistance program which helped
mitigate the impact of the financial crisis on Spanish savings banks. It elaborates on the
public Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB) which is responsible for managing banks’
restructuring processes and channeling public aid to them. The FROB continues to act as
one of the resolution bodies in Spain, next to the Central Bank. In addition, all state aided
banks had to transfer their real estate assets to SAREB, a private-public asset management
vehicle. This case study highlights how the national legal framework developed in 2012/13
anticipated BRRD’s principles, and prescribed mandatory burden sharing exercises under the
NCWOL principle through “Subordinated Liability Exercises” (SLE) linked to the pre-existing
Spanish insolvency legislation. These SLEs contributed to the reduction of public support by
bailing-in subordinated debt holders. The case elaborates on how this loss absorption affec-
ted retail investors (due to prior mis-selling of products) and how a liquidity mechanism
for “bailed-in” (retail) holders financed by the DGS, as well as a less aggressive SLE scope
(compared to the BRDD), have played a significant role in reducing litigations. The case study
also discusses the resolution of BFA-Bankia, one of the biggest resolution cases in Spain, by
the transfer of its “bad” assets to SAREB and its recapitalization via the FROB. It concludes
by offering some thoughts on the transition from a bail-out to a bail-in scheme, and the
importance for authorities to ensure sound resolution decisions which minimize the risk of
legal challenge.




THE LOSS ABSORBING CAPACITY
UK CO-OPERATIVE BANK: RESOLUTION VIA NEGOTIATED BAIL-IN
OUTSIDE THE BRRD (2013)

The UK case study shows how a Co-operative bank was recapitalized by “consensual” or
“negotiated bail-in”, better known as liability management exercises (LMEs). LMEs operate
outside the legal constraints imposed by the BRRD and can provide a commercial solution to
the failure of a financial institution by reaching an agreement between the parties involved
in “bail-in”.




8
                                                                                                                                AUSTRIA




AUSTRIA
HETA: RESOLUTION OF AN ASSET MANAGEMENT VEHICLE (2014)




PART 1 – HETA: THE RESOLUTION OF AN ASSET MANAGEMENT VEHICLE
Authors: Johanna Lincoln and Pamela Lintner




Summary
HETA Asset Resolution AG (HETA) was established on October 30, 2014, as the resolution
vehicle to continue Hypo Alpe-Adria-Bank International AG (“HBInt”) the parent company
of Hypo Group Alpe Adria (HGAA) (subsequently Hypo Alpe Adria/HAA) a failed bank natio-
nalized by the Republic of Austria in 2009. The Austrian Financial Market Authority (FMA),
in its capacity as the resolution authority, initiated the resolution of HETA on March 1, 2015,
in accordance with the Federal Act on the Recovery and Resolution of Banks (BaSAG) which
transposed the BRRD1. In order to prepare for the application of resolution tool(s) and since
no resolution plan was drawn up ex ante, the FMA imposed a temporary moratorium on
the liabilities of HETA until May 31, 2016. The final bail-in decision adopted in April 2016
imposed a haircut of 54 % on senior debt. Overall and since 2008, the Austrian Government
injected about EUR 5.5 billion into HAA.

Background
Founded as a small regional mortgage bank in the Austrian State of Carinthia, HAA later
became a full-service bank. Throughout its existence some of the bank’s liabilities were gua-
ranteed by the State of Carinthia2, enabling HAA and its Austrian subsidiary Hypo Alpe-Adria
Bank (HBA) to benefit from a good credit rating. This allowed the bank to finance its opera-
tions in favorable conditions and expand aggressively, especially across South East Europe.
However, the bank’s risk management and control systems were poorly equipped to monitor
this debt-fueled growth.

A special enquiry commission (the “Griss-Kommission”) initiated by the Austrian Govern-
ment concluded that in 2009 mistakes had been made not only by the bank’s owners and
its board but also by other key players. In particular, this report highlighted that the State of
Carinthia was caught in a permanent conflict of interest. The bank’s aggressive expansion
generated high revenues (i.e. higher guarantee commissions and dividends paid by HAA) for
the State of Carinthia which diminished its incentive to mitigate the risks taken by the bank.
The bank’s auditors and the authorities responsible for its supervision were also found, in
this report, not to have reacted with the intensity required to address the bank’s weaknesses.




	 Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD)
1

	 Only liabilities, issued between April 2003 and 2007 and falling due before September 2017, were guaranteed by the State of Carinthia.
2




                                                                                                                                           9
AUSTRIA




Nationalization of HAA
Bayern LB acquired the majority shares of HAA in 20073. In 2008, the group requested state
aid and the Republic of Austria subscribed to its capital in the amount of EUR 900 million,
under the condition that the bank was sound. An expert review from the Oesterreichische
Nationalbank (OeNB), the central bank of Austria at that time concluded that HAA was “not
distressed”, and therefore no restructuring plan was drawn up4.

In fall 2009, Bayern LB announced that it would not provide additional capital to HAA to even
its bad loans. The Austrian Government chose to step in to prevent the collapse of the bank, and
the default its guarantor the State of Carinthia. In December 2009, a share purchase agree-
ment was concluded between the Republic of Austria, Bayern LB, and the other shareholders,
for a symbolic price of one euro. HBInt was nationalized. At the time of nationalization, HAAs
balance sheet amounted to a total of EUR 41 billion, including EUR 20 billion of secured
debts. Between December 2008 and April 2014, the Austrian Government has provided up to
EUR 5.5 billion to the bank in the form of capital injections via participatory capital, ordinary
shares and state guarantees on subordinated debt issued by HAA.

In September 2013, the European Commission (EC) approved the liquidation plan of HBInt,
including the use of state aid, which prescribed three strategic steps:

(i) the sale of the Austrian bank (HBA). At the end of 2013 and after the reduction of its
balance sheet by two thirds (down to approx. EUR 4 billion at the end of 2012), the Austrian
subsidiary of Hypo (HBA) was privatized and acquired by Anadi Financial Holdings Pte. Ltd.

(ii) the sale of its SEE network via the creation of a SEE holding with a banking license. HAA’s
SEE network consisted of “some 1.2 m customers, 250 branches in five countries, a capital
ratio above 20 %, long-term liquidity funding of more than EUR 2 billion, a clean loan port-
folio with Non-Performing Loans around 12 %”.5 The stake of HBInt in the Hypo SEE Holding
AG was transferred to Finanzmarktbeteiligung Aktiengesellschaft (FIMBAG) and acquired in
July 2015 by Advent International and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment (EBRD).




3
 	 Before its nationalization HAA was owned by: BayernLB (67.08 %), State of Carinthia via Kärntner Landesholding (12.42 %),
   	Grazer Wechselseitige Versicherung AG (“GRAWE”) (20.48 %) and Mitarbeiterstiftung Hypo Alpe Adria (0.02 %).
4
 	 The absence of a requirement for a restructuring plan was due to a particular provision of the 2008 State aid Banking Communication,
   applicable only for a very short period and under particular circumstances which were subsequently tightened. See also footnote 4 of the
   2009 State Aid Banking Communication.  
5
 	 Extract from the press release Hypo Group Alpe Adria AG – SEE banking network – acquired by Advent International and EBRD July 2015
   Dr. Christian Stoffel, Director at Advent International in Frankfurt http://www.hypo-alpe-adria.com/sites/hypo-alpe-adria.com/files/
   content/announcement/file_download/press_release_hypo_group_alpe_adria_ag_-_see_banking_network_-_acquired_by_advent_
   international_and_ebrd.pdf



10
                                                                                                                                    AUSTRIA




HETA: The resolution of an asset management vehicle



                                             REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA




                    FIMBAG                               ABBAG                           HBI-BUNDESHOLDING AG




                 SEE-Holding/Hypo                       Heta Asset                               Hypo Alpe-Adria-Bank
                Group Alpe Adria AG                    Resolution AG                                 Italia S.p.A.



Source: FMA

and (iii) the creation of a wind-down entity to ensure that the remainder of HBInt (balance
sheet of approx. EUR 18 billion) would be liquidated in an orderly manner over a reasonable
period of time ensuring the sale of its viable assets and wind down of the others. On Octo-
ber 30, 2014, its license was revoked (deregulation) and an asset management vehicle, HETA
Asset Resolution, was created via a special Federal Act on the Creation of a Wind-down Entity
(GSA). Separate holding companies took over the Italian subsidiary of HBInt (HBI-Bun-
desholding AG) and its SEE business (FIMBAG) (see graph above). The Austrian Federal Act on
Restructuring Measures for Hypo-Alpe-Adria-Bank International AG (HaaSanG), also enac-
ted in 2014, enabled the restructuring and winding-down of the bank (the constitutional
conformity of the Act, inter alia stipulating a haircut and expiry of the State of Carinthia
guarantee for junior creditors, was subsequently challenged, see part 2).6

Deregulation meant some HETA activities, such as deposit-taking or participation in credit
institutions/investment units, became strictly prohibited. Its capital and liquidity require-
ments were also waived. The bank was, however, able to conduct limited banking and leasing
activities under the GSA, for example providing staff, IT, and access to its Continuous Linked
Settlement system to the SEE network, and acting as counterparty for HGAA in derivative
transactions.7

At the beginning of 2015, HETA was subject to an Asset Quality Review (AQR) conducted by
external auditors. This made apparent HETA’s need for additional funding to avoid insol-
vency. HETA and the Austrian Financial Market Authority (FMA) asked the Republic of Austria


6
 	 On April 2, 2015 the Constitutional Court dismissed the individual complaints filed against the HAA legislation due to formal reasons.
   (VfGH Decision Number G 194/2014)
7
 	 Since HGAA was a newly licensed credit institution, there was not yet a high level of market confidence to enable the bank to issue
   derivatives to hedge its foreign currency and interest rate risks in the market.



                                                                                                                                            11
AUSTRIA




(HETA’s owner) if it would inject further capital into HETA. The Government declined and the
FMA concluded that HETA fulfilled all the legal requirements for resolution.

FMA puts HETA into resolution and adopts a temporary moratorium until May 31, 2016
Although neither a “CRR credit institution” with a banking license nor an investment firm,
the law transposing the BRRD into Austrian national law (i.e. BaSAG) explicitly required that
HETA was covered by the scope of the EU Directive.

HETA was considered failing because it was deemed unable to pay its debt in the near future
(i.e. from 2016 onwards). This was confirmed by the results of a provisional valuation report
(AQR). When the Republic of Austria decided that it would not provide additional funding,
the Executive Board of HETA announced that they were no longer in a position to service
HETA’s liabilities. No private solution (i.e. take-over or private capital injection) was available.

The FMA, in its capacity as the national resolution authority, initiated the resolution of HETA
in accordance with the BaSAG and the BRRD on March 1, 2015. The FMA deemed HETA’s
resolution appropriate and in the public interest for the following reasons (see chapter 14,
FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD):

–	the essential services provided by HETA to the HGAAs SEE banking network could not be
  ensured to the same extent and with the same legal certainty under liquidation;
–	HETA’s bankruptcy would have likely had considerable negative effects on financial stability
  in Croatia and Slovenia as well as negative consequences on financial stability in Austria;
–	the objective of protecting public funds could not be achieved to the same extent in a
  bankruptcy proceeding (i.e. “If the Province of Carinthia were to become insolvent … this
  would also give rise to negative effects for the financial market, as well as bringing fiscal
  consequences in its wake”).

To prevent HETA’s insolvency, the FMA imposed a temporary moratorium on HETA’s debts
until May 31, 2016. A temporary debt moratorium can be applied as a first step before the
application of a resolution tool, such as a haircut, to an entity’s bail-in-able liabilities. This
decision gave the FMA time to check the quality of HETA’s assets, to determine their values
and to apply bail-in and/or any other resolution tool.

The bail-in decision of April 2016
In April 2016, the Austrian FMA decided to apply the bail-in tool based on an ex ante valuation
conducted by an independent valuer (see chapter 12, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). Taking
into account past experience, as well as the legal provisions required for an expedient wind-
down, the target date for completing the liquidation of HETA was set for the end of 2023.
On March 1, 2015, HETA’s assets were valued at EUR 9.6 billion and its liabilities at EUR 17.6
billion. The expected loss after adjustments of EUR 7.1 billion was allocated in accordance with
the bail-in waterfall ensuring that HETA’s net asset value would be zero at the end of the liqui-
dation process. The estimate of the hypothetical insolvency scenario was calculated with a 34
% recovery rate compared to 46 % under resolution (see chapter 20, FinSAC Guidebook to the
BRRD). Based on these valuations, the FMA announced the following measures:

–	the Tier 1 capital (shareholders) was written down to zero. The economic rights of the sha-
  res were cancelled and their control rights exercised by the resolution authority;
–	all subordinated debts were written down to zero;
–	a 54 % haircut was applied to the nominal value of HETA’s senior debt;




12
                                                                                                                                   AUSTRIA




–	all interest payments were cancelled from March 1, 2015, onwards; and
–	the maturity date of all eligible debt were extended to December 31, 2023.

According to the Executive Board of the FMA: “The measures that have been prescribed under
BaSAG form the basic structure for an orderly resolution, and fully satisfy the aims of the
European resolution regime – namely to guarantee financial market stability, to protect tax-
payers and to bail-in creditors. Moreover, this package of measures also ensures the equal tre-
atment of creditors. Orderly resolution is more advantageous than insolvency proceedings.”

As a result of this ruling, creditors face a waiting period of seven years for the repayment
of 46 % of the value of the senior bonds they hold. The quota agreed for the write-down is
based on a cautious and conservative estimation of the expected future settlement proceeds
of HETA. The actual quota of the write-down will depend on how successful the resolution
process is and thus could ultimately be higher or lower than 46 %.

Bail-in of liabilities guaranteed by the State of Carinthia8
Liabilities ex-lege not covered by the bail-in mechanism included liabilities towards com-
mercial or trade creditors, employees, secured liabilities, and liabilities arising from trustee
relationships. Secured liabilities were secured against HETA’s assets9. Liabilities secured by
third party collateral (e.g. the default guarantee of the State of Carinthia) could thus be sub-
ject to a haircut according to BaSAG (contrary to a bail-in under the BRRD, see chapter 15,
FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).10

However, because the bail-in decision did not cancel the existing statutory deficiency gua-
rantee provided by the State of Carinthia, creditors sued Carinthia to recover the difference
between the amount repaid under HETA's wind-down and their bonds' full face value11.
The FMA estimated this difference to be EUR 6.4 billion12, approximately three times the
annual budget of Carinthia.

Carinthia offered to buy back the bonds it guaranteed, funded with loans from the Austrian
Government, for 75 % of their face value. Even with a last-minute sweetener from the Aus-
trian Government bringing the offer up to about 82 % too few creditors accepted it and it
expired. The Austrian Ministry of Finance continued to believe an out-of-court agreement
on dissolving Carinthia's guarantees was the best solution. On May 18, 2016, a Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) was signed by the Republic of Austria and 72 creditors of HETA
(i.e. representing 48.7 % of HETA senior debtholders and 12.3 % of its subordinated debt-
holders) confirming their common intention to amicably settle the restructuring of HETA’s
debt instruments.




8
 	 The Hypo Reorganization Act (HaaSanG), adopted in 2014, provided certain categories of unlimited guarantees from the State of Carinthia
    to expire. However, in July 2015, the Austrian Constitutional Court declared the HaaSanG unconstitutional, and the law was repealed in its
    entirety. One of the reasons for this decision was that the HaaSanG made a non-justifiable and non-proportionate distinction between the
    guarantees of junior and other creditors. Furthermore, the Austrian Constitutional Court ruled that guarantees issued by a federal State
    cannot be rendered completely invalid retroactively through a single law. See part II: Raschauer
9
 	 These are e.g. covered bonds issued by HETA which have been secured by the corresponding tangible assets of HETA, such as its real estate.
10
  	 See also EBA, 06.02.2015, Single Rulebook Q&A, Question ID 2015_1779
11
  	 The full face value of the guaranteed debt amounted to EUR 11.1 billion. It is legally unclear if the creditors can claim the whole amount
    from the state of Carinthia and if Carinthia will then be indemnified by the liquidation estate.
12
  	 Of the EUR 11.1 billion: EUR 10.2 billion was reduced by a 54 % haircut, while the remaining EUR 0.9 billion subordinated debt was
    cancelled in its totality.


                                                                                                                                           13
AUSTRIA




A new public offer, presented in May 2016 and submitted by the Carinthian Compensation
Payment Fund (Kärntner Ausgleichszahlungsfonds or KAF) in September 2016, received an
overwhelming acceptance from creditors in October 201613. The State of Carinthia is expec-
ted to contribute EUR 1.2 bn to the KAF leaving the Republic of Austria to provide the largest
portion of the funds.

In this new proposal, the creditors agreed to receive, either:
–	a cash payment of 75 % for senior debtholders and 30 % for subordinated debtholders.
or
–	a zero coupon bond from the KAF with a term of 13.5 years (senior bondholders can
   exchange their bond at a 1:1 ratio while subordinated bondholders at a 2:1 ratio).
   The yield on the zero coupon is fixed at 0.7835 % which implies a value of 90 % of par. The
   zero coupon bond will have an “abstract, explicit, irrevocable and unconditional” guaran-
   tee from the Federal Republic of Austria. Its credit spread will be stabilized for a period of
   180 days after the mandatory 60 day holding period.

Almost all HETA bond holders have opted for the exchange into zero coupon bonds rather
than the cash offer.14 While most of the KAF liabilities should be covered by the assets of HETA
and the contribution from the State of Carinthia, there is still a near-term cash risk for the
Republic of Austria, since investors can sell their zero coupon bonds back to the KAF during
the 180-day stabilization period.15

Whether taxpayers will have to provide more funds to HETA in the future will depend on the
success of the wind-down process, which should be completed by 2020 with the repayment
of all claims scheduled for the end of 2023.

Relevant Sources
–	Report by the Independent Commission of Inquiry for the Transparent Investigation of
  the Events Surrounding the Hypo Group Alpe-Adria
–	FMA Mandatsbescheid HETA ASSET RESOLUTION AG 1.03.2015
–	FMA Vorstellungsbescheid HETA ASSET RESOLUTION AG 10.04.2016
–	FMA Mandatsbescheid HETA ASSET RESOLUTION AG 10.04.2016
–	Beschluss der Kommission vom 03.09.2013 – Staatliche Beihilfe SA.32554 (09/C) –
  Umstrukturierungsbeihilfe Österreichs für die Hypo Group Alpe Adria (Commission
  Decision 2014/341/EU




13
  	 99.6 % of senior debt and 89.4 % of junior debt holders have accepted the tender offer. It has also obtained the prior approval from the
    European Commission state aid offer.
14
  	 Almost all senior HETA bond holders accepted the 1:1 exchange into the KAF zero bond with an initial recovery value of 90 %.
    Approx. 3/4 junior bond holders opted for the 2:1 exchange ratio into the KAF zero coupon bond. Junior bonds with an outstanding debt
    of EUR 105 m will be switched 1:1 into a 50 year 2068 zero coupon Schuldschein issued by the Republic of Austria.
15
  	 The 180 days stabilization period starts on 1 December 2016.




14
                                                                                         AUSTRIA




PART 2: RULING OF THE AUSTRIAN CONSTITUTIONAL COURT ON THE LEX-SPECIALIS
RESTRUCTURING HBINT AND THE IMPOSED EXPIRY OF GUARANTEES FROM THE
STATE OF CARINTHIA
Author: Nicolas Raschauer




Summary
The Austrian Federal Act on Restructuring Measures for Hypo-Alpe-Adria-Bank I      ­ nternational
AG (HaaSanG) was enacted in order to restructure and wind-down the Hypo-Alpe-Adria-
Bank International AG (Hypo). It provided for the expiration of all supplementary capital
emissions as well as of subordinate held by third parties and covered by guarantees of the
Austrian province of Carinthia. The Act also applied to liabilities towards the former majority
shareholder, Bayerische Landesbank.

In 2015, the Austrian Constitutional Court had to decide on the constitutional conformity of
the HaaSanG. The Court found that the right to property was violated because the HaaSanG
differentiated within the group of subordinate creditors by declaring only those claims that
matured before June 30, 2019 expired. Another violation of the right to property was seen
in the fact that the HaaSanG declared all securities (and among them statutory guarantees)
expired together with the respective claims.

Background
The HaaSanG entered into force on August 1, 2014. This law in conjunction with the Federal
Law on the Creation of a Wind-Down Unit for Hypo (GSA) regulated the institution’s restruc-
turing and controlled wind-down. The HaaSanG foresaw the expiry of certain subordinate
claims including the guarantees of Carinthia, and the deferral of certain disputed claims.
The GSA determined the conditions for the winding-down of portfolios by Hypo. The wind-
down unit, HETA Asset Resolution AG (HETA), has been operational since ­   November 2014,
charged with managing assets to ensure the orderly and active disposition of its assets on the
best terms as quickly as possible.

In 2015, members of the Austrian parliament, and the regional court of Klagenfurt in the
province of Carinthia, questioned the constitutionality of parts of the HaaSanG and sought
an Austrian Constitutional Court decision on its constitutional conformity. Both HaaSanG
and GSA formed part of the proceedings before the Court.

Ruling of the Constitutional Court
HaaSanG stipulated that, with the publication of an ordinance by the Financial Markets
Supervisory Authority (FMA), all subordinate claims and shareholders’ claims substituting
equity which matured before June 30, 2019, expired. Affected creditors might gain a new
claim against HETA if assets remained on completion of the wind-down. Disputed claims
were deferred until this date or until proceedings deciding their status were complete. The
five year period was to allow for an orderly wind-down of portfolios at the best possible
conditions, while honoring the remaining subordinated claims.

The applicants, however, submitted that the expiry of claims violated their fundamental
right to property. They saw it as an expropriation or restriction of property rights. Since only
claims of certain subordinate creditors were affected, while other equally subordinate credi-
tors as well as the Austrian federation as the owner of HETA could keep their claims, the “pari




                                                                                               15
AUSTRIA




passu principle“16 was not respected. Even if a public interest were to be granted, the restriction
of the right to property would be disproportional and violate the right to equal treatment. An
ordinary insolvency procedure could have avoided this discrimination.

The Court took up these concerns. The creditors’ claims were deemed to fall under the right to
property as protected under constitutional law and under European law. However, the Court
found that the expiry of claims according to the HaaSanG was not strictly speaking an expro-
priation, since the claims were chosen solely for their worth. Moreover, the restructuring of
Hypo was held to be in the public interest. Since the legislator had a wide margin of discre-
tion when making economic prognoses, a wind down was considered an appropriate available
option in the circumstances, rather than ordinary insolvency proceedings. Also a ‘hair-cut’ was
potentially seen as necessary for the resolution of a bank in crisis. The differentiation between
different groups of creditors (‘normal’ and ‘subordinate’) was legitimate, since subordinate
creditors would also leave empty-handed in insolvency proceedings. Regarding the differen-
tiation between subordinate creditors and the Austrian Federation, as the owner of HETA, it
had to be taken into account that the Austrian Federation had already put in more than EUR 5
billion to mitigate damages in the interest of other creditors.

However, the Court found that the right to property was nonetheless violated because the Haa-
SanG differentiated within the group of subordinate creditors by declaring only those claims
that matured before June 30, 2019 as expired. Subordinate creditors with such claims were
discriminated further as the securities and guarantees on their claims expired together with
the claim, while other equally subordinate creditors were not affected at all and even kept their
interest claims. Since, as it turned out, the cut-off date could not prevent HETA from failing
before the end of the restructuring period (measures under the Bank Restructuring and Reso-
lution Act had been taken with regards to the remaining creditors after the entry into force of
the Hypo Reorganization Act), this discrimination could not be justified as ensuring an orderly
restructuring and resolution.

The Court also agreed with the applicants regarding the expiry of all securities together with the
claims. This particularly affected guarantees by the province of Carinthia. The Court empha-
sized that claims resulting from such statutory guarantees (rendering the claims quilt-edged
and equipping them with qualified protection) constitute a severe restriction of the right to
property. While the government claimed the protection of creditworthiness of Austrian pro-
vinces as well as the prevention of an insolvency of the province of Carinthia, the Court saw no
reason solely for the specific group of subordinate creditors to be drawn on. The expiry of gua-
rantees, which exclusively applied to those subordinate creditors whose claims expired while
guarantees for other creditors remained unaffected, was found to be neither factually justified
nor proportionate. Guarantees issued by a federal province must not be rendered invalid retro-
actively, even when the province is evidently incapable of bearing the risk.

As regards the GSA, the applicants submitted, inter alia, that it was unclear which assets could
be transferred to other entities in the course of the winding-down of Hypo and that the minis-
ter of finance had too great a discretion in deciding how this transfer was effected (by way of
ordinance or ruling). However, the Court found that owing to the legislator’s margin of appre-
ciation and the flexibility needed for the resolution of Hypo, the GSA was in conformity with


 	 Pari passu is a Latin phrase that literally means “with an equal step” or “fairly”, “without partiality”. This term is also often used in the lending
16

   area and in bankruptcy proceedings, where creditors are said to be paid pari passu, or each creditor is paid pro rata in accordance with the
   amount of his claim. Here its meaning is “equally and without preference”




16
                                                                                             AUSTRIA




the constitution. Thus, also certain (eg cancellation or approval) rights may legitimately be
limited when deciding on restructuring measures and specific insolvency rules foreseen for a
wind-down unit.

The Court thus concluded that the HaaSanG was unconstitutional and repealed it in its enti-
rety. Consequently, the FMA ordinance based on it was repealed as well. A deadline for cor-
rection was not set and, thus, the HaaSanG is no longer applicable. As far as the applications
concerned the GSA, they were dismissed as unfounded.

Conclusions
This decision is of international relevance. The Constitutional Court clarified that the rights
of subordinate and other shareholders’ claims and the securities thereon were protected. The
expiry of claims and securities had to be qualified as a severe restriction of the right to property.

The Court, however, acknowledged that the legislator’s judgement on treatment of distres-
sed financial institutions must be respected. Circumstances may dictate the choice of a wind-
down under special rules (such as laid down in the HaaSanG) over insolvency proceedings, but
these rules must ensure equal treatment of the respective groups of creditors. This had direct
implications for the inclusion of HETA in the regime of the Austrian Bank Recovery and Reso-
lution Act (BaSAG), which implements the BRRD.

The Court did not object to a ‘hair-cut’ of creditors as such. Moreover, the court explicitly cla-
rified that the restructuring of Hypo was in the public interest and a ‘hair-cut’ was (ex ante)
necessary for the resolution of a bank in crisis. After the entry into force of the BRRD, any other
position may anyway have been in conflict with EU law. Also the differentiation between diffe-
rent groups of creditors (‘normal’ and ‘subordinate’) was deemed legitimate.

For the Court, the violation of the right to property lay in the differentiation within the group
of subordinate creditors which resulted from the cut-off date. Creditors with claims maturing
after June 30, 2019, were not affected by the hair-cut and, thus, were found to be in a better
position for no legitimate reason. In particular, and even with the possibility of new claims
if assets remained after the wind-down, these claims would lack the securities of the expired
claims. Had the cut-off date not been introduced, the HaaSanG would have been proportio-
nate. The ex-ante prognosis was found to be legitimate, but when a resolution procedure over
HETA according to the BaSAG in early 2015 showed that the limitation to claims maturing
before June 30, 2019 was not sufficient, the HaaSanG was rendered unconstitutional.

Moreover, when explaining why creditors not affected by the hair-cut were better off despite
their claims being subordinate, the Constitutional Court strongly based its argument on the
fact that creditors affected by the hair-cut lost all securities together with their claims.

Thus, not all discussions are over yet. HETA’s authorization to take deposits (and its qualifica-
tion as a credit institution according to the EU Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR)) ended
before the entry into force of the BaSAG. It is Union-wide not even clear if the BaSAG is still
applicable on HETA. The Court of Justice of the European Union has to decide if this separate
“Austrian approach” i.e. the application of the BaSAG to an undertaking which is not a credit
institution under the CRR is compatible with European Law.

Relevant Sources
VfGH number of Decision G 239/2015 ua, VfGH Press release 7/28/15




                                                                                                   17
CYPRUS




CYPRUS
BANK OF CYPRUS (BOC) AND LAIKI: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC SUPPORT
AND BAIL-IN, INCLUDING OF UNINSURED DEPOSITORS (2013)




Author: Alexander Michaelides




Summary
In March 2013, Cyprus agreed to an originally estimated EUR 7 billion bail-in solution to
recapitalize the largest systemic bank (Bank of Cyprus (BoC)), while the second largest bank
(Cyprus Popular Bank (Laiki)) was subject to the “sale-of-business” tool merging it with BoC.
This was the Cyprus-financed part in an originally estimated EUR 17 billion agreement bet-
ween the Troika (the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the European Central Bank (ECB)
and the European Commission) and the Cypriot government (Cyprus MoU (2013)).

At 100 % of GDP, the total package is one of the largest in financial history and a number of
taboos were broken along the way. For the first time in the euro area uninsured depositors
were called upon to recapitalize their banks, and capital controls were imposed as a result.
The loss in deposit value associated with the final restructuring and resolution of Laiki and
BoC was extraordinary. To ring-fence exposure to Greece, all Greek-related assets (loans and
fixed assets) and customers’ deposits of all Cypriot banks (including the third largest, Helle-
nic Bank) were sold to Piraeus Bank at a net asset value estimated using an adverse valuation
scenario (around EUR 3.2 billion). The original 2012 ring-fencing idea was to protect Cyprus
bank assets from “Grexit” and currency redenomination risk. By March 2013 a new resolu-
tion law provided a legal basis for bail-in and avoiding bank run contagion from Cyprus to
Greece through the bail-in became equally important. Cypriot assets of Laiki, along with the
Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) and insured deposit liabilities of Laiki, were transfer-
red to BoC with the investments in overseas subsidiaries and the uninsured deposits of Laiki
remaining in a legacy entity. To recapitalize BoC, an estimated 37.5 % of BoC’s uninsured
deposits were converted into full voting shares with additional equity contributions from
legacy Laiki. To prevent capital flight, the largest part of the remaining BoC uninsured depo-
sits was temporarily frozen. The exact level of the bail-in (“haircut”), not determined until
the end of June 2013, was set at 47.5 %. Recapitalizing the co-­     operative sector involved a
more standard bail-out with the government becoming the major shareholder with a EUR
1.5 billion capital injection.

Background
In the years prior to March 2013 a number of important macroeconomic imbalances
developed in the country. After joining the European Union (EU) in 2004 and the euro area in
2008, a combination of lower tax revenues and higher social expenditures increased the bud-
get deficit above 5 % of GDP from 2009 to 2012. Government debt to GDP rose from 49 % in
2008 to 86 % in 2012, including a 10 % initial bailout of Laiki in June 2012 (these were the
numbers available at the time, they were later revised slightly downwards in October 2014 by
Eurostat). With the worsening economic situation, the government turned to international




18
                                                                                          CYPRUS




markets to finance the rising debt and reduce interest rate costs. This worked well for the first
two years but in May 2011, as the euro area sovereign debt crisis worsened, the increasing
exposure to foreign debt backfired and Cypriot government bond yields rose above 7 %.
That level is considered prohibitive to maintain debt sustainability, and essentially prevented
any new borrowing from international capital markets. Prominent economists argued that
exit from the euro was in the interest of a small open economy like Cyprus and forecasts of
impending economic depression were widely circulated.

The situation was exacerbated by a combination of poor risk management and weak cor-
porate governance practices in the banking sector, aggressive credit expansion, and a large
banking and co-operative sector with a strong sovereign-bank nexus, which allowed illiquid
loans in property to be funded by liquid, and largely short-term, deposits. As a result of a low
tax policy to attract foreign investment, deposits to GDP reached 400 % in 2010, allowing a
rapid increase in private sector credit growth with domestic private credit to GDP reaching
300 % in 2012. A search for yields, triggered by lower global interest rates coinciding with
entry to the EU and then euro area, resulted in two further imbalances: rapid house price
growth and (relatively unproductive) residential (property) investment financed by large
capital inflows. The current account deficit in 2008 reached 15 % of GDP, for example, and
remained below 5 % in the next four years.

Growing pressure on the banking system
With these macroeconomic imbalances in the background, and the gradual recognition from
credit rating agencies (CRAs) that the “sovereign and banking system are joined by the hip”
(Mody and Sandri, 2012), it seemed increasingly likely that the economy was in a precari-
ous position. As Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) note, a random event is typically what pushes
an overleveraged economy over the abyss. On July 11, 2011, an explosion next to the main
electricity-producing plant of the country resulted in 13 deaths, major power cuts, and led
to the resignation of the ministers of finance and foreign affairs; and immediate downward
revisions of future GDP growth and expedited CRA downgrades.

Although the government was unable to access international capital markets, it chose not to
negotiate a bailout agreement with the Troika at this stage. The government instead attemp-
ted for the next 18 months to manage the crisis. This delay is striking when compared to
the experience of other European countries in such a predicament (Greece, Ireland, Portugal
and Spain) where agreement was reached in some cases within three weeks of requesting
assistance and exacerbated the weaknesses of the economy. Unemployment rose from 8 % in
2011 to 15 % in 2013 and, following an official request for EU assistance in June 2012, depo-
sit flight soared (mainly from the branches of Cypriot banks in ­  Greece). Depending on the
measurement techniques there was a deposit outflow of about EUR 10–17 billion by the time
an agreement was reached with the EU/Troika in March 2013. Sophisticated investors with
access to information resulted in leaks ahead of official announcements. This made liquidity
problems in the banking sector worse, as deposits that flee are not available to be bailed-in
(once that decision is taken), and exacerbated the diabolic loop between bank and sovereign
balance sheets. As recession worsens the liquidity problem can become a solvency problem.

The Central Bank of Cyprus commissioned the investment management firm PIMCO to
undertake a stress test and estimate of banks’ capital needs in June 2012. This was not offi-
cially completed until February 2013. Performing independent and transparent tests over a
period of time to ensure accuracy from granular information and determine the amount of
actual losses is laudable in theory. But this is conditional on the assumption that the banks




                                                                                               19
CYPRUS




will be recapitalized at the end. When no clear backstop exists, transparency and delay can
backfire, as the options left on the table disappear (along with deposits).

Banks around the world suffer from home bias in sovereign debt. In Cyprus, PIMCO’s final
calculations for the banking system’s capital shortfall was EUR 5.8 billion. One main com-
ponent reflected EUR 4.5 billion investments in Greek government bonds. The restructuring
of Greek debt through “private sector involvement” (PSI) in October 2011 resulted in sig-
nificant losses for BoC and Laiki (around EUR 4 billion) which had large holdings of Greek
government bonds in their portfolios. According to Basel requirements government bonds of
Greece got a zero risk weight, the same as other (EU) government Bonds, but earned a higher
yield. On the other hand, the moral suasion hypothesis states that local politicians can influ-
ence bank executives’ decisions when it comes to investment in local government bonds.
One could argue that the banks were undertaking the “greatest carry trade ever” (Acharya and
Steffen, (2015)) through regulatory arbitrage. The large presence of the two Cypriot banks
in Greece may have made Cypriot bank executives susceptible to buy bonds at large scale,
even in the secondary Greek government bond market. The concentration risk associated
with this exposure should have raised alarms in the risk management departments of the
various banks, even though it is also true that concentration risk limits did not legally apply
to sovereign debt holdings in the euro area.

The Central Bank of Cyprus was responsible for handling ELA to Laiki in the period leading
up to March 2013. ELA is a two-week short-term funding facility that is granted through the
national central bank by the European Central Bank (ECB) to illiquid but solvent banks, as
long as this funding is backed by eligible collateral. ELA was allowed to reach 60 % of GDP,
even though the ECB had since July 2012 opined that resolution might have been the better
option for Laiki than the initial bailout of EUR 1.8 billion in June 2012. The justification
offered by the Central Bank of Cyprus and ECB was that Laiki was “dynamically solvent” con-
ditional on a program. This argument begs the questions of whether it is empirically useful
to condition solvency on future states of the world and for how long such an argument can
hold (Xiouros (2016) offers further details).

EU intervention, the adoption of a new resolution law and the bail-in
The Eurogroup (finance ministers of the euro area) agreed a deal with Cyprus on March 16,
2013, involving a horizontal, across-all-banks, tax (haircut) of 6.75 % for (insured) deposits
up to EUR 100,000 and a 9.9 % tax for larger (uninsured) deposits. Parliamentary approval
was required as the haircut was applied in the form of a tax. Parliament rejected the proposal
in the hope that a better deal could be agreed. Touching insured deposits was unprecedented
and provoked huge international criticism (and no one taking responsibility for suggesting
it). The banking system was shut for almost two weeks while the terms of the deal were
revised. In the meantime, on March 21, 2013, the Governing Council of the ECB announced
its decision to maintain the current level of ELA for BoC and Laiki until March 25, 2013. After
that date, the public announcement stated that ELA would “only be considered if an EU/IMF
program is in place that would ensure the solvency of the concerned banks”.

On March 22, parliament urgently approved a new law enabling the Central Bank of Cyprus
to resolve insolvent institutions (Cyprus Resolution Law (2013)). A new bail-out plan was
announced on March 25, which did not require further parliamentary approval. The new
bank resolution law now provided a legal basis to implement change: Laiki was resolved
immediately with full contribution from shareholders, bondholders and uninsured deposi-
tors. Selected Laiki assets and EUR 9 billion of ELA were folded into the BoC with uninsured




20
                                                                                        CYPRUS




depositors converted to shareholders (at a rate to be determined after another detailed asset
valuation by the summer of 2013 but expected at the time to be between 40–50 %).

IMF’s debt sustainability analysis indicated that with a debt to GDP ratio close to 90 % it was
impossible to agree on a bailout of more than EUR 10 billion (close to 65 % of GDP). The tax
on deposits (haircut) was intended to provide the rest and was intended to “share the burden”
of the crisis more widely.

One major decision to be taken before banks re-opened on March 28, 2013, was whether
capital controls would be imposed and, relatedly, whether limits should be imposed on
deposit withdrawals and opening new accounts at different banks. The fear was that depo-
sits would flow out of the bailed-in BoC to other banks or out of the country when banks
re-opened. ELA was already at a very high level and the ECB might not have been willing to
extend liquidity further. To address these fears the Central Bank of Cyprus imposed capital
controls (except for documented emergencies and trade needs) and froze uninsured deposits
for different periods depending on deposit size. These restrictions were gradually relaxed
until they were completely abolished approximately two years later.

After a further independent valuation of assets, the final haircut in BoC was set in July 2013
at 47.5 %. Upon decision of the Central Bank of Cyprus as resolution authority, BoC exited
from resolution status that month. On the negative side, non-performing loans rose in the
months that followed to 50 % of the banks’ balance sheets, close to 150 % of GDP, a problem
that is still ongoing at the time of writing. In Cyprus the unexpected bail-in of depositors
was perceived as neither fair nor moral, especially because certain households and busines-
ses held simultaneously loans and deposits at different banks. Deposits could be bailed-in
but not the loans, generating substantial frustration and damaging further the confidence
towards the banking sector. As a result, the idea that loans should also be bailed-in quickly
surfaced in the public debate. With the authorities not unequivocally rejecting this idea, one
can argue that such public discussions pushed the number of strategic loan defaults hig-
her: the empirical results in Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2013) are consistent with higher
strategic defaults in such circumstances, especially when the probability of being sued for
non-repayment is perceived to be low.

The unexpected bail-in also raised questions about exclusions of certain organizations. The
University of Cyprus, a non-profit institution, had large deposits from EU-funded projects
in Laiki and was eventually not bailed-in. A similar discussion happened with regards to
pension funds (and also distinguishing across different categories by employee size) and this
is still ongoing. Sound companies whose working capital was bailed-in were the biggest col-
lateral damage from the bail-in.

Cyprus exited the bail-out support program in March 2016. So while the bail-in might be
considered a success it came at a cost. The bail-in involved the resolution of the two largest
banks and merging the two proved a costly transition. The smaller horizontal tax on uninsu-
red deposits would probably have been a preferable outcome under the circumstances: sim-
plicity should be preferable to complexity. This becomes especially important in countries
where administrative resources and institutional cooperation are not at always the desired
levels.




                                                                                             21
CYPRUS




Conclusions
The Cypriot experience highlights important issues and offers interesting lessons at both
the national and European level. The first involves the treatment of Cypriot banks which
held Greek government bonds during restructuring of Greek sovereign debt in October 2011.
Zettelmeyer et al (2013) describe the consequence from the Greek debt restructuring and
calculate the cost to the two systemic Cypriot banks. This decision wiped out an amount
equivalent to 25 % of Cypriot GDP of the equity of two Cypriot banks without recourse to
any external aid, whereas their Greek counterparts (with larger losses in absolute terms) were
separately assured funding through the European Stability Mechanism.

The second lesson learned relates to the effects of the delay in reaching out for an agreement
with the Troika and presents one main lesson from the crisis: early resolution of uncertainty is
vital, especially when the banking system is involved. The Cypriot government tried to avoid
entering into an agreement with the Troika for three reasons. First, signing a memorandum,
given the experience of Greece, had become associated with the risk of going through a major
economic depression. Second, an element of overconfidence in the local political class ema-
nating from the rapid real economic growth of the previous three decades (between 4 and
4.5 percent real GDP growth per annum). Third, elections were due in February 2013 and the
hope must have been to delay the agreement until after that point.

Another critical question relates the role of the central bank during this period. Supervi-
sing cross-border banks across different regulatory regimes is a hazardous and challen-
ging task. It is an on-going question whether holding higher-yielding Greek government
bonds instead of German Bunds (both with zero risk weights) was the result of the “greatest”
carry trade, or moral suasion by local politicians, or both. The EU Single Rulebook
(see chapter 2, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD) is intended to address regulatory arbitrage,
in this case the treatment of sovereign bond exposure across different regimes (in this case
between the Greek and the Cypriot one). More importantly, during the period of the crisis
(after June 2012) there are two main principles that need to be emphasized: the extent of
transparency; and the speed with which a central bank conducts its affairs.

Implementing a successful bail-in is potentially difficult but becomes even more so when
inherent problems are not tackled early on. The absence of a resolution law in May 2012 was
one of the arguments given in support of the initially bail-out, instead of resolving, Laiki bank.
The presence of BRRD mechanisms could have prevented this outcome, but making such
tough choices often becomes highly political and requires substantial strength of purpose and
administrative capacity to implement successfully in a necessarily short period of time.

Relevant Sources
–	Acharya, Viral and Sascha Steffen, 2015, “The ‘Greatest’ Carry Trade Ever? Understanding
  Eurozone Bank Risks,” Journal of Financial Economics, 115 (2), 215–236
–	Cyprus MoU, 2013, https:/  /www.imf.org/external/np/loi/2013/cyp/042913.pdf
–	Cyprus Resolution Law, 2013, http:/  /www.centralbank.gov.cy/nqcontent.cfm?a_id=12727
  &lang=en
–	Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2013, “The Determinants of Attitudes
  toward Strategic Default on Mortgages,” Journal of Finance, LXVIII, 4, pp.1473–1515
–	Mody, Ashoka and Damiano Sandri, 2012, “The Eurozone crisis: how banks and
  sovereigns came to be joined at the hip,” Economic Policy, 2012, pp. 199–230
–	Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, 2009, “This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
  Financial Folly”, Princeton University Press




22
                                                                                      CYPRUS




–	Xiouros, Costas, 2016, “Handling of the Laiki Bank ELA and the Cyprus Bail-In Package,”
  in The Cyprus Bail-in: Policy Lessons from the Cyprus Economic Crisis, Imperial College
  Press, edited by Michaelides, A. and A. Orphanides
–	Zettelmeyer, Jeromin, Christoph Trebesch and Mitu Gulati, 2013, “The Greek debt
  restructuring: an autopsy,” Economic Policy, pp. 513–563

Timeline
July 11, 2011	         Explosion at Mari provides trigger for worsening of crisis
October 26, 2011	      Private Sector Initiative (PSI) for Greek sovereign debt restructuring
April 28, 2012	        Demetriades’ appointment as Governor to start on May 3
                       announced. Orphanides’ last day in office is April 30
May 18, 2012	          Laiki bailout by state with EUR 1.8 billion	
June 27, 2012	         BoC requests EUR 0.5 billion state aid to meet EBA deadline
June 28, 2012 	        Cyprus requests financial assistance from the Troika
December 2012	         Preliminary MoU agreement: total EUR 17 billion with
                       EUR 10 billion to recapitalize the banking sector
March 16, 2013	        Eurogroup decision to reduce bailout to EUR 10 billion with no
                       funds to recapitalize BoC or Laiki. Decision to implement horizontal
                       levy (tax) on all banks
March 18–28, 2013	     Closure of banks and no internet transactions
March 19, 2013	        Parliament rejects horizontal bank levy
March 21, 2013	        ECB publicly announces no further ELA provision to Laiki unless
                       EU/IMF program agreed to ensure solvency of concerned banks
March 22,2013	         Parliament urgently passes bank resolution law
March 25,2013	         Eurogroup decision to resolve BoC and Laiki
March 28, 2013	        Banks re-open with capital controls and limit of EUR 300 daily cash
                       withdrawals per natural person and EUR 500 daily per legal person
                       Ministry of Finance to relax controls progressively depending on
                       ELA and general liquidity in the banking system
July 30, 2013	         Final eligible deposits converted to equity equal to 47.5 %
                       Simultaneously, the Central Bank of Cyprus, in its capacity as
                       Resolution Authority, announces that BoC is no longer under
                       resolution
July 28, 2014	         Mostly foreign investors including American Mr Ross agree to inject
                       EUR 1 billion equity into BoC boosting capital ratios and diluting
                       existing shareholders
April 6, 2015	         Abolition of all capital controls after 27 gradual relaxations
March 7, 2016	         Eurogroup announces Cyprus’ exit from program to take place end
                       of March 2016




                                                                                            23
DENMARK




DENMARK
ANDELSKASSEN: RESOLUTION VIA BRIDGE BANK AND BAIL-IN
INCLUDING OF UNINSURED DEPOSITORS (2016)




Authors: Jens Verner Andersen, Pamela Lintner, Susan Schroeder




Summary
Denmark experienced an almost systemic financial crisis in the banking sector linked to
the global financial crisis. It decided not to rescue distressed banks, but rather to encourage
industry consolidation and restructuring under five "bank packages" adopted in response to
the financial crisis. To help maintain financial stability, the government provided guarantees,
capital injections, and liquidity support, and created a company to wind-up distressed banks.
The Danish financial sector was charged to pay for the implemented measures. The BRRD
was implemented in Denmark from June 2015. The first bank failure under this new regime,
Andelskassen JAK SLagelse (Andelskassen), was resolved according to the principles of the
BRRD. A successful and smooth open bank bail-in including write-down of uninsured depo-
sitors and contributions of the DGS combined with a bridge bank ensured private loss absorp-
tion while ensuring uninterrupted access to the bank’s deposits and critical functions. Ultima-
tely, however, a transfer to a private acquirer was not approved by the supervisory authority
and Finansiel Stabilitet decided, in the absence of any viable alternatives, to wind up the bank.

Background
The years before the financial crisis saw Denmark enjoy economic growth, low and stable
inflation and low interest rates. However, this encouraged over-optimism and risky lending
behavior similar to other European countries. As a small, open economy with close integ-
ration, economically and financially, with Europe and the rest of the world economy even
small Danish financial institutions began raising liquidity on the international capital and
money markets, contributing to the growth through lending, but exposing themselves to
international market fluctuations.

As the global financial crisis took hold a number of factors exerted pressure, including the
complex and interconnected nature of the international financial system; a pro-cyclical
fiscal policy unable to counteract pressure on the labor market and general economy; and
the bursting of price bubbles in housing and commercial real estate, often financed through
large loans from small and medium-sized banks, inflicting considerable losses on some
financial institutions.

The escalating financial crisis quickly began to impact the Danish banking sector, espe-
cially a group of small and medium-sized financial institutions. These banks, lacking
effective corporate governance and having lent carelessly, were vulnerable and some soon
became distressed. Those unable to devise private solutions (eg mergers or acquisitions)
were wound up. In general, the strategy was to avoid a situation where distressed banks in
Denmark continued their business. 62 financial institutions in Denmark ceased existing




24
                                                                                                                              DENMARK




(not all as a consequence of the crisis) between 2008 and August 2013, of these 26 were
identified as distressed during the period.

Response to the financial crisis
In response to the financial crisis, from 2008 Denmark adopted a number of initiatives,
notably five "bank packages", aimed at ensuring financial stability and confidence. The BRRD
was implemented via two new laws that took effect on June 1, 2015.


 Bank Package                              From            Purpose
 I – The Bank Package                      October 2008    Introduced general state guarantee
 II – The Credit Package                   February 2009   Individual state guarantee and capital injection from the State.
 III – The Exit Package                    October 2010    Economic bail-in of unsecured senior loans and deposits (above EUR 100,000)
 IV – The Consolidation Package            August 2011     Extension of amended Exit Package
 V – The Development Package               March 2012      Initiatives for promoting financing of SMEs
 Transposition of the EU Bank Recovery     June 2015       Legislation implementing the requirements of the BRRD, requiring recovery plans
 and Resolution Regulation and Directive                   and providing enhanced resolution tools




Bank Package I introduced a general state guarantee for all deposits and other ordinary unse-
cured obligations of banks, offering a safety net and preventing any potential "bank runs",
with small savers queuing to withdraw their money. It also established a financial stability
company (Finansiel Stabilitet) to handle the winding-up of distressed financial institutions.
Owned by the Danish State through the Ministry of Business and Growth this allowed for
a controlled process of winding up during which customers could continue their normal
banking business.

Bank Package II provided for individual guarantees, from October 2010 when the general state
guarantee expired, increasing the ordinary deposit guarantee to cover up to DKK 750,000.
It also led to the government making available up to DKK 100 billion in so-called hybrid
capital loans out of which DKK 46 billion was used by 43 financial institutions to reinforce
their capital base.

Bank Package III saw the general state guarantee removed and creditors expected to bear
the risk of the failure of a financial institution as an incentive to reinvigorate the market
mechanism and the pricing of risk.

Bank Package IV sought to create a greater incentive among viable financial institutions to
take over, wholly or partially, engagements from distressed financial institutions. It included
a process to avoid the resolution of distressed banks after the failure of two banks in the
first half of 2011 resulted in losses for senior creditors. It provided for: i) a consolidation
process with the possibility of compensation (a “dowry”) from the State and the guaran-
tee fund; ii) State-guaranteed funding as part of a merger; iii) funding of the guarantee
fund as an insurance scheme with fixed ex ante annual payments (from March 30, 2012);
and iv) the designation of national SIFIs (Systemically Important Financial Institutions).

Bank Package V aimed to ensure that businesses could access financing, including increasing
available growth and export financing, and establishing an agricultural financing institution
for viable farmers.




                                                                                                                                         25
DENMARK




The financial stability company
The financial stability company, Finansiel Stabilitet, was introduced in the first Bank Package
and will continue under the laws implementing the BRRD. Finansiel Stabilitet did pre-BRRD
take over distressed financial institutions (excluding equity and subordinate capital). Essen-
tial services were maintained for customers while Finansiel Stabilitet looked for a healthy
financial institution to take over viable parts of the operation and winds up the remainder.

Depositors with deposits above DKK 750,000 and all ordinary creditors did lose money (Bank
Package III). Creditors were in some cases compensated via a “dowry” from DGS or Finan-
cial Stability Company (Bank Package IV). If the winding-up resulted in a financial profit,
the dividends were to be divided amongst creditors, investors and other parties who have
suffered a financial loss. Any financial loss incurred by Finansiel Stabilitet through the win-
ding-up is covered by the Deposit Guarantee Fund, the State had no financial risk.

Introduction of the BRRD and resolution of Andelskassen
Legislation implementing the BRRD was approved by the Danish parliament in March 2015
and entered into force on June 1, 2015. The powers allocated to the resolution authority
in the BRRD are divided between the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority (DFSA) and
­
Finansiel Stabilitet. The DFSA acts as the competent resolution authority until a distressed
institution meets the resolution conditions. The DFSA decides if an institution is failing or
likely to fail and if there are any private sector solutions. The DFSA and Finansiel Stabilitet
cooperate on the preparation of resolution plans. The DFSA is responsible for the final wor-
ding including orders to remove impediments to resolvability and determining MREL. Fin-
ansiel Stabilitet assesses whether the public interest test is fulfilled. When resolution con-
ditions are met Finansiel Stabilitet is granted the resolution powers and is responsible for
applying resolution tools in specific resolution situations.

The first bank resolution case under the BRRD in Denmark was Andelskassen. On March 2,
2015, the DFSA ordered Andelskassen to submit a recovery plan and to take steps to meet
the solvency requirement. By October 5, 2015, the FSA concluded that attempts to meet the
solvency requirement set out in the recovery plan had failed. It therefore notified Finansiel
Stabilitet that Andelskassen was likely to fail, and that no alternative measures were availa-
ble within a reasonable time to prevent the failure. Finansiel Stabilitet considered that the
conditions for resolution were fulfilled, including that resolution was in the public interest.
Resolution objectives, including allowing critical functions to continue and protecting depo-
sitors and client funds, would not be met if the institution were subject to bankruptcy pro-
ceedings. An interim valuation was prepared by Finansiel Stabilitet to decide on the extent of
bail-in and transfer prices as well as to give an estimate on the hypothetical liquidation value
(in light of the No Creditor Worse Off than under Liquidation (NCWOL) principle contained
in the BRRD; see chapter 20, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).

On October 5, 2015, Finansiel Stabilitet announced that it had assumed control of Andels-
kassen under the provisions of the Act on Restructuring and Resolution of Certain Financial
Enterprises. Finansiel Stabilitet took on the powers conferred on the institution’s board of
directors and members. Andelskassen’s executive board and board of directors were termina-
ted and new board members and a manager were appointed. On the same day Finansiel Sta-
bilitet established a bridge bank (Broinstitut I A/S), wholly owned by the Danish resolution
financing arrangement, to contribute new capital to Andelskassen and take over ownership
of the institution, after full bail-in by owners and creditors.




26
                                                                                        DENMARK




Resolution was initiated on Monday evening (October 5, 2015). Services were available to
customers from the following morning. Thus, customers had uninterrupted access to basic
banking services even after Finansiel Stabilitet's takeover.

All of Andelskassen’s creditors and owners were Danish citizens. Based on the interim valua-
tion, Finansiel Stabilitet decided it was necessary to cancel all contributed capital, write down
relevant capital instruments and bail-in for loss absorption all subordinated obligations and
certain non-subordinated obligations. The contributed capital of existing members was can-
celled (in accordance with article 47 of the BRRD) meaning full ownership passed to the
bridge bank with no additional shareholders. All relevant capital instruments were written
down to zero (in accordance with articles 59 and 60 of the BRRD). Bail-in for loss absorption
meant obligations were written down to zero (in accordance with articles 43, 44, 46, 48 and
103 of the BRRD) or adjusted as if the institution had become bankrupt (in accordance with
articles 63 and 64 of the BRRD). Covered depositors (up to EUR 100,000) remained fully pro-
tected by the Danish Deposit Guarantee Scheme.

The preliminary valuation indicated that the Depositor and Investor Guarantee Scheme had
incurred a loss of approximately DKK 25 million.

The Financial Stability Company established a new subsidiary Broinstitut 1 A/S which took
full ownership of Andelskassen. New capital of DKK 37.5 million was injected into Andels-
kassen after bail-in of all the relevant creditors was conducted and the balance between
assets and liabilities was reestablished. The injection of new capital was based on funds from
the Resolution Fund. According to Danish legislation transposing the BRRD into Danish law,
the Resolution Fund had begun building up capital to the level determined by the BRRD (1 %
of covered deposits) in 2015. The injection of equity capital into Andelskassen encompasses
0,5 % of the total level of the Resolution Fund once the final goal has been reached. The new
ownership immediately began a process of reducing risk, including reducing credit lines and
customers.

The model represents a hybrid application of a bridge bank set-up and bail-in. All the acti-
vities remained in the same juridical company but the former owners saw their previous
holdings written down to zero, while the Fund took full ownership.

As soon as Andelskassen entered resolution, PricewaterhouseCoopers were appointed to
prepare a final independent expert valuation. Finansiel Stabilitet undertook to reassess the
preliminary write-downs as necessary depending on its findings. The valuation, published
in April 2016, found that the losses in Andelskassen were so great that there was no cover for
share capital, subordinated creditors or unsecured creditors' claims. The interim measures
were deemed as final and only the receivable from the Depositor and Investor Guarantee
Scheme was adjusted to DKK 75 billion. A couple of creditors received compensation under
the NCWOL principle. The difference between the losses under resolution (Valuation 2:
DKK -96,4 Million) and the hypothetical insolvency losses (valuation 3: DKK -142,7 million)
were calculated with DKK 46 million which means losses were assumed to be about 50 %
higher under hypothetical liquidation.

On January 21, 2016, the Danish resolution authority began the sale process for the bank or
for its customer activities. An open and transparent tender process was launched and pros-
pective investors were invited to contact Finansiel Stabilitet not later than February 5, 2016.




                                                                                              27
DENMARK




On March 18, 2016, Finansiel Stabilitet announced it had agreed to divest Andelskassen
to Netfonds Holding AB, a bank 95 % owned by Rolf Dammann (who also owns 89 % of
Netfonds Holding AS, the parent company of Netfonds Bank AS, and Netfonds Livsforsikring
­
AS, which are both under supervision by the Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway).
Under this agreement Andelskassen would continue to be governed by Danish financial
                                                                         Netfonds was to
regulation and supervised by the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority. ­
acquire the shares in the bank, including approx. 3,200 customers with deposits of approx.
DKK 175 million. The agreement was subject to the approval of the Danish Financial Super-
visory Authority.

On October 31, 2016, it was announced that Netfonds Holding AB had not obtained the
supervisory Authority’s approval and that the transaction would therefore not be completed.
Given Finansiel Stabilitet’s experience from the previous bid process and the bank’s situation
in general, winding up the bank and returning its banking license as soon as possible was
left as the only possibility. The approx. 2,600 remaining customers, with deposits of approx.
DKK 132 million, were told to expect to have their deposit accounts and related products
closed. Interest rates on loans would increase in accordance with the principles applying to
the winding up of banks that have been taken over by Finansiel Stabilitet.

No owners or creditors whose claims in Andelskassen were written down have at this
point initiated litigation procedures as a result of the resolution actions taken by Finansiel
Stabilitet.

Conclusions
This case further underlines the precariousness of successful resolution and recovery, with
so many aspects and actors involved, and the potential for derailing issues at any stage. A
successful and smooth open bank bail-in combined with a bridge bank ensured private loss
absorption and prepared the ground for a transfer of the restored bank to private acquirer
while ensuring uninterrupted access to banking functions. The ultimate winding up, due
to the supervisor’s non-approval of the transfer to a private acquirer, will change little in
terms of financial stability and burden sharing. Losses were already bailed-in and the bank
restored. It will make it more burdensome for depositors to transfer their deposits but given
its orderly nature the outcome is preferable to a bankruptcy. The main effects are likely to
be for the Resolution Fund as shareholder and for the Depositor and Investor Guarantee
Scheme, as the winding up of the Bridge Bank is expected to be more costly than transferring
the bank to a private acquirer (although the final winding up result will depend on a number
of unknown variables).

Relevant Sources
Vurderingsrapport, for Andelskassen J.A.K. Slagelse under kontrol, PwC, April 27, 2016




28
                                                                                         GREECE




GREECE
SEVERAL GREEK BANKS AND FOREIGN BRANCHES: RESOLUTION VIA
PUBLIC RECAPITALIZATION AND BAIL-IN AND STATE AID ISSUES (2009–2015)




PART 1: THE GREEK EXPERIENCE OF RESTRUCTURING AND RECAPITALIZATION
OF PROBLEM BANKS
Authors: Maria Mavridou, Aikaterini Theodossiou, Triantafyllia Gklezakou
Resolution Department, Bank of Greece




Summary
Over the period 2009–2015, the Greek sovereign crisis had major implications for Greek
banks in terms of capital and liquidity. The support program agreed between the Greek
authorities, euro area Member States and the IMF called for strict fiscal and structural mea-
sures. These deeply affected the loan portfolios, and consequently the capital base, of Greek
banks. The restructuring of Greek sovereign debt was another major blow to banks’ capital
ratios. Moreover, successive downgrades of Greece’s sovereign credit rating and the subse-
quent cut-off from international markets, along with extensive deposit outflows, put signi-
ficant pressure on banks’ liquidity. Since the onset of the crisis, Greek banks faced six stress
test exercises and underwent one of the largest restructuring and consolidation processes
in Europe: 14 resolutions and 40 % downsizing in the number of Greek banks and foreign
branches.

Background
The international financial turmoil of 2007–2008 did not have a major impact on Greek
banks in terms of capital, as they had limited exposure to US subprime debt or other complex
structured products. Greek banks, along with other banks worldwide, faced only liquidity
pressures. These pressures were addressed through central bank funding, and in 2008 the
Greek Government adopted a government guarantee program (Law 3723/2008) to enhance
the eligibility of collateral for funding by the Eurosystem (comprising the European Central
Bank (ECB) and the national central banks of euro area countries). As an additional measure
to safeguard financial stability, the level of deposit protection per depositor provided by the
Hellenic Deposit and Investment Guarantee Fund (HDIGF) increased from EUR 20,000 to
EUR 100,000.

By late 2009, attention was rightly drawn to Greek public finances, since Greece was the
worst performer among euro area member States in terms of Public Debt, Fiscal and Current
Account deficits, as shown in Table 1.




                                                                                             29
GREECE




Table 1: The Greek public finances: main indicators in 2008-09


  	                                               GDP 	      Public Debt	                Fiscal Deficit	         Current Account
  	                                         growth (%)	     as % of GDP	                 as % of GDP	         Deficit as % of GDP
  2008	                                             -0.3	              109.4	                      -10.2	                    -15.1
  2009	                                             -4.3	              126.7	                      -15.2	                    -12.3


Source: Elstat., Bank of Greece	 	


During the same period, Greek banks had sound regulatory and financial ratios:

Table 2: The Greek banking sector (solo basis) – main indicators in 2008


   	                         Assets 	            Assets	      CAR	               NPL	          Household Debt	               NII
  	                      in EUR bn	         as % of GDP	         	              ratio	            as % of GDP	         in EUR bn
  2008	                              412	           171	     10.7 %	              5 %	                      50.3	             8.1


Source: ElStat., Bank of Greece	 	




In late 2009, concerns over the sustainability of sovereign debt led to successive and sharp
increases in Greek government bond yields. Following downgrades from the credit rating
agencies, Greece was eventually excluded from international capital markets.

Developments in the Greek debt rating were inevitably followed by Greek bank downgrades,
while bank liquidity pressures intensified since their access to wholesale funding was signi-
ficantly impaired. These pressures were further exacerbated by mass deposit withdrawals;
from 2010 to 2015, Greek banks lost almost 45 % of their deposit base. Banks had exten-
sive recourse to Eurosystem funding to address these unprecedented liquidity needs, either
through monetary policy operations or through emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). The
Greek Government additionally supported banks by extending and increasing the guarantee
program introduced in 2008.

In April 2010, the Greek Government requested bilateral financial assistance from euro area
Member States and the IMF, which led to agreement for an economic adjustment program
in May 2010. As it was evident that Greek banks would face major capital challenges in the
aftermath of the sovereign crisis, the assistance program also included a support package
for banks. From May 2010 to August 2015, three adjustment programs were agreed, which
included a total of EUR 75bn earmarked for Greek banks. In H1 of 2015 economic uncer-
tainty, already widespread since end 2014, increased further and peaked with the procla-
mation of the referendum, the launching of the bank holiday and the imposition of capital
controls in June 2015.

Recapitalization needs and process
The capital needs of Greek banks increased significantly due to deterioration of the macro-
economic situation in Greece and the restructuring of Greek Government debt which took
place in 2012. In the absence of fiscal integration and flexible labor and product markets,
the assistance program focused on fiscal discipline and structural reforms. This took a heavy




30
                                                                                              GREECE




toll on households and businesses, which were simultaneously hit by a rise in unemploy-
ment, wage reductions and tax increases. Between end 2008 and end 2015, a notably adverse
macroeconomic environment developed, as evidenced by the cumulative effect on key
macroeconomic indicators shown in Table 3.


Table 3: Cumulative change in key macroeconomic indicators 2008–2015


   	                                GDP in EUR  bn 	   GDP % 	     Unemployment	       Housing prices
  2008–2015	                                    -66	    -26.2 %	     7.8 % ➞ 24.9 %	           -39.9 %


Source: ElStat., Bank of Greece		




The deterioration in the financial condition of borrowers led to a sharp increase in non-per-
forming loans (NPL) with the NPL ratio increasing from 5 % at the end of 2008 to 32.6 %
at the end of 2015, while Non-Performing Exposures (NPEs ratio EBA definition) stood at
44.2 % at the end of 2015. As a result, profitability plummeted and banks were forced to
make substantial loan-loss impairment charges. Moreover, in spring 2012, the implementa-
tion of the PSI program, one of the biggest international debt-restructuring deals affecting
some EUR 206 billion of Greek government bonds, resulted in a EUR 37.7 billion loss for
Greek banks, wiping out their entire capital base.

In March 2012, the Bank of Greece conducted a strategic viability assessment of the banking
sector using a set of quantitative and qualitative criteria including: shareholders’ soundness
and willingness to inject new capital; quality of management and risk management systems;
capital, liquidity and profitability metrics (both forward and backward looking); the Bank
of Greece’s assigned ratings to bank risks; and a sustainable business model (as envisaged
in the Memorandum of March 2012). The aim was to assess which banks were more likely,
within a reasonable time frame, to repay the funds they had been granted. Those banks were
deemed viable and were eligible for state funds if they were unable to raise private capital
to address their needs. The remaining “non-viable banks” would be resolved, unless private
capital could be raised.

In the period 2010–2015, Greek banks underwent unprecedented scrutiny by means of six
stress-testing exercises. These exercises took into account the Private Sector Involvement
(PSI) losses in banks’ balance sheets, as well as the expected losses in their loan portfolios.
Apart from the capital mitigating actions taken by banks to address these shortfalls, the via-
ble banks proceeded with Liability Management Exercises (LMEs) and share capital increa-
ses to cover capital needs as estimated by the supervisory authority. Under the LMEs the
banks offered to exchange previously issued Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruments held
by investors against newly issued Common Equity Tier 1 instruments. To this end, in late
2015, the four significant Greek banks raised EUR 2.7 billion through this liability manage-
ment exercise by offering a voluntary bond swap to their bank bondholders. Overall in the
period 2010–2015, private sector participation in the three share capital increases during
this period amounted to EUR 25.1 billion.

To address the banks’ capital shortfall state aid was granted through the use of public funds
injected by the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) established in 2010 under the first




                                                                                                     31
GREECE




assistance program. HFSF participation, on behalf of the state, in share capital increases of the
four core banks from 2011 to 2015 totaled EUR 32.7 billion. An additional EUR 5.1 billion was
disbursed by the government in the form of preference shares (Law 3723/2008). Total funds,
both private and state, injected in the Greek banking system for recapitalization purposes
during the period 2011–2015 amounted to EUR 63 billion. Following receipt of state funds,
the banks agreed with European Commission restructuring plans.

Furthermore, the support program envisaged a consolidation of the Greek banking sector. To
this end, between 2010 and 2013, three subsidiaries of foreign banks were acquired by local
banks, while 8 branches of foreign banks suspended their operations, marking the exit of
foreign banks from the Greek banking market. Another major development was the acquisi-
tion by a Greek bank of the domestic branches of the three Cypriot banks in March 2013. This
action was taken in order to avoid contagion from the Cyprus banking crisis.

From 36 banks with Greek banking authorization and 30 branches of foreign banks in 2008,
by the end of 2015 the Greek banking system had reduced to 18 banks and 22 branches.
 
Resolution process
In the face of a profound economic crisis and with a suffering banking sector, Greece was
among the first EU countries to pass a law regarding bank resolution, in October 2011, gran-
ting resolution powers to the Bank of Greece.

During the following years the Bank of Greece, as the national resolution authority, applied
resolution measures to 14 credit institutions: seven commercial banks and seven coopera-
tive banks. The resolutions of the first 13 banks were implemented under the national legal
framework1, while the latest resolution (Peloponnese Cooperative Bank) took place under
the provisions of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), as transposed into
national law (by Law 4335/2015) in July 2015.

Up to the end of 2015, two resolution tools have been applied: the Sale of Business tool has
been used in 12 cases and Bridge Banks have twice been established (prior to BRRD frame-
work). The two bridge banks were under the control and management of HFSF who acted as
the sole shareholder of the banks (whereas the new BRRD framework foresees that bridge
banks are managed by the resolution authority).

Before each resolution, the Bank of Greece determined the perimeter of the assets and lia-
bilities of the bank under resolution to be transferred to the acquirer or the bridge bank,
as appropriate. In the case of Sale of Business tool, an informal and confidential bidding
process was conducted. For commercial banks placed under resolution, the perimeter of the
transferred assets and liabilities was selected on a case-by-case basis, focusing mainly on the
“healthy and viable” parts, including the loan portfolio. Cooperative banks, by contrast, had
only their deposits transferred, due to the relative low quality of their loan portfolio and the
limited interest from bidders in acquiring additional assets.

Prior to each resolution, during the preparative stage, the resolution authority carried out an
initial valuation determining the preliminary difference in the value of the transferred assets
and liabilities (the preliminary funding gap) based on limited, typically supervisory and



	 Law 3601/2007 and Law 4261/2014
1




32
                                                                                                                                  GREECE




published, data. Following the resolution, an independent auditor was appointed to review
and finalize the fair value of transferred assets and liabilities within a period of six months.
The independent auditor had extended access to the resolved bank’s data and records and
determined the final resolution cost under conservative assumptions.

Table 4: Resolution Cost for the Greek credit institutions (in mn euros)


  	          Credit	                       Date of	      Resolution	         Acquirer	                  Resolution	   Funded	     Funded
  	          Institution	                  Resolution	   Tool	               	                                Cost	   by HFSF	   by HDIGF

  Resolved	 Proton Bank	                   09.10.11	     Bridge Bank	        –	                              1.122	       260	        862
  banks	     T-Bank 	                      17.12.11	     Sale of Business	   Hellenic Post Bank	               677	       227	        450
  	          Cooper. Lesvou-Limnou	        23.03.12	     Sale of Business	   National Bank of Greece	           56	        56	
  	          Achaiki Cooperative	          23.03.12	     Sale of Business	   National Bank of Greece	          209	       209	
  	          Cooper. of Lamia	             23.03.12	     Sale of Business	   National Bank of Greece	           55	        55	
  	          ΑΤΕ-Bank	                     27.07.12	     Sale of Business	   Piraeus Bank	                   7.471	     7.471	
  	          Hellenic Post Bank	           18.01.13	     Bridge Bank	        –	                              3.733	     3.733	
  	          First Business Bank 	         10.05.13	     Sale of Business	   National Bank of Greece	          457	       457	
  	          Probank 	                     26.07.13	     Sale of Business	   National Bank of Greece	          563	       563	
  	          Cooper. of West. Macedonia	   08.12.13	     Sale of Business	   Alpha Bank	                        95	        95	
  	          Cooperative of Evia	          08.12.13	     Sale of Business	   Alpha Bank	                       105	       105	
  	          Cooperative of Dodecanisou	   08.12.13	     Sale of Business	   Alpha Bank	                       259	       259	
  	          Panellinia Bank	              17.04.15	     Sale of Business	   Piraeus Bank	                     297	          	        297
  	          Cooperative of Peloponnese	   18.12.15	     Sale of Business	   National Bank of Greece	           93	          	         93

  Total resolution cost	                   	             	                   	                             15.191	    13.489	       1.702


Source: Bank of Greece


In the most recent case of the Cooperative Bank of Peloponnese, which was resolved in
December 2015 under the BRRD framework, the Bank of Greece carried out the required
preliminary valuation and proceeded with the application of the Sale of Business tool. Under
the new national framework, all depositors have a preferred status against all other liabilities
and all senior unsecured debt is subordinated to all other senior liabilities eligible for bail-in.
Exceptionally for the year 2015, the bail-in instrument was applicable only to subordina-
ted and senior debt bondholders. Since the Cooperative Bank of Peloponnese did not have
any subordinated or senior unsecured debt eligible for bail-in, only the shareholders were
wiped out, and full depositors’ protection was ensured through the transfer of deposits to
the acquirer, as in the case of all other resolved cooperative banks.

As evidenced by the resolution actions taken, the main objective of the resolution strategy
has been the protection of uncovered deposits in order to safeguard depositors’ confidence
and avoid further deposit outflows.

In all 14 Greek banks placed under resolution, shareholders were entirely written off. In
some banks, notably the cooperatives, these were mainly retail investors. In two cases subor-
dinated debt was also wiped out.

As already mentioned, all but one of the Greek bank resolutions were implemented
prior to the introduction of the BRRD framework, hence full bail-in was not in place.




                                                                                                                                        33
GREECE




When attempting a counterfactual “what if” assessment of the developments that might
have occurred if the BRRD had been in place when the crisis started, one may find it difficult
to see how financial stability would have been efficiently protected under the BRRD. More
specifically, full depositors’ protection would not have been ensured since, in some resolu-
tion cases, the minimum 8 % bail-in foreseen in the Directive would have resulted in the
bail-in of uncovered deposits. Such a development in a systemic crisis environment would
have further deteriorated depositors’ confidence, thus triggering additional mass withdra-
wals, with domino effects for the other banks.

One of the key “lessons learned” from the Greek resolution experience addresses the need
for close and effective cooperation among all involved authorities: resolution and supervi-
sory authorities, the national financing arrangement, as well as the European institutions
(European Commission, European Stability Mechanism, etc). The timely preparatory work
for supervisory and resolution authorities introduced by the BRRD as well as the close coope-
ration between resolution (Single Resolution Board and national resolution authorities) and
supervision (Single Supervisory Mechanism and national competent authorities) are neces-
sary conditions for the efficient management of any bank crisis, given the complexity of the
new framework.

Conclusions
As a result of the Greek sovereign crisis, the Greek banking sector experienced significant
capital and liquidity pressures and underwent an impressive restructuring and consolida-
tion phase. The actions of the Greek authorities, together with the support program, as well
as the ample liquidity provided by the Eurosystem, safeguarded financial stability and pre-
vented what could have been a fatal deepening of the banking crisis. The effective resolution
of the failed banks has had a major contribution in this respect.

Today’s transformed Greek banking sector still faces substantial challenges, with the effi-
cient and sustainable NPL management topping the list. Full restoration of public confi-
dence, which will lead to a return of some of the deposits in the financial system, is another
important challenge.

Relevant Sources
–	“Report on Financial Structures”, European Central Bank, October 2015
–	Bank of Greece, Annual Reports 2009–2015,
–	“Report on the Recapitalization and Restructuring of the Greek Banking Sector”,
  Bank of Greece, December 2012
–	Hellenic Financial Stability Fund, Annual Financial Reports 2012–2015
–	“European Banking Supervision: The first eighteen months”, Dirk Schoenmaker,
  Nicolas Veron, Bruegel Blueprint Series, Volume XXV, 2016
–	“Overview of the Greek Financial System”, Bank of Greece, July 2016 (in Greek)
–	“The Chronicle of the Great Crisis, The Bank of Greece 2008–2013”, Bank of Greece,
  Centre for Culture, Research and Documentation, 2014




34
                                                                                            GREECE




PART 2: PUBLIC RECAPITALIZATION UNDER THE BRRD AND THE EU STATE AID REGIME
Authors: Barney Reynolds and Ellerina Teo




Summary
The 2015 recapitalizations of the Greek banks involved the interaction between the BRRD
and the state aid regime. Uncertainties arising from the interplay between the two regimes
caused certain Greek banks to engage in liability management exercises (LMEs) in order to
meet the burden-sharing condition for state aid. For further recapitalizations requiring state
aid, regulators should consider the uncertainties arising from the interaction between the
two regimes. In particular, they should consider how to effect mandatory burden-sharing
if an institution's liabilities are not squarely within the scope of the BRRD, whether bur-
den-sharing under the state aid rules is satisfied by the requirement on institutions see-
king State aid to absorb losses equivalent to 8 % of their total liabilities, and whether the
super-equivalent implementations of the BRRD in one Member State will be subject to legal
challenge in the courts of another Member State.

Background
Greece has been receiving financial support from eurozone Member States and the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund, in the form of economic adjustment programs, since 2010. Greece
entered into its Third Economic Adjustment Program in August 2015, which earmarked up
to EUR 25 billion of assistance to address the potential recapitalization needs of viable banks
and the resolution costs of non-viable banks. In October 2015, as part of this Program, the
European Central Bank published the results of a comprehensive assessment of four signi-
ficant Greek banks: Piraeus Bank, Eurobank, National Bank of Greece and Alpha Bank. This
identified a total capital shortfall of EUR 14.4 billion, which was approximately 6.9 % of
Greece's 2014 GDP.

Use of state aid within the context of the BRRD
Recapitalization of the Greek banks occurred against the backdrop of the BRRD, which
applied under national law from July 23, 2015. Certain Greek banks required state aid to
recapitalize due to a thin capital base. The need for state aid within the context of the BRRD
gave rise to two main regulatory considerations.

First, under Article 32(4)(d) of the BRRD, institutions that require state aid are deemed to be
"failing or likely to fail", which is likely to trigger one of the conditions for resolution. Howe-
ver, a bank may avoid meeting that condition if the state aid is required for the purposes of
"precautionary recapitalization". Broadly, this is an injection of own funds or purchase of
capital instruments as a precautionary and temporary measure necessary to address capital
shortfalls established by stress tests or asset quality reviews conducted by certain regulatory
authorities. A precondition of precautionary recapitalization is that the institution is not fai-
ling or likely to fail at the time the public support is granted (on government stabilization
tools see chapter 9 and 19, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). For the Greek banks receiving
state aid, this meant ensuring that the capital shortfall under the asset quality review and
base case scenario of the comprehensive assessment was met through private capital, leaving
only the adverse case under the comprehensive assessment to be met from public funds.




                                                                                                35
GREECE




Secondly, under current state aid rules, "burden-sharing" must occur as a condition to recei-
ving state aid, which requires holders of hybrid capital and subordinated debt to contribute
to reducing the capital shortfall "to the maximum extent" before state aid is granted. It was
unclear whether, given the thin capital bases of certain banks, burden-sharing to the maxi-
mum extent required subsidiaries of the banks to contribute to reducing the capital shortfall.
Mandatory burden-sharing was considered under Greece's Hellenic Financial Stability Fund
(HFSF) Law, which contained powers to write down or convert the subordinated liabilities of
an institution, but the scope of the powers did not extend to instruments issued by subsidia-
ries of the bank. Mandatory burden-sharing was also considered under the BRRD. Article 59
of the BRRD sets out the power to write down or convert relevant capital instruments, which
can be exercised outside resolution in circumstances where the institution would no longer
be viable if the power was not exercised (see chapter 13 on WDCC). However, Article 59 could
not be used in this case to write down or convert instruments issued by unregulated special
purchase vehicle (SPV) subsidiaries. Even if the relevant instruments had been issued by the
bank itself or its regulated subsidiaries, the relevant instruments did not qualify as relevant
capital instruments to which the Article 59 power applied. Another option was to use the
bail-in tool under Article 43 of the BRRD. However, again, the bail-in tool could not be used
to write down or convert the liabilities of unregulated SPV subsidiaries and the exercise of
this power would necessitate the institutions entering into resolution.

As mandatory burden-sharing proved difficult for certain Greek banks, the banks engaged in
liability management exercises involving the consensual conversion of bonds into equity to
reduce liabilities and boost Common Equity Tier 1 capital. Rights issues were also conducted
to increase equity reserves independently of liability management exercises. The European
Commission then approved EUR 2.72 billion of state aid to Piraeus Bank and EUR 2.71 billion
of state aid to National Bank of Greece to address the outstanding capital shortfalls identified
in the adverse scenario. (Alpha Bank and Eurobank raised sufficient capital through private
recapitalizations without requiring state aid.)

Conclusions and lessons learned for recapitalizations under the BRRD
The interplay between state aid rules on burden-sharing and the BRRD should be conside-
red for future recapitalizations. Where an institution's liabilities are not squarely within the
scope of the powers set out in the BRRD, it will be difficult to effect mandatory burden-sha-
ring unless there are separate powers contained in national legislation. The issue is to some
extent resolved by the requirement on institutions to meet a minimum requirement for own
funds and eligible liabilities under Article 45 of the BRRD (MREL, see chapter 11, FinSAC
Guidebook to the BRRD) and the requirement on an institution seeking state aid in a syste-
mic economic crisis to absorb losses equivalent to 8 % of its total liabilities under Article 56
of the BRRD, neither of which applied in Greece until January 1, 2016. However, questions
still arise as to whether satisfaction of the 8 % requirement would amount to satisfying the
requirement to burden-share "to the maximum extent" under state aid rules.

Another issue related to burden-sharing is mutual recognition of super-equivalent implemen-
tations of the BRRD (so called “gold plating"). Some Member States, such as the UK, recognize
limitations arising from the application of the write-down and conversion power to relevant
capital instruments and included super-equivalent provisions to extend the use of the power
to legacy capital instruments. Such Member States should be mindful that the exercise of
super-equivalent powers may be subject to legal challenge in cross-border scenarios if courts
determine that the powers do not fall within the mutual recognition provisions of the BRRD or
the EU Directive on the reorganization and winding up of credit institutions (CIWUD).




36
                                                                                   GREECE




Relevant Sources
EU Legislation:
–	Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of May 15, 2014
  establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and
  investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and Directives
  2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU,
  2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU)
  No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (the "Bank Recovery and
  Resolution Directive" or "BRRD")
–	Directive 2001/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April 4, 2001,
  on the Reorganization and Winding Up of Credit Institutions (CIWUD)

Greek Legislation:
–	Law 3864/2010 on the establishment of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund
  (the "HFSF Law")
–	Law 4335/2015: Urgent Measures for the Implementation of Law 4334/2015 (A'80):
  Recovery and Resolution of Credit Institutions and Investment Firms (integration of
  Directive 2014/59/EE, EE l 173) and other regulations (the "Greek BRRD Law")

ESM Press release, Board of Directors approves EUR 2.72 billion disbursement to
recapitalise Piraeus Bank of Greece

Commission Decision on State Aid C(2015) 8626 final – Greece Amendment of the restruc-
turing plan approved in 2014 and granting of new aid to Piraeus Bank, November 29, 2015




                                                                                         37
ITALY




ITALY
FOUR SMALL BANKS: RESOLUTION VIA BRIDGE BANK AND ASSET
MANAGEMENT VEHICLE TOOLS TO AVOID FULL BAIL-IN (2015)




Author: Silvia Merler




Summary
Having escaped the first wave of the financial crisis in 2008 relatively unscathed, problems in
the Italian banking sector then began to grow due to bad loans, high structural costs, and sec-
toral inefficiencies (such as Italy’s very high number of branches). Measures to address these
issues stepped up in late 2015, likely triggered in anticipation of the introduction of obliga-
tory bail-in rules under the BRRD per 2016, with failing or troubled banks being liquidated
or resolved. At the end of November 2015 four small Italian banks (Banca Marche, Cassa di
risparmio di Ferrara, Popolare Etruria e CariChieti) which were under special administration,
were resolved under the new legal framework transposing the BRRD into national law (the
new bail-in rules only had to be applied as of 2016). After agreement was reached with the
European Commission on the creation of a guarantee scheme on banks’ Non-Performing
Loans (NPLs), a new bank-financed Fund (Atlas) was created to buy junior NPL tranches and
act as an underwriter of last resort in the capital raised by two other banks.

Background
Italian banks were very resilient to the first wave of financial crisis in 2008, due to their
low exposure to US sub-prime products and to the fact that Italy did not have a pre-crisis
housing bubble (unlike Spain, for example). However, when the global financial crisis turned
into a euro sovereign banking crisis in 2010, things started to deteriorate for the sector.

In October 2014, the ECB and the EBA published the results of their comprehensive assess-
ment of banks’ balance sheets, and Italian banks were found to be among the worst per-
formers. Overall, the stress tests singled out 25 banks that fell short of the 5.5 % minimum
Common Equity Tier (CET1) threshold, based on data as of end 2013. Once measures already
enacted in 2014 were taken into consideration, the number of banks failing the test was
reduced to 13. Of these, four were Italian. Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, Banca Carige,
Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Banca Popolare di Milano were found to be in need to raise
respectively 2.1 billion, 0.81 billion, 0.22 billion and 0.17 billion, for a total of 3.31 billion.




38
                                                                                                                        ITALY




Table 1



 	                       MPS	      Unicredit	    Intesa	    Popolare	     UBI	     Carige	     Popolare 	          Popolare
 	                          	               	          	            	        	           	    di Milano	    Emilia Romagna

 Total Assets	            170.2	        874.0	     668.2	       123.4	    120.5	      31.6	         49.3	               59.4
 Total Loans	             118.9	        564.8	     379.1	        86.6	     88.0	      24.2	         33.4	               43.5
 NPE	                      47.5	         80.7	      64.5	        21.5	     13.7	       6.8	          6.1	               11.4
 NPE coverage	           48.6 %	       51.0 %	    47.0 %	      33.7 %	   27.7 %	    41.0 %	       39.5 %	             42.0 %
 NPL ratio	              39.9 %	       14.3 %	    17.0 %	      24.8 %	   15.5 %	    28.0 %	       18.4 %	             26.2 %
 CET1	                   11.7 %	       10.5 %	    13.4 %	      12.2 %	   12.6 %	    12.2 %	       12.1 %	             11.8 %


Source: banks’ reports


The burden of non-performing loans
There was particular concern about the unresolved and sizable burden of NPLs. As the econo-
mic situation worsened, bad loans accumulated on banks’ balance sheet, making it increa-
singly difficult for them to lend to the private sector and support the economic recovery.
Bad loans have been growing constantly since 2008. About 71 % of the total bad debt is to
non-financial corporations, and 27 % is loans to households. The NPL ratios are higher in the
Southern and Islands regions – where the economic situation is worse – than in the North.

Out of the aggregate 360 billion euros of Italian NPLs, the more serious bad debts (“soffe-
renze”) account for 14 % of total loans on average (about 200 billion euros), with a coverage
ratio of 59.8 %. Assuming a price of 20 cents on the euro (in line with the cases of resolution
carried out in 2015), banks would be covered for 79 % of the nominal value of their impaired
assets, while the remaining 21 % would face a net loss of EUR 42 billion on bad debts (or
2.6 % of GDP).

At bank level the situation is mixed (Table 1), with NPL ratios ranging from about 14 % for
Unicredit to as much as 39.9 % for Monte dei Paschi, and coverage ratios also varying consi-
derably. Worries about increasing bad loans, together with longer-lived factors, such as high
structural costs and sectoral inefficiencies (such as Italy’s very high number of branches) may
partially explain the mediocre profitability of Italian banks over recent years.

Increasing pressure to address banking sector issues
Despite awareness of these problems, the Italian banking system had avoided the kind of
deep monitoring and restructuring process that was undertaken in Spain and other coun-
tries that were subject to the EU/IMF financial assistance programs. However, market pres-
sure to find a solution began intensifying in early 2016, probably driven by concerns about
how the NPL issue could play out now that the BRRD had entered into force.

Tackling failing banks
Bail-in of junior debt in Banca Romagna Cooperativa (BRC)
On July 17, 2015, the Italian authorities began the liquidation of Banca Romagna
Cooperativa (BRC). BRC’s assets and liabilities, including deposits, were transferred to
Banca Sviluppo, which is part of the ICCREA Group. In the process, BRC equity and junior
debt were bailed-in whereby subordinated loans were not transferred to the buyer of BRC’s




                                                                                                                           39
ITALY




asset and liabilities but left behind in the liquidation estate. The case passed largely unnoticed
abroad, but this is effectively the first instance of a “quasi bail-in” in Italy, conducted under
national insolvency law by selling only parts of assets and liabilities out of liquidation (gone
concern; contrary to a BRRD bail-in under resolution). As it took place before the obligatory
entry into force of the BRRD bail-in provisions this case did not require the application of
the full BRRD bail-in (see chapter 15, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD), but only a reduced
version. The rule was set in the amended state aid regime, which constituted the transi-
tion framework to the new recovery and resolution regime. The amended state aid frame-
work prescribed that a loss absorbance of junior debt had to be carried out before any public
money could be injected into the bank. Although junior bondholders were accordingly bailed
in (i.e. not transferred), no loss was suffered by retail bondholders as the Italian mutual sec-
tor’s Institutional Guarantee Fund decided to reimburse them in full and became the only
senior creditor of the entity in liquidation. The Institutional Guarantee Fund is technically
not public money, as it is financed by contributions from banks having voluntarily agreed
upon the mutual sector fund. However, this operation looked like a circuitous way to avoid
placing losses on private creditors. This approach was probably taken because all junior debt
in BRC was actually held by retail depositors.

Bail-in and the set-up of a good /bad bank for 4 small cooperative banks
In November 2015, four Italian banks (Banca Marche, Cassa di Risparmio di Ferrara, Banca
Etruria e CariChieti) entered resolution. After absorbing part of the losses with equity and
subordinated debt – the four banks were split into a “good” bridge bank each and one single
“bad” bank (asset management vehicle) was set up for the transfer of all of the problem assets
and liabilities (especially NPLs). The Italian Resolution Fund replenished capital of the bridge
banks to 9 % and provided guarantee to the Asset Management Vehicle (the bad bank). The
resolution fund contribution is expected to total about EUR 3.6 billion: 1.7 billion to absorb
losses in the original banks, 1.8 billion to recapitalize the good banks, and 140 million mini-
mum capital injection to the bad bank (according to the note on the operation published by
the Italian Central Bank). The resolution fund is financed by contributions from the Italian
banking sector, but as it was only recently set up it did not have sufficient funds available
for this operation. Resolution fund money is not public money “in the strict sense” as it is
financed by the banks (via ex ante contributions or levies) but the use of resolution funds
must be compatible with EU state aid rules. To keep bail-in to the pre-BRRD regulatory mini-
mum, and to ensure the State remained formally out of the picture, the money was advanced
to the resolution fund by three large Italian banks (Unicredit, Intesa and UBI). The Italian
Resolution Fund collected the 2015 ordinary contribution (EUR 588 million) and the 2015
extraordinary contribution (three times the ordinary contribution EUR 1.750 million).

Addressing high levels of “bail-inable" subordinated debt held by retail consumers
The episodes of banking resolutions carried out in 2015 highlighted an issue that could
potentially be very problematic for banking resolution in the Italian context. Over past years
some Italian banks placed their subordinated debt with retail customers, who were probably
largely unaware of the true risk associated with these products, sometimes not even being
aware of their bondholder status but considering themselves as simple depositors. The entry
into force of the BRRD makes this a thorn in the side of the Italian government. The BRRD
aims to reduce the cost of bank rescues for taxpayers, which would be especially problematic
for states – like Italy – that have high public debt. This requires sizable bail-in of bondhol-
ders, but if, as in Italy, these are retail holders with limited awareness of the risk and limited
diversification in their portfolios the result could be potential inadvertent social and political
costs.




40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ITALY




Figure 1 shows that the percentage of bank bonds held by the household sector is historically
high in Italy. This was partly due to the preferential tax treatment of interest income on
bonds, which was in place between 1996 and 2011. After then, the share has declined, but
it was still very high at about 30 % of the total, as of September 2015. This problem was
known, but it has been brought into the spotlight by the episodes of bank resolutions carried
out in 2015, before the entry into force of the new regime.

For comparison, figure 2 reports a breakdown of bank bonds by holding sectors for all euro
area countries. Excluding Malta and Latvia – which appear to be large outliers – Italy and
Belgium have the highest percentage of bank bonds held in the household sector. An equally
large share of bank bonds in Italy is held within the domestic banking sector, further increa-
sing vulnerability and providing ground for systemic spillover effects from bail-in. It is also
interesting to note how the Italian bank debt market is only internationalized to a limited
extent, with just slightly more than 10 % of total bank bonds being held out of the country.

Figure 1 – holdings of Italian bank bonds by sector (% total)



 70 %


 60 %


 50 %


 40 %


 30 %


 20 %


 10 %


  0%
        03.01.99
                   11.01.99
                              07.01.00
                                         03.01.01
                                                    11.01.01
                                                               07.01.02
                                                                          03.01.03
                                                                                     11.01.03
                                                                                                07.01.04
                                                                                                           03.01.05
                                                                                                                      11.01.05
                                                                                                                                 07.01.06
                                                                                                                                            03.01.07
                                                                                                                                                       11.01.07
                                                                                                                                                                  07.01.08
                                                                                                                                                                             03.01.09
                                                                                                                                                                                        11.01.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                   07.01.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              03.01.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         11.01.11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    07.01.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               03.01.13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11.01.13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     07.01.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                03.01.15




                          Monetary Financial institutions                                                             Rest of the World (extra-IT)                                                        Households

        Source: author’s calculations based on data from Central Bank of Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             41
ITALY




Figure 2 – Holdings of Banks' Bonds - by holding sector (% of total)




                                                                                                                 monetary and financial institutions
                                                                                                                 households
                                                                                                                 non-financial corporations
                                                                                                                 insurance corporations and pension funds
                                                                                                                 other financial institutions
                                                                                                                 general government
                                                                                                                 rest of the world


AT BE CY DE EE ES FI FR GR EA IE                       IT   LT LU LV MT NL PT SI SK                        Source: author’s calculations based on data from ECB


Notes: MFI=Monetary and Financial Institutions, HHs= Households, NFC=non-financial corporations, IC and PF= Insurance corporations and pension funds,
OFI= Other financial institutions, GG= general government, RoW= Rest of the World



Dealing with NPLs and creating a shareholder of last resort (“Atlas”)
These worries, and the resulting market stress, speeded up talks between the Italian govern-
ment and the European Commission about the creation of a guarantee scheme on non-per-
forming loans (named GACS in Italian). This could be a potentially positive step to clean Ita-
lian banks’ balance sheets, but it is unlikely to be miraculous and it would not be as easy as
when Ireland and Spain adopted similar solutions.

The idea in the Italian case is to reduce the balance sheet impact of NPL write-downs by
having the bad loans sold to special purpose vehicles (SPV), which would issue bonds to fund
the purchase. To make the bonds appealing and cheaper to issue Italy will offer a state gua-
rantee on them, in the hope that this helps limit the balance sheet impact.

The banks will need to pay a fee for the guarantee, for it not to qualify as state aid. The fee will
be calculated based on the guaranteed amount, and the price of the guarantee will be com-
puted taking as reference the prices of credit default swaps (CDS) for issuers with a "compa-
rable level of risk" to the guaranteed bonds. The fee will increase over time, to take account
of "the higher risks connected to the longer duration of the guaranteed bonds" and in order
to "introduce in the scheme a strong incentive to recover quickly" the value of the bad loans.

However, before the GACS guarantee can be activated on the senior tranches of securitized
NPLs, 50 % of the less senior tranches need to be placed with private investors. The market
appeal of these riskier tranches is low, and the market price could be very different from the
value at which the NPLs are accounted for on banks’ balance sheets, which would translate
into impairments and consume capital.

Under these conditions, the guarantee scheme for Italian NPLs runs the obvious risk of still-
birth unless Italian banks pool their funds together into a private fund and buy a significant




42
                                                                                             ITALY




part of the junior products themselves. A fund, named Atlas, was set up in April 2016, to do
precisely that - buy junior tranches of securitized NPLs and “ensure the success of capital rai-
sing requested by the supervisory authority from banks that face market difficulties” acting
as a subscriber/shareholder of last resort.

While GACS is a step in the right direction, the Atlas set-up is problematic
First, the effect of Atlas on investors’ confidence in the Italian banking system is dubious.
Ideally, a backstop should be reassuring enough for it never to be used. This was not the case
with Atlas, which was tested by the Banca Popolare di Vicenza (BPVI) capital raising exercise
and eventually had to underwrite the entire capital increase and hold 99.3 % of the bank.

Second, Atlas can significantly increase systemic risk in the longer term, because of its struc-
ture. The fund is mostly financed by Italian banks, with Intesa and Unicredit contributing
the largest share. By acting as a shareholder of last resort for banks that are not able to raise
capital on the market, the fund accumulates risk onto the balance sheets of a banking system
that is already very interconnected and that retains areas of weakness. The risk of a domino
effect could worsen in the long term, as the fund increases the exposure of stronger banks
to weaker banks, with potentially negative effects on the stronger banks’ creditworthiness.

Third, the nature of this initiative is unclear. While there have been reports that the fund is
“government-inspired”, the Italian government has stressed its private nature. Yet, if this is
supposed to be a fully private initiative, it is not clear why it should include a EUR 500 million
contribution from the Italian National Promotional bank Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, which is
a joint-stock company under public control. The role of Cassa Depositi e Prestiti should be
clearly spelled out (the rationale for transparency goes well beyond state aid considerations).
Atlas will buy unsold shares from those banks that have been asked to raise capital by the
supervisor: the involvement of a publicly controlled institution into a fund that acts as a
buyer of last resort could cast doubts on the strength and impact of supervisory action.

Conclusions
Italy certainly constitutes an interesting case study as long-lived problems in the banking
sector have started to be more directly addressed during the transition and entry into force
of the BRRD regime.

A first obvious lesson from the Italian example is the cost of procrastination in relation to
the reform of the banking system. While Italian banks were initially resilient, resilience soon
turned into complacency which led to the situation described above. The potentially ineffi-
cient structure of the NPL guarantee scheme was designed to meet the toughened European
stance on state aid to the financial sector. The solution could have been more effective, had
Italy acted earlier rather than waiting until it was almost too late.

A second lesson concerns the approach to the new regime of bank recovery and resolution.
While the date for entry into force of BRRD bail-in had long been known, Italy was not enti-
rely prepared for it. After the two episodes of resolution conducted in 2015, one fact could
not be clearer: in a country like Italy that ranks poorly in terms of financial literacy, and
where about a third of bank bonds are held by the household sector, even a limited bail-in
can have painful consequences for people’s lives.

With the full entry into force of the new BRRD framework in 2016, the bail-in requirement
will be tougher. A prior bail-in equal to 8 % of total liabilities will be required before the use




                                                                                               43
ITALY




of resolution fund money or public support, and the supranational Single Resolution Board
will have a much stronger role. This will limit the potential scope for arrangements like those
implemented in the 4 resolution cases described to protect senior (retail) bondholders, and
even if they were allowed the costs would be prohibitive. The November 2015 operation to
resolve the four banks without a haircut to senior bondholders required the three biggest
Italian banks to advance money to the resolution fund and was only possible because the
banks to be resolved were tiny, accounting for only 1 % of Italian deposits in total. Assuming
that the “public interest” for avoiding liquidation of these banks was strong enough (which
is unclear), replicating this approach for a big or even medium-size bank would be much
more expensive.

After BRRD bail-in entered into force in January 2016, the Italian approach seems to be one
of trying to avoid resolution as much as possible. As a public-only solution to recent banks’
problems is impossible to envisage under the BRRD, the Atlas fund has been set up to act as
a shareholder of last resort and ensure that even a bank like BPVI, that fails to raise capital,
is not resolved. Yet this cannot be a long-term solution. Atlas is problematic, as highlighted,
and it has limited power. The good will and resources of the healthier part of the Italian
banking sector cannot be relied upon indefinitely to rescue weaker banks.

More generally, regardless of whether one thinks that keeping weak banks alive at all costs
is a good idea, it is beyond doubt that the aim of EU-wide rules on bank recovery and reso-
lution is to provide certainty on how banking problems will be dealt with. For now, the Ita-
lian approach to bank resolution has been an ad hoc one, which achieves the opposite and
appears at odds with the aim of making progress towards a solid European Banking Union.
Ultimately, the most important question raised by Atlas is therefore what will come next.w




44
                                                                                                                   NETHERLANDS




THE NETHERLANDS
SNS REAAL: RESOLUTION VIA NATIONALIZATION AND BAIL-IN (2013)




Author: Professor Dr. Matthias Haentjens




Summary
On February 1, 2013, the Dutch Minister of Finance decided to expropriate all shareholders
and subordinated bondholders of SNS Reaal, one of the four largest financial conglomerates
in the Netherlands. By means of this expropriation order, all shares issued by the holding
company SNS Reaal N.V. and subordinated bonds issued by the holding company or its sub-
sidiary, SNS Bank N.V. transferred to the State of the Netherlands. All subordinated debts (not
issued as securities) were transferred to a separate entity. In derogation of the otherwise
applicable corporate law rules, the Minister also ordered that members of both the manage-
ment board and non-executive board were to be appointed, suspended and dismissed by the
general assembly of shareholders, i.e. by the state. New management board members were
subsequently appointed this way.

Background
The SNS Reaal group (SNS Reaal) resulted from the 1997 merger of the SNS banking group
and the insurance company REAAL. The holding company SNS Reaal N.V. held all shares in
SNS Bank N.V. (SNS Bank) and Reaal N.V. In 2006, SNS Reaal N.V. went public and 50 % of
its shares were listed on Euronext Amsterdam. The other 50 % were held by the foundation
Stichting SNS Reaal Beheer, as a measure against a possible hostile takeover (cf. Figure 1).


Figure 1
                                              Stichting SNS Reaal Beheer




                                                     SNS REAAL N.V.




               SNS BANK N.V.                      SNS Asset Management N.V.                           REAAL N.V.


                        RegioBank N.V.                                                  SRLEV N.V.

                        SNS Property Finance N.V. (Propertize)       REAAL Schadeverzekeringen N.V.

                        SNS Securities N.V.                          Proteq Levensverzekeringen N.V.

                          ASN Bank N.V.


                        ASN Groenbank N.V.




                                                                                                                            45
NETHERLANDS




SNS Bank then acquired shares in a company that financed real estate acquisitions: SNS Pro-
perty Finance N.V. (Property Finance). At the time of nationalization about 77 % of Property
Finance’s loans concerned real estate in the Netherlands, the rest concerned North-Ameri-
can and (southern) European property. The portfolio amounted to around EUR 8.55 billion,
around 9.6 % of SNS Bank’s balance sheet. Other Dutch banks held a substantially lower ratio
of around 4.5 %.

In mid-2012, SNS Reaal estimated Property Finance’s possible future losses, i.e. defaults on the
loans made by Property Finance, at between EUR 1.4 billion and EUR 2.1 billion. The govern-
ment’s own estimates, in October 2012, pointed at between EUR 2.4 billion and EUR 3.2 billion.
SNS Reaal’s external auditor held that it was not clear that SNS Reaal could satisfy its statutory
capital requirements, not least because in 2008 the state had lent EUR 750 million to SNS Reaal
(see below) and by January 2013, SNS Reaal had been able to repay only EUR 185 million.

SNS Reaal’s preliminary 2012 financial statements were scheduled to be made public in
February 2013. Negative press reports in January led to deposits being withdrawn and a
­
plummeting share price. The Dutch Central Bank (DNB) assessed that SNS Reaal fell short
EUR 1.9 billion of its capital requirements and ordered immediate redress. When SNS Reaal
did not meet the deadline, the Minister of Finance decided to nationalize the group.

Early intervention measures
When the global financial crisis hit the Netherlands in 2008, SNS Reaal’s insurance division
needed additional funding. The state provided EUR 750 million. Two years later, DNB asked
SNS Reaal to draft exit plans for its international real estate portfolio. After the Supervi-
sory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) in 2010, DNB asked SNS Reaal to drastically wind
down its entire ‘non-core’ real estate portfolio. SNS Reaal subsequently achieved a reduction
of Property Finance’s net exposure from EUR 14 billion to EUR 8 billion by end 2012. Follo-
wing the 2011 SREP, DNB and the Ministry of Finance created a project team to investigate
possible scenarios for SNS Reaal, because the group proved unable to reinforce its capital
position. This team investigated the following options: capital injections by private parties,
sale of (parts of) SNS Reaal, bankruptcy, public-private joint stabilization measures, forced
asset transfers, and immediate government measures such as recapitalization by the gover-
nment and nationalization.

Nationalization and bail-in of subordinated debt as the best resolution option
On February 1, 2013, the insurance division’s balance sheet totaled around EUR 54.3 billion.
The banking division maintained around 1.6 million deposit accounts and 1 million pay-
ment accounts. Customer deposits amounted to around EUR 36.4 billion, of which around
EUR 35.2 billion was insured under the national deposit guarantee scheme (DGS). If SNS
Reaal became insolvent the ex post DGS funding structure would require the other Dutch
banks in the DGS to have to pay EUR 35.2 billion. Moreover, the Minister expected the agg-
regate losses for the Dutch banks to amount to a maximum of EUR 5 billion.1 DNB assessed
payouts to account holders under the deposit guarantee scheme as it was then in existence
would take 20 days. DNB and Ministry of Finance concluded that this would have serious
negative consequences for confidence in the Dutch financial system given market condi-
tions, and that there was a risk of social unrest if 2.6 million accounts were unable to be
accessed for up to 20 days.



	 See Expropriation Letter, page 6, footnote 9 and Expropriation Decision, pp. 9–10.
1




46
                                                                                    NETHERLANDS




Of the possible resolution options discussed, the issuance of new equity instruments and
a sale of (parts of) the bank proved impossible. No private party could be found that was
willing to take on the risks that Property Finance entailed. Public-private joint stabilization
measures, in which the three largest Dutch banks together with the state would recapitalize
SNS Bank and its real estate portfolio, were thwarted by the European Commission, inter alia
on competition law grounds. A possible joint recapitalization, for which a private equity fund
had presented itself, was dismissed as the Minister considered this option to place a dispro-
portionate burden on the state in relation to the fund’s gains. Bankruptcy was dismissed as
a viable option because SNS Reaal qualified as a systemically important financial institution
and the Ministry of Finance considered that its bankruptcy would have had most serious
consequences for the stability of the financial system.

SNS Reaal’s finance structure is also relevant. Like many other financial conglomerates, it
was financed with ‘double leverage’ – only the holding company was externally financed
(EUR 909 million at end 2012) and this money was injected, as equity, in the holding com-
pany’s subsidiaries. The failure of Property Finance would therefore have led to the failure of
both SNS Bank and SNS Reaal N.V because of their substantial exposure through the double
leverage structure. Additionally, the proceeds of a possible sale of good parts of the group
(such as the insurance division) would have to be used to pay back the holding company’s
external liabilities, rather than to rescue ailing Property Finance. Thus, the double leverage
structure effectively prevented the sale and split-off of ‘good parts’ of the group and an iso-
lated bankruptcy of Property Finance or SNS Bank.

The Minister of Finance concluded that nationalization and the immediate implementation
of measures, such as the decision on the appointment of new board members (see above),
were the only viable options. The legal basis for these immediate measures and the nationa-
lization were Articles 6:1 and 6:2 of the Financial Markets Supervision Act (FMSA).

Costs for the state, capital injection and restructuring
The expropriation of shareholders and subordinated debt holders effectively resulted in a
capital relief for SNS Reaal of around EUR 1 billion. Shareholders and the holders of sub-
ordinated debt instruments were fully expropriated, i.e. ownership of their capital instru-
ments transferred to the state. In addition, all subordinated debts (not issued as securities)
were transferred to a separate entity, so that this entity (which was then put into liquidation)
replaced SNS Reaal and SNS Bank as debtor. This was not enough to rescue the group. The
Ministry of Finance added a capital injection of around EUR 3.7 billion and announced a res-
tructuring, which included loans totaling EUR 1.1 billion and guarantees worth EUR 5 billion.
The Treasury levied a EUR 1 billion one-off ‘resolution tax’ on the banking sector to contri-
bute to these costs. EUR 0.3 billion was injected as equity in SNS Reaal N.V.; EUR 1.9 billion in
SNS Bank; and EUR 0.7 billion in Property Finance. The earlier EUR 0.75 billion loan from the
state to the group was amortized.

Restructuring is being accomplished by the transfer of the shares in Property Finance to
Stichting NL Financial Investments (NLFI), a semi-public entity which holds the shares
in all financial institutions of which the state is the owner. Property Finance (renamed as
Propertize) will be resolved over time. SNS Bank remained – at least initially – liable for the
financing of Property Finance, i.e. for the separate property management vehicle created
after the restructuring. But to minimize exposure on this, the State of the Netherlands has
issued a EUR 5 billion guarantee to the benefit of SNS Bank. Reaal N.V. has been renamed
VIVAT Verzekeringen, and was acquired by the Chinese insurance company Anbang Group




                                                                                              47
NETHERLANDS




Holdings Co. Ltd. in early 2015. The state has committed to the privatization of SNS Bank
in due course.

Impact on shareholders and creditors
As a consequence of the nationalization shareholders and subordinated debt holders were
fully wiped out, amounting to losses of approximately EUR 240 million and EUR 1.67 billion
respectively. Senior bondholders remained untouched.

Many legal proceedings have been brought before almost all possible courts including:
–	Some 700 plaintiffs challenged the legality of the expropriation order with the highest Dutch
  administrative court. They argued that the expropriation violated civil rights, that the expro-
  priation of subordinated debt was unnecessary and that SNS Reaal’s situation did not pose
  an immediate threat to financial stability. The court upheld the expropriation order.
–	Dutch law requires that expropriated investors are fully compensated for their losses.
  The Minister of Finance had offered EUR 0.00 compensation, arguing that if SNS Reaal
  had gone bankrupt there would have been no capital left for subordinated creditors or
  shareholders. The Enterprise Chamber of the Amsterdam Court of Appeal held that this did
  not compensate for the damage suffered and it appointed experts to advise on an amount
  of compensation. The Dutch Supreme Court struck down the judgment and held that the
  Enterprise Chamber must determine the level of compensation independently and it clari-
  fied the manner in which compensation for expropriation should be determined. It provi-
  ded further guidance for the application of the FMSA provisions saying that compensation
  should be based on the future prospects of the financial institution if no expropriation had
  taken place, and on the price that would have been achieved in a hypothetical sale in the
  open market at the time of the expropriation between the expropriated party as a reaso-
  nable seller and the expropriating party as a reasonable buyer. On February 26, 2016, the
  Enterprise Chamber appointed three experts to advise on the price.
–	The European Court of Human Rights rejected several complaints concerning the exprop-
  riation and held other applications inadmissible.

Conclusions
The SNS Reaal case took place about two years before adoption and transposition of the
BRRD into Dutch law. Its legal basis, however, relates to the BRRD in several respects. First,
from an economic point of view, the Dutch rules on expropriation and the BRRD provisi-
ons on bail-in and write-down may boil down to the same result for investors, especially if
bail-in and write-down under BRRD result in a reduction of investors’ claims to zero, and
‘full compensation’ for expropriated investors under the Dutch FMSA is also zero (based on a
hypothetical market price).

In the SNS Reaal case full compensation was deemed to be zero as no capital would have
been left under bankruptcy proceedings. This is essentially a negative application of the No-
Creditor-Worse-Off rule formulated in the BRRD (NCWOL, see chapter 20, FinSAC Guide-
book to the BRRD), which ensures creditors and shareholders never receive less than they
would have under ‘normal insolvency proceedings’, i.e. bankruptcy under national law. For
compensation, the BRRD takes a gone-concern situation as a starting point, whereas the
FMSA takes into account a broader set of circumstances, including the future prospects of
the failing institution and a hypothetical sale of the expropriated instruments.

The result for shareholders and subordinated debt holders may have been the same had the
BRRD been implemented into Dutch law when SNS Reaal failed because these investors




48
                                                                                        NETHERLANDS




would probably also have been fully written-down under the BRRD. Moreover, they may
not have received more if SNS Reaal had entered into ‘normal’ Dutch insolvency procee-
dings, so would not have been entitled to any compensation under BRRD’s NCOWL principle.
Additionally, senior debt holders may also have been written down or converted into equity,
and there may have been recourse to the Single Resolution Fund if BRRD and the Single
Resolution Mechanism had already been in force. At the time of the SNS Reaal nationaliz-
ation, the Minister explicitly considered expropriating/bailing-in senior bondholders, but
concluded that financial stability reasons prevented that. He argued the measures taken were
least burdensome for public finances, especially considering the special ‘resolution tax’ levy
on the banking industry discussed above, which can be compared to a drawing on the Single
Resolution Fund which is also funded by the industry.

BRRD Articles 56–58 allow for the possibility of ‘public equity support’ and ‘temporary public
ownership’ as a last resort (see chapter 19, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). The Netherlands
Government has argued that these provisions allow for retaining FMSA Articles 6:1–6:13,
the legal basis on which the Minister of Finance’s power to nationalize a failing bank rests.
However, the Government also stated that under the Single Resolution Mechanism, where
the Single Resolution Board is responsible for the resolution of failing credit institutions,
it will be unlikely – other than in a state emergency – that the nationalization power will
ever have to be used. This was also the conclusion of a commission tasked with drawing les-
sons from the SNS Reaal nationalization, although the Minister of Finance’s nationalization
power should be retained as a last resort.

Other findings by the commission, and by a committee set up to evaluate the relevant FMSA
provisions, included that:

1	 All financial institutions should be required by statutory law to draft “living wills”. Complex
   operational, financial and corporate interdependencies should be controllable and separa-
   ble. Authorities should have the power to require financial institutions to adopt changes to
   their structure, organization or business practices to improve their resolvability;
2	 Statutory law should explicitly empower the Minister of Finance to expropriate debts
   (rather than only rights and claims); and
3	 The scope of DNB’s resolution powers should be extended to financial holding companies.

Recommendation 1 has been effectuated through the implementation of the BRRD and the
Single Resolution Mechanism, which requires the drafting of recovery and resolution plans
and empowers authorities to take resolvability decisions. Recommendations 2 and 3 have
been implemented by amendment of the FMSA as of April 1, 2016.

Relevant Sources
Statutory materials
–	Grondwet (Constitution), esp. Article 14
–	Wet op het financieel toezicht (Financial Markets Supervision Act), esp. Articles 6:1-6:13

Government materials
–	Proceedings of the Senate May 22, 2012, 30-6-27
–	Besluit ex artikel 6:1, eerste lid, 6:2 eerste, vierde en vijfde lid, en 6:4, eerste en tweede lid,
  van de Wet op het financieel toezicht, February 1, 2013 (Expropriation Order), available at
       /www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten-en-publicaties/besluiten/2013/02/01/
  http:/
  onteigeningsbesluit-sns-reaal-en-sns-bank.html




                                                                                                  49
NETHERLANDS




–	Letter of the Minister of Finance to the Parliament, February 1, 2013 (Expropriation
                             /www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten-en-publicaties/
  Letter), available at http:/
  kamerstukken/2013/02/01/kamerbrief-over-de-onteigening-van-sns-reaal.html
–	Letter of the Minister of Finance regarding the offer for compensation, March 4, 2013,
  available at http://www.government.nl/news/2013/03/04/dutch-minister-of-
  finance-makes-offer-for-compensation-due-to-the-nationalisation-of-sns-reaal.html
–	Kabinetsvisie Nederlandse bankensector (Government position re. Dutch banking
  industry) August 23, 2013
–	Parliamentary Proceedings 2014–2015, 34 208, no. 3 (Explanatory Memorandum)

Case law
–	European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) January 14, 2014, application no. 47315/13
  (Adorisio and Others v. the Netherlands)
–	ECHR February 11, 2014, application no. 50494/13 (VEB NCVB and Others v. the
  Netherlands)
–	ECHR March 17, 2015, application no. 47315/13, 48490/13 and 49016/13
  (Adorisio and Others v. the Netherlands)
–	Hoge Raad (Supreme Court) March 20, 2015, ECLI:NL:HR:2015:661
–	Raad van State (Administrative Law Section of the Dutch Council of State)
  February 25, 2013, ECLI:NL:RVS:2013:BZ2265. The English version of this judgment is
  available at www.raadvanstate.nl
–	Gerechtshof Amsterdam (Amsterdam Court of Appeal) July 11, 2013,
  ECLI:NL:GHAMS:2013:1966

Reports
–	Financial Stability Board, Peer Review of the Netherlands, Review Report
  November 11, 2014, available at http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/
  Netherlands-peer-review-report.pdf
–	Rapport van de evaluatiecommissie nationalisatie SNS Reaal (2014)
  (Report of the evaluation committee nationalisation SNS Reaal (2014)

Literature
–	M Haentjens, What Happens when a Systemically Important Financial Institution Fails:
  Some Company Law Observations re. SNS Reaal, European Company Law Journal,
  nr. 2, 2013
–	LGA Janssen & JT Tegelaar, How to Compensate Expropriated Investors?
  The Case of SNS Reaal, JIBLR 2016
–	Figure 1 has been copied from the Expropriation Letter
–	Figure 2 has been copied from the FSB Review Report




50
                                                                                                  NETHERLANDS




Figure 2 – Structure of SNS REAAL before and after intervention

     BEFORE INTERVENTION                                 AFTER INTERVENTION




                                               0.3 bln          1.1 bln
                                               capital             loan




               HOLDING                                HOLDING



                                                                             1.9 bln       state guarantee
                                                                             capital

                                                                                                                0.5 bln
                                                                                                                capital
     insurer                  bank          insurer                bank          fundin
                                                                                       g


                                                                                                  real estate
                                                                 separated
                                                                                                   company



                               PF                                   PF



Source: ministry of finance




                                                                                                                    51
PORTUGAL




PORTUGAL
BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.: RESOLUTION VIA A BRIDGE BANK
INCLUDING A RE-TRANSFER




Author: Ana Rita Garcia1




Summary
On August 3, 2014, Banco de Portugal applied a resolution measure to Banco Espírito Santo,
S.A. (BES), transferring the majority of its activity to Novo Banco, S.A. (Novo Banco), a bridge
bank created for that purpose whose equity capital was provided by the Resolution Fund.
This decision had to be urgently taken due to the imminent risk of cessation of payment by
BES, at the time the third largest Portuguese bank, which would have had very serious con-
sequences for financial stability and for the Portuguese economy.

Background
In mid-2014 BES was the third largest bank in the Portuguese banking system and was
considered a significant credit institution by the European Central Bank under the Single
Supervisory Mechanism. BES had a market share of around 11.5 % of total deposits received
from residents in Portugal, approximately 14 % of total loans granted and 19 % of loans
granted to non-financial corporations. Also, its market share of the financial and insurance
sector financing amounted to 31 %, showing a strong interconnection with the rest of the
financial services industry2. BES belonged to a larger economic group (Grupo Espírito Santo
– GES), which was active both in the financial sector and also the nonfinancial sector, with a
broad geographical scope (25 countries on four continents). The bank therefore played a very
significant role in the national economy and financial system, especially in the financing of
non-financial corporations, and a possible disruption of the financial services it provided
would have had a very significant systemic effect.

At the end of July 2014, BES released the results for the first half of the year, with losses of
around EUR 3.6 billion (on a consolidated basis).3 This included the negative impact of above
EUR 1.5 billion of unexpected losses resulting from operations mainly conducted in the first
half of 2014 and unknown to the external auditor. As a result, BES’s losses largely exceeded
the amount previously estimated on the basis of the information that had been disclosed by
BES and its external auditor to the market and to the competent authorities. Those estimated
losses had already exhausted the bank’s EUR 2.1. billion capital buffer, reinforced in May–
July following a determination of Banco de Portugal.




1
 	 Banco de Portugal. The opinions expressed in this case study are those of the author and do not necessarily coincide with those of
   Banco de Portugal. Any errors and omissions are the sole responsibility of the author.
2
 	 Recital 9 of 3 August 2014 Decision
3
 	 Recital 1 of 3 August 2014 Decision




52
                                                                                     PORTUGAL




The situation described above had very serious consequences for BES:
–	A substantial reduction of the Common Equity Tier 1 ratio to around 5 % (on a consolida-
  ted basis)4, significantly below the minimum required by Banco de Portugal;
–	The significant deterioration of the public perception of BES, reflected in the strongly
  negative performance of its securities in the days leading up to resolution and a very signi-
  ficant fall in the market-value of its shares to around 12 cents, which culminated with the
  suspension of the trading of BES’s shares by the Portuguese Securities Market Commission
  on August 1, 2014;
–	The downgrade of BES’s rating by the Canadian rating agency DBRS, also on August 1,
  2014. There was indication that further rating cuts were also a possibility;
–	The growing pressure on the bank’s cash flows;
–	Increased uncertainty over BES’s balance sheet given the evidence of internal control fai-
  lure and harmful mismanagement.

In addition to the serious breach of its minimum own funds requirements, BES was also
in a situation of severe liquidity shortfall (from the end of June until July 31 the liquidity
position of BES declined by around EUR 3,350 million5). BES could not accommodate such
sharp pressure on its liquidity through recourse to funds obtained in monetary policy ope-
rations due to the exhaustion of the assets accepted as collateral for that purpose, and to the
limitation imposed by the European Central Bank (ECB). BES was therefore forced to resort
to Emergency Liquidity Assistance.

The magnitude and the nature of the losses unexpectedly made public in late July signifi-
cantly damaged the external perception of BES’s financial position, making a private capi-
talization solution unfeasible in the short run. On July 31, 2014, the Board of Directors of
BES informed Banco de Portugal that it would not be possible to submit a capitalization
plan based on private investment, under the terms and within the deadlines requested by
Banco de Portugal in the face of the urgency of the situation and the rapidly deterioration of
confidence in the bank.

On August 1, 2014, the Governing Council of the ECB decided to suspend BES’s Euro-
system monetary policy counterparty status, effective as of August 4, 2014, and, in parallel,
requested the bank to fully repay its outstanding credit with the Eurosystem to an amount
of around EUR 10 billion by close of business on August 4.

Considering all the above, BES was in a situation of serious risk of not meeting, in the short
term, its obligations and consequently of not complying with its authorization require-
ments. Given the importance of BES within the Portuguese banking system and in the finan-
cing of the Portuguese economy, the risk of suspension of payments or failure to meet its
obligations carried high risk of contagion that could compromise the stability of the national
financial system.

Banco de Portugal, faced with the imperative and urgent need to adopt a solution that simul-
taneously guaranteed deposit protection and ensured the stability of the financial system,
decided on August 3, 2014, to apply a resolution measure to BES.




	 Recital 2 of 3 August 2014 Decision
4

	 Recital 5 of 3 August 2014 Decision
5




                                                                                            53
PORTUGAL




The national legislation then in force
In August 2014, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) had already entered
into force but had yet to be enacted in national legislation. However, the Portuguese reso-
lution regime then in force, which had been introduced in 2012, already took into account
to a large extent the ongoing international debate on bank resolution. The resolution
regime provisions included the application of corrective measures, the appointment of
an ­interim board, and resolution measures, including the main resolution objectives and
general principles. At that moment, the only measures available were the sale of business
tool and the bridge institution tool, as the regime did not yet stipulate for bail-in. Thus,
it partially anticipated, internally, what would later become the framework enshrined in
the BRRD and, therefore, the national regime was already, in substance, very similar to the
BRRD.

The resolution of BES and the creation of Novo Banco
On August 3, 2014, Banco de Portugal, acting as the national resolution authority, started the
                                                                                        balance
resolution of BES. The business conducted by BES i.e. selected assets, liabilities, off-­
sheet items, and assets under management, were transferred to Novo Banco, a bridge bank
set up by Banco de Portugal for that purpose, leaving behind assets and liabilities connected
to the GES and most of the contingent elements of BES balance-sheet. Given that there were
no immediate viable solutions for selling the activity of BES to another authorized credit
institution, this was the only measure that ensured the continuity of the provision of its
financial services and that allowed the new bank to be adequately ring-fenced from the risks
created by the exposure of BES to entities of GES.

Novo Banco is a credit institution with the status of a bank and bridge institution. As such,
it can carry out all bank-related activities, under the management mandate set out by Banco
de Portugal, as the Resolution Authority. It also complies with all the rules, including pru-
dential requirements, imposed on banks operating in the market. Being a significant cre-
dit institution for the purposes of Article 6(4) of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013,
of October 15, 2013 (SSM Regulation), Novo Banco has been directly supervised by the ECB
since November 4, 2014. Novo Banco has had full access to the liquidity facilities provided by
the European System of Central Banks, under the Eurosystem framework, having the same
funding conditions of the remaining national credit institutions.

The by-laws of Novo Banco were approved by Banco de Portugal, as the resolution autho-
rity, which also appointed the members of the management and supervisory boards of Novo
Banco upon a proposal submitted by the Resolution Fund, as the single shareholder.

The equity capital for Novo Banco, of EUR 4.9 billion, was fully provided by the Resolution
Fund. The Resolution Fund, only created in 2012, did not have sufficient available financial
means (arising from the ex ante contributions paid by the industry, and the proceeds from a
special levy on the banking sector) to fully finance the operation. The Resolution Fund the-
refore took out loans from the Portuguese State (EUR 3.9 billion) and from a group of credit
institutions that are members of the Resolution Fund (EUR 700 million). This allowed the
State's resources to be used in the form of a financing operation to the Resolution Fund and
not as capitalization of the failed bank, protecting the public purse from the risks inherent to
a position of shareholder or of a direct creditor of a credit institution and ensuring that the
disbursed amount is to be reimbursed by the Resolution Fund based on contributions paid
by the industry.




54
                                                                                        PORTUGAL




Use of the Resolution Fund, legally a public law legal entity even if it is financed by the indus-
try and whose intervention is decided by Banco de Portugal, constitutes state aid within the
meaning of Article 107(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) (see
chapter 21b FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). This meant that the resolution measure had to be
properly notified to the European Commission, which had to decide whether the aid was com-
patible with the internal market under the EU rules on state aid to banks in the context of the
financial crisis. In its assessment, the Commission found that the orderly resolution aid was
limited to the minimum necessary, that the distortions of competition stemming from the
market presence of Novo Banco until the completion of its sale were limited, that an adequate
burden sharing was ensured and that, therefore, the state aid was compatible with the internal
market for reasons of financial stability on the basis of Article 107(3)(b) TFEU.

Assets and liabilities transferred from BES to Novo Banco, burden sharing and the
“no creditor worse off” principle
The selection by Banco de Portugal of the assets, liabilities, off-balance sheet items and assets
under management to be transferred from BES to Novo Banco took into account the pur-
poses of resolution, particularly the need to ensure the continuity of the essential financial
services provided by BES, to avoid systemic risk, to protect depositors and to safeguard the
public purse. This selection also aimed to adequately ring-fence BES’s activity, now trans-
ferred to Novo Banco, from the risks created by the exposure to the non-financial entities
of GES, and was defined in order to have a stable perimeter (which was crucial to calculate
capital needs), thus excluding all contingencies.

More importantly, the selection of the assets and liabilities to be transferred to Novo Banco
pursued the guiding principle of resolution according to which shareholders of the credit
institution under resolution bear first losses, followed by its creditors, in equitable condi-
tions. In compliance with this guiding principle, the following were among those not trans-
ferred to Novo Banco:

–	Instruments that were, or had once been, eligible for BES’s own funds;
–	Liabilities or contingent liabilities related to shares, instruments, or contracts from which
  subordinated claims arise towards BES;
–	Liabilities to shareholders whose holdings were equal to or higher than 2 % of the equity
  capital of BES at the time of resolution or in the preceding two years;
–	Liabilities to members of the management and supervisory boards and to the audit firms;
–	Liabilities to the persons or entities that had been shareholders or who had performed the
  functions mentioned in the two subparagraphs above in the four-year period before the
  creation of Novo Banco and whose action or failure to act caused the financial difficulties
  experienced by BES or helped aggravate that situation;
–	Liabilities to the relatives of the persons and entities mentioned in the three subparagra-
  phs above and any person or entity acting on their behalf or account;
–	Liabilities or contingent liabilities, if any, arising from the placement by BES of financial
  instruments issued by entities belonging to the GES Group with
–	All contingent liabilities.

It should be noted that burden sharing took place not only due to the applicable rules of the
resolution legal framework then in place but also because of the state aid rules in force in the
European Union since 2013, according to which the losses of a credit institution must first
be borne by shareholders and subordinated creditors before any state aid can take place. This
means that, had public recapitalization been an available and feasible option in August 2014,




                                                                                               55
PORTUGAL




such public recapitalization would necessarily entail a similar contribution to loss absorption
from shareholders and subordinated creditors (See chapter 9 FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).

An independent valuation of the assets, liabilities, off-balance-sheet items and assets under
management transferred to Novo Banco was later carried out by PricewaterhouseCoopers &
Associados – Sociedade de Revisores Oficiais de Contas, Lda (PwC) and resulted in significant
adjustments to the net book value of the assets as booked in the balance sheet of BES at the
timing of resolution. These adjustments were fully reflected in Novo Banco’s opening balance
sheet.

The resolution of BES is also bound by the principle that no creditor shall incur greater losses
than would have been incurred had the credit institution entered into liquidation instead of
being resolved (the ‘no creditor worse off’ principle). If, at the end of the liquidation procedure
of BES, according to independent valuation, creditors whose claims were not transferred to
Novo Banco are found to have incurred greater losses than the losses they would have expec-
tedly incurred had BES entered liquidation procedures immediately before the application of
the resolution measure, those creditors are entitled to the payment of that difference from the
Resolution Fund (see chapter 20 FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).

In compliance with the applicable law, Banco de Portugal appointed an independent entity,
Deloitte Consultores, S.A. (Deloitte), to estimate the level of recovery of the claims of each
class of creditors of BES, in accordance to the priority ranking provided for by law, in a scena-
rio in which BES had been liquidated immediately before and instead of the application of
the resolution measure. In accordance with the estimation carried out by Deloitte, in a liqui-
dation scenario, shareholders and subordinated claims would have zero recovery and the
recovery rate of unsubordinated, unpreferred claims would be of about 31.7 %. This means
that if those creditors whose credit claims were left behind at BES recover less than 31.7 %
following the liquidation of BES, they will be entitled to compensation by the Resolution
Fund. Any right to compensation by the Resolution Fund can only be determined at the end
of BES’s judicial liquidation proceedings.

Further developments in the resolution of BES
On December 29, 2015, the Board of Directors of Banco de Portugal approved a number of deci-
sions that completed the resolution measure applied to BES on August 3, 2014. The package of
decisions taken on December 29 was intended to finally close the perimeter of assets and liabi-
lities of Novo Banco, including by making sure that the losses of BES were effectively absorbed
by the bank’s shareholders and creditors in accordance with the legal framework.

Given evidence that the economic and financial situation of Novo Banco had been negatively
affected since its creation by losses originating prior to the resolution of BES (whose assets
had been overvalued), Banco de Portugal decided to transfer back to BES the liabilities rela-
ted to non-subordinated bonds issued by BES and intended for institutional investors. The
nominal amount of the bonds retransferred to BES totaled circa EUR 2 billion.

The exercise of this power by Banco de Portugal to re-transfer at any time assets and liabi-
lities between BES and Novo Banco, expressly provided for in the legal framework and in
the original resolution decision of August 3, 2014, was deemed necessary to ensure that, as
stipulated in the resolution regime and in accordance with the State Aid Decision, the losses
of BES were absorbed by its shareholders and creditors and not by the Resolution Fund.




56
                                                                                        PORTUGAL




The selection by Banco de Portugal of the bonds transferred back to BES was based on grounds
of public interest and aimed to safeguard financial stability and ensure compliance with the
purposes of the resolution measure applied to BES.

Other measures taken by the Board of Directors of Banco de Portugal on December 29, 2015,
included:
–	The clarification that no liabilities had been transferred to Novo Banco that were cont-
  ingent or unknown on the date of the resolution of BES (including disputed liabilities in
  connection with pending litigation);
–	The clarification that it is the Resolution Fund’s responsibility to make neutral for Novo
  Banco – through an appropriate compensatory measure – any potential negative effects of
  future decisions in the resolution process that might give rise to liabilities or contingencies.

These decisions represented the final and definitive adjustments of the perimeter of the
assets, liabilities, off-balance sheet items and assets under management transferred from
BES to Novo Banco.

Consequences of the resolution measure for BES
                                                                                   Directors
With the application of the resolution measure to BES, the members of its Board of ­
and the Board of Auditors were automatically suspended. The new members of the manage-
ment bodies of BES were appointed by Banco de Portugal.

Being an institution under resolution which had its most significant share of activity and
property transferred to Novo Banco, BES ceased to be in a position to carry out its activity in
an autonomous manner or to continue to operate in the market under normal conditions.
Accordingly, Banco de Portugal applied the following corrective measures to BES, taking
effect on August 3, 2014:

–	Prohibition to grant credit and invest funds in any types of assets, except where the invest-
  ment of funds was necessary for the preservation and enhancement of the value of its assets;
–	Prohibition to take deposits;
–	Waiver of compliance with the prudential rules applicable and the timely fulfilment of
  previously contracted obligations, except when this fulfilment was indispensable to the
  preservation and valuation of its assets, in which case Banco de Portugal could authorize
  the operations required for the purpose.

Because BES was not carrying out any activity, and given that it no longer served any purpose
in ensuring the successful implementation of the resolution measure, the ECB withdrew its
banking license on July 13, 2016. In accordance with the applicable law, this has the effect
of a declaration of insolvency. Judicial liquidation proceedings of BES are ongoing and the
assets and liabilities that were not transferred to Novo Banco, which were being managed by
the Board of Directors of BES, are now part of BES’s insolvency estate.

Sale process of Novo Banco
Under the legal framework in force in August 2014, Novo Banco was established for a period
of two years, renewable for periods of one year for reasons of public interest. Accordingly,
Portugal committed, in the context of the state aid assessment undertaken by the European
Commission, to sell the activity transferred to Novo Banco, or the equity stake held by the
Resolution Fund, through an open, transparent, non-discriminatory and competitive selling
process until August 2016.




                                                                                               57
PORTUGAL




The sale process was launched in December 2014 and elicited three binding offers for the
purchase of the Resolution Fund's equity holding in Novo Banco. However, Banco de Portugal
opted, on September 15, 2015, to interrupt the sale process and to terminate the then-ongo-
ing procedure without accepting any of the three binding offers, as it deemed the terms and
conditions of these offers not satisfactory.

The duration of Novo Banco as a bridge institution was later extended and, in its decision of
December 19, 2015, the European Commission decided to extend the deadline for the sale of
Novo Banco. On January 15, 2016, Banco de Portugal decided to re-launch the sale process
of the Resolution Fund’s equity stake in Novo Banco. The sale process is on-going at the time
of writing.

Conclusions
The application of the resolution measure to BES has made it possible, even in the face of the
collapse of the third largest banking group in the country, to safeguard stability and confi-
dence in the Portuguese financial system, protect depositors, and ensure the ongoing provi-
sion of key financial services previously conducted by BES. However, as this was the first time
that a resolution measure was applied to a Portuguese credit institution, the implementation
of that decision was challenging and has provided important lessons.

Preparation is of the utmost importance. This is something that can be partially addres-
sed in the resolution planning phase, where resolution authorities can, for instance, obtain
thorough knowledge of the group’s structure and activity as well as remove impediments
to resolution. However, several significant components of a successful resolution can only
be properly addressed in the weeks or days before resolution because they require the most
up-to-date financial data possible. Information about the credit institution’s liabilities, in as
much detail as possible, particularly regarding counterparties, is essential at that stage. If the
circumstances prompting resolution arise suddenly because of undisclosed liabilities, as was
the case with BES, implementation issues will inevitably add to the inherent difficulties of a
resolution process.

A key aspect that is particularly highlighted in the BRRD is the need for a detailed and com-
prehensive valuation of the institution’s assets to ensure the proper recognition of its losses.
These include both the losses determined in accordance with accounting and prudential
rules from a going concern perspective (which inform the resolution authority’s decision
on whether the conditions for resolution are met); as well as the losses arising from deter-
mination of the economic value of the institution’s assets, in accordance with the impact of
the chosen resolution strategy, from a gone concern perspective (which inform the choice of
resolution action to be adopted). This helps to ensure that losses are properly absorbed by the
institution’s shareholders and creditors and that the institution is recapitalized to a prudent
extent.

An interesting difference in the resolution regime introduced by the BRRD to the regime in
place in Portugal when BES entered resolution is the possibility of converting creditors of the
institution under resolution into shareholders of the bridge institution. This new financing
option allows for the use of less resources from the Resolution Fund aimed at providing the
equity capital to the bridge institution.

The importance of a strategy to follow-up implementation of the resolution measure
should not be overlooked, particularly when the chosen resolution tool is a bridge bank. The




58
                                                                                       PORTUGAL




resolution authority, together with the management of the bridge bank, need to ensure that
the bridge bank has access to liquidity and funding in the days following resolution and
that it can access payment, clearing, and settlement systems, with the purpose of ensuring
continuity of critical functions. To safeguard the public’s confidence in the financial system,
an effective communication strategy has to be put in place.

While Directive 2001/24/EC (Reorganization and Winding-up Directive) already provided
for the recognition and enforcement of resolution decisions adopted within the European
Union, the BRRD helpfully reinforces the mutual recognition of crisis management mea-
sures and states that creditors affected by the transfer of rights, assets, and liabilities under
a resolution action cannot prevent, challenge, or set aside said transfer under any provision
of law of the Member States where the assets are located or which govern the rights or lia-
bilities. Accordingly, the UK Court of Appeal has recently held that the UK was obliged to
give immediate effect in its law to the transfer of rights and liabilities of BES to Novo Banco
under Banco de Portugal’s decision of August 3, 2014, and other decisions that completed it
(because the obligation to recognize the decision involves giving it the effect that it had in
Portuguese law), and that a debt claim brought by investors whose liability was not trans-
ferred to Novo Banco can only be pursued after, and only if, those decisions are overruled by
the courts in Portugal.

In conclusion, the case of BES has proved that the resolution of a large and complex banking
group facing idiosyncratic difficulties is possible and that resolution is an efficient although
not risk-free tool for preserving financial stability.

Relevant Sources
EU Legislation:
Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of May 15, 2014
establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and
investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and Directives 2001/24/
EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and
2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012, of the European
Parliament and of the Council (the ‘Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive’ or ‘BRRD’)

European Commission’s State aid temporary rules established in response to
the economic and financial crisis:
Communication from the Commission on the application, from 1 August 2013 , of State aid
rules to support measures in favour of banks in the context of the financial crisis
(OJ C 216, 30.7.2019, p. 1) (‘Banking Communication’)

Portuguese Legislation:
Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies, approved by Decree-Law
No 298/92, of December 31, as amended

Banco de Portugal Decisions:
                                                                 /www.bportugal.pt/en-US/
Decisions are available on the Banco de Portugal's website, http:/
OBancoeoEurosistema/Esclarecimentospublicos/Pages/DeliberacoesBes.aspx




                                                                                              59
PORTUGAL




European Commission State Aid Approvals:
–	Decision of August 3, 2014, C(2014) 5682 final, State aid n° SA.39250 (2014/N) –
  Portugal, Resolution of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
–	Decision of December 19, 2015, C(2015) 9762 final, State aid nº SA.43976 (2015/N) –
  Portugal, Amendment of the 2014 Resolution of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A




60
                                                                                                                             SLOVENIA




SLOVENIA
SEVERAL DOMESTIC BANKS: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC RECAPITALIZATION
AND BAIL-IN (2013)




Authors: Mitja Mavko and Lars Nyberg




Summary
In late 2013 and 2014, before the BRRD came into force in January 2016, the Slovenian
government had to recapitalize a number of domestic banks considered to be of domestic
systemic importance. In the process equity of EUR 381 million and subordinated debt of
EUR 582 million were written off. Equity and debt holders have questioned the legal sup-
port for this. A constitutional appeal of bail-in debt holders was referred to the Court of
Justice of the European Union (CJEU) for preliminary ruling which endorsed, in principle,
the right to enforce “burden sharing” on private investors. If the BRRD had been in place,
the process would have been unambiguous and the bail-in considerably bigger at around
EUR 1,900 million.

Background
Like many other industrial countries, and especially as a small and very open economy,
Slovenia was hit by the financial crisis of 2007–2008. Interestingly, and in contrast to many
other countries in the crisis, household debt was not a problem. The balance sheets of house-
holds were generally sound in Slovenia and housing prices did not increase in the way they
did elsewhere. However, a number of corporate groups had borrowed heavily from the banks
to expand their operations. The banks, in turn, largely depended on wholesale financing in
the EU. With those sources drying up, pressure began to mount. A large part of the corporate
sector was overleveraged and non-performing loans (NPLs) in the banks increased quickly.
When new international capital requirements were announced and after the results of a
comprehensive asset quality review, it became clear that a number of banks would have to
be recapitalized or resolved. As a result of the previous banking rehabilitation undertaken in
the 1990s, the Slovenian state had been heavily involved in partly owning and controlling the
largest banks, those of systemic importance. Injecting fresh capital into the banks was partly
an issue for the state as an owner, but – more importantly – the state had responsibility to
safeguard the country’s financial stability. The Bank of Slovenia, independent and part of the
euro-system, was and continues to be the supervisory and resolution authority for banks –
today it performs its role as national supervisor in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM).

As an EU Member State, Slovenia had to observe state aid rules in recapitalizing its banks.
The European Commission had to be involved in calculating the maximum support pos-
sible to avoid conflicts with competition legislation. In line with the Banking Communica-
tion1 shareholders and holders of subordinated debt were supposed to contribute before any


	 Communication from the Commission on the application, from August 1, 2013, of state aid rules to support measures in favour of banks in
1

  the context of the financial crisis



                                                                                                                                      61
SLOVENIA




provision of state aid. The BRRD was still under construction and the concept of bail-in was
still controversial, while experience from other EU Member States varied.

Recapitalization and other public support
Following the Cyprus bail-out in Spring 2013 (See Cyprus case study), the financial mar-
kets and the European institutions insisted on a comprehensive asset quality review and a
stress test in the Slovenian banking sector. The exercise was concluded in December 2013
and determined the scope for recapitalizations in the form of state aid and transfers of assets
to the newly created Bank Asset Management Company (BAMC).

The two biggest Slovenian banks, Nova Ljubljanska Banka (NLB) and Nova Kreditna Banka
Maribor (NKBM) were fully recapitalized by the Slovenian state in December 2013. Abanka
was partly recapitalized in 2013, and a restructuring plan was drawn up in 2014 which would
enable its merger with Banka Celje. The state provided EUR 3.647 million (EUR 2.524 million
in cash and EUR 1.123 million in bonds), while the rest was to be provided through banks’
own capital-generating capacities. As part of the process, all distressed assets to be transferred
to the state-owned BAMC from the four major banks were identified and priced. The assets
consisted mainly of loans, but there was also some equity included.

The process was deemed a successful rescue of the Slovenian financial system by the inter-
national financial markets. In January 2014 Moody’s immediately changed its outlook for
Slovenia to “stable”, while the spreads on Slovenian government bonds lowered by more than
260 basis points in the first quarter of 2014, reaching pre-crisis levels.

Moreover, two small banks Probanka and Factor Banka were partly recapitalized by the
Slovenian state in the amounts necessary to prevent bankruptcy and to allow orderly win-
ding down of both banks in 2013. The Bank of Slovenia, appointed extraordinary manage-
ment while the state made provision for the capital shortfall after bail-in of equity and junior
liabilities had been performed. After more than two years of wind-down in which deposits in
the two banks were fully repaid, the remaining assets and liabilities of these two banks were
merged into the BAMC and their banking licences were revoked.

Table 1: Slovenian banks at the end of 2013


    Bank	                    Capital	         Recapita-	            Transfer to	   Equity	      % State	                 Hybrid and
    	                       shortfall	          lization	                BAMC	           	    Ownership	          subordinated debt
    NLB	                         1904	                1551	                2300	      184	               90	                         250
    NKBM	                        1056	                 870	                1011	      143	               50	                          56
    Abanka Vipa	                  756	                 5912	               1144	        7	               41	                         120
    Banka Celje	                  388	                 190	                 411	       17	               54	                          92
    Faktor Banka	            n/a (283)	                269	                   –	       12	                –	                          23
    Probanka	                n/a (214)	                178	                   –	       18	                –	                          41
    Total	                       4601	                3649	                4866	      381	                 	                         582


Figures in million euros	       Source: Bank of Slovenia (www.bsi.si)




	 The recapitalization was provided in two steps: EUR 348 million in 2013 and EUR 243 million in 2014 when the final restructuring plan for
2

  merging with Banka Celje was approved. Banka Celje was recapitalized in 2014.




62
                                                                                                                         SLOVENIA




In addition to the capital support, EUR 4.866 million of distressed assets at book value (as
revised after the asset quality review) were taken from the banks’ balance sheets and trans-
ferred to the BAMC.3 The state further provided EUR 204 million in equity in the BAMC and
guaranteed the EUR 1.560 million in bonds issued by the BAMC to pay for the assets trans-
ferred. Within its first year of operations, the BAMC liquidated EUR 129 million of assets. By
December 2015 its portfolio, net of cash, decreased further to EUR 1.2 billion and the BAMC
was able to repay its first bond, issued to pay for the transferred assets, in the amount of
EUR 505 million.

A sovereign guarantee of EUR 1.030 million was given to the Bank of Slovenia for providing
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) to Faktor Banka and Probanka. Part of the guarantee of
EUR 428 million of was invoked and the state thereby effectively replaced the central bank
in providing liquidity in the wind-down process. As of February 2016 the remaining balance
sheets of Probanka and Faktor banka were merged with the BAMC.

Bail-in and state aid
In discussions preceding the recapitalization, European regulation clearly demanded that
shareholders and holders of subordinated and hybrid debt must contribute in full before
state aid could be granted. This implied a complete bail-in of all instruments except for depo-
sits and senior liabilities. Since the state and state-owned enterprises featured dominantly
on the liabilities’ side of the four major banks, the impact on the Slovenian public sector of
the equity write-down and the bail-in was profound. The remaining equity of the six banks
amounted to EUR 381 million, and the hybrid and subordinated debt to EUR 582 million.

Amendments to the Banking Act were enacted in the fall of 2013. The role model for the
respective with regard to resolution tools and bail-in, was the draft BRRD and the Spanish
resolution law (Law 9/2012 on the restructuring and resolution of credit entities). Amend-
ments were also made to comply with state aid rules to support measures in favor of banks in
the context of the financial crisis, contained in the EU Commission’s “Banking Communica-
tion” of August 1, 2013. This states that in cases where a bank no longer meets the minimum
capital requirements, subordinated debt must be written down or converted to equity before
state aid is granted. Furthermore, state aid must not be granted before equity, hybrid capital
and subordinated debt have fully contributed to offset any losses. The Banking Communica-
tion also states that before granting any kind of restructuring aid to a bank all capital-gene-
rating measures, including the conversion of junior debt, should be exhausted provided that
“fundamental rights are respected” and financial stability is not at risk.

Legal challenges
This all sounds pretty clear. However, the parties bailed-in questioned the legal grounds.
The parties launched a constitutional appeal concerning the amendments to the Banking
Act and the write-off of subordinated liabilities, claiming that it represented interference
with private property. At the time when expropriated shareholders and debt holders bought
their shares and bonds, possible future state aid was not conditional on prior loss absorbance
(“bail-in”) of shares and equity. Hence they claimed the actions taken violated the principle
of legitimate expectations as developed by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU)
and rejected the (retrospective) application of the burden sharing principles of the Banking
Communication in an administrative resolution procedure rather than actual liquidation

	 BAMC paid EUR 1,559 million for the EUR 4,866 million transferred from the banks or approximately 32 % of the book values. Detailed
3

  valuations performed by BAMC showed the transfer prices to be reasonably correct.




                                                                                                                                  63
SLOVENIA




(under a judicial bankruptcy procedure). The BRRD, adopted after this action had been taken
in Slovenia cannot be interpreted supporting this view. It provides for burden sharing of
creditors also with respect to liabilities which were entered into before the date of transposi-
tion of the directive into national legal systems (also under Article 55, which only applies to
cross border cases, contractual recognition clauses are not conditional for applying statutory
bail-in).

At the time of writing (September 2016) the jury is still out on this Slovenian legal bail-in
issue. The Constitutional Court in Ljubljana has, before issuing a final judgement, reques-
ted preliminary ruling from the CJEU. The CJEU in its July 2016 judgement4 noted that the
Banking Communication may not be binding on a Member State. Nevertheless, the CJEU is
clear in its opinion that (i) the Commission is authorized to adopt guidelines for assessing
the compatibility of Member States’ aid measures with the internal market; (ii) in adopting
such guidelines burden-sharing by shareholders and subordinated creditors as a prerequisite
to the authorization of state aid by the Commission is compatible with the internal market;
(iii) even if the subordinated creditors had not been called upon to contribute in the first
phases of the international financial crisis, this does not put them in a position to rely on
the principle of protection of legitimate expectations; and (iv) burden sharing (bail-in) when
required by the European Commission during state aid procedures, does not infringe funda-
mental rights of investors (right to property) when write down is based on valuation (rather
than on actual liquidation). The Court also notes that while a Member State may not be com-
pelled to impose burden-sharing by subordinated creditors prior to provision of state aid,
in not doing so it is taking a risk of incompatibility of measures with the internal market.
A final ruling by the Slovenian Constitutional Court is expected before the end of 2016.

Conclusions
How would the recapitalization process have been handled if the BRRD had been in place?
The four banks would most likely have been considered as “systemic” i.e. being in the public
interest under the new Directive (for details on the conditions for resolution see chapter 14,
FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). Whether Faktor Banka and Probanka would have been seen
as “systemic” is more questionable, but in 2013, given the fragility of the financial system at
the time, the conduct of the Slovenian government and the Bank of Slovenia towards orderly
wind-down seems warranted.

According to the BRRD, in circumstances of extraordinary systemic stress authorities may
provide public support to a bank under resolution instead of imposing losses in full on pri-
vate creditors, but only after the bank's shareholders and creditors have borne losses equiva-
lent to 8 % of the bank's liabilities (see chapters 15 and 21 FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).
The table below sets out the first approximation of the scope of ”bail-inable” instruments in
each of the banks, based on the end-2012 audited financial results.




	 Case C-526/14
4




64
                                                                                                                             SLOVENIA




Table 2: A hypothetical BRRD scenario


  	                                           Size of liabilities	         Equity	        8 % Liabilities	   “Bail-inable” liabilities
  	                                                              	               	                       	      (other than equity)
  NLB	                                                       11,487	          1,067	                  919	                         n/a
  NKBM	                                                       4,339	            193	                  347	                         155
  Abanka Vipa	                                                3,598	            169	                  288	                         119
  Banka Celje	                                                2,270	            158	                  182	                          24
  Probanka	                                                   1,059	             52	                   85	                          32
  Faktor banka	                                               1,028	             83	                   82	                         n/a
  Total for bail-in under BRRD	                                    	                	               1,902	


Figures in million EUR	   Source: Banks’ 2012 Audited Annual Reports; own calculations.




The table indicates that up to EUR 1,902 million of liabilities could have been bailed-in had
the BRRD already been in force. The largest portion of this amount refers to equity. Howe-
ver, it should be noted that the 2012 results overestimated the equity available and that this
had to be adjusted following the asset quality review undertaken in 2013. In fact, it is clear
from Table 1 that in 2013 only EUR 381 million of equity was available to cover the capital
shortfall. If the BRRD had been in force in 2013 in addition to state aid rules, bail-in under
the BRRD could have been applied and liabilities well beyond hybrid and subordinated inst-
ruments would have had to contribute to covering the capital shortfalls before any state aid
could have been contemplated, subject, of course, to the decision of the resolution authority
(see chapters 15 and 21, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). The considerable scope of senior
liabilities, however, suggests that none of the deposits would have been subject to bail-in.




                                                                                                                                     65
SPAIN




SPAIN
SAVINGS BANKS: RESOLUTION VIA PUBLIC RECAPITALIZATION,
THE CREATION OF AN ASSET MANAGEMENT VEHICLE AND BAIL-IN (2012)




Authors: María Guinot Barona and Alfonso Cárcamo Gil




Summary
The 2007 financial crisis triggered by the subprime mortgage crisis, together with the real
estate crash in Spain, and the subsequent sovereign debt crisis, exposed the weaknesses in
the capitalization of Spanish financial institutions. After domestic efforts to support and
restructure financial institutions proved insufficient (state aid of EUR 22.4 billion was pro-
vided), up to EUR 100 billion aid from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) was made
available (about EUR 41.3 billion has been used) and eight banking groups were recapitali-
zed via the public Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB), created in 2009. To mini-
mize public support part of the losses had to be borne by shareholders – who were almost
completely diluted – and by the holders of preference shares and subordinated debt (about
EUR 13.6 billion were generated through “Subordinated Liability Exercises” (SLE)). A liquidity
mechanism for “bailed-in” (retail) holders of subordinated debt financed by the DGS as well
as a less aggressive SLE scope has played a significant role to reduce litigation in resolution. A
private-public asset management vehicle (SAREB) was set up for the orderly winding down/
liquidation of real estate assets of EUR 51.8 billion within 15 years.

Background
After 15 years of growth and a considerable construction boom in Spain, domestic and exter-
nal factors since 2007 have had a significant impact which led the economy to fall deep into
recession and its financial sector to enter into crisis. The burst of the real estate bubble, the
increase in the ratio of non-performing loans, the fall in house prices, as well as huge lever-
aging, and excess risk taking, have raised banks’ capital and provisions needs.

Regulatory requirements, strengthened to avoid systemic risk and to ensure a more realistic
valuation of real estate assets, further increased capital requirements. Despite its systemi-
city, the financial crisis in Spain did not affect banks to the same extent as in other countries,
but was largely concentrated in saving banks, the so called “Cajas”. Commercial banks were
able to cover their capital requirements by their own private means and were not deeply
affected. But some “Cajas”, were unable to undertake recapitalization without public finan-
cial support due to their particular structural deficiencies – savings banks had an ownership
structure without formal shareholders, governed by both public and private stakeholders
without profit distribution – and had often displayed poor risk management and aggressive
lending behavior.

The Financial Sector Assistance Program
In 2009, the Government created the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB), a
100 % state owned public agency, responsible for managing the restructuring processes and




66
                                                                                                                                      SPAIN




channeling public aid to financial institutions. Between 2009 and 2012 the FROB injected
                                                                                      billion
around EUR 15 billion capital from the state budget into eight savings banks (EUR 0.9 ­
subscribing convertible preference shares, and EUR 13.5 subscribing common shares). The
Deposit Guarantee Fund provided an additional EUR 7.9 billion of public aid, basically
strengthening the capital of the Cajas.

In July 2012, the European Union approved a Spanish request for up to EUR 100 billion
financial support to recapitalize the financial sector – approximately 10 % of Spain’s GDP.
This support was provided by the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) under an 18-month
program established in the “Memorandum of Understanding on Financial Sector Policy Con-
ditionality” (MoU). Under this program, the ESM disbursed EUR 39.5 billion in ­       December
2012 and a further EUR 1.8 billion in February 2013. The majority of the funds were used for
the direct recapitalization of 10 banks via the FROB (subscribing common shares and conver-
tible contingent bonds (CoCos)) and EUR 2.5 billion for capitalizing SAREB, the public/private
asset management company (AMC) created in November 2012 to segregate and manage the
orderly disposal of assets related to the real estate sector over a period of 15 years. The pro-
gram was successfully completed in January 2013, with no extension of the initial deadline.
As of end-April 2016, the outstanding amount of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)
loan is 35.7 billion.1

The MoU imposed stringent conditions, based on three pillars:
–	An independent asset quality review and bank-by-bank stress test to identify, through a
  bottom-up exercise2, overall capital needs, followed by the implementation of the measu-
  res needed to address the shortfall, including bail-in of junior debt and public injections.
–	The segregation of the real estate portfolios of state-aided banks (real estate developers’
  loans and foreclosed assets) and their transfer to an external independent asset manage-
  ment company (SAREB).
–	The completion of reform of the financial sector’s legal framework to improve the resili-
  ence of banks, savings banks in particular, and to strengthen transparency and supervision.

The national legal framework for the implementation of these conditions took into account
the BRRD (then still under development). It allowed the FROB to apply mandatory bur-
den-sharing exercises and to impose losses on shareholders and on holders of hybrid capi-
tal and subordinated debt instruments, under the No Creditor Worse Off principle (see
chapter 20, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD). One of the conditions imposed by the MoU was
that, prior to receiving any public aid, the shareholders and the holders of hybrid instruments
and subordinated debt had to absorb losses to the greatest possible extent. Shareholders were
nearly wiped out in all the entities and the holders of preference shares and subordinated
debt absorbed losses under SLEs.

Moreover, the Government committed itself to improving the Spanish legal framework for
the financial sector, and a package of regulations have been approved in recent years to com-
ply with this condition. Especially remarkable are the measures introduced by Law 26/2013


1
 	 Government has reimbursed this amount with i) the amounts derived from the sale of the Banks under resolution (Catalunya Banc, NCG);
   ii) the repayment of CoCos (Liberbank); iii) the amount returned by CaixaBank in April 2013, arising from the assistance received by Banca
   Cívica before its integration into CaixaBank.
	 To be added to these figures are the EUR 1,304 million obtained from the divestment by BFA in Bankia. The FROB still is the main shareholder
   of two banks (Bankia and BMN).
2
 	 This exercise was preceded by a top-down assessment, which helped decide the total figure of the program.




                                                                                                                                          67
SPAIN




on Cajas (savings banks) and Law 10/2014 on Regulation, Supervision and Solvency of the
credit entities. Under the new regulation former savings banks (Cajas) have been redefined,
and their activities have been limited to their core territory and original function (which is a
kind of foundational and cooperative activity).

Bank Recapitalization and Restructuring
Restructuring institutions with public support was considered necessary to avoid a signifi-
cant adverse effect on the financial system, to prevent contagion, and also to protect deposi-
tors. In all cases, the resolution decision by the Bank of Spain was adopted on the basis of an
independent economic valuation of the assets and liabilities of the institution in question,
with respect to both going-concern and liquidation scenarios. This valuation assured the
proportionality of the measure and ensured shareholders’ and creditors’ treatment was no
worse than if the institution had been wound up under normal insolvency proceedings.

Stress tests of banks’ balance sheets assessed whether they would face capital shortfalls under
an adverse scenario, and if so, the amount of the shortfall. The stress tests identified capital
shortfalls totaling EUR 55.9 billion. Ten credit institutions were identified as undercapita-
lized, only two (Banco Popular and Ibercaja) met their capital requirements through capital
increases and without having to resort to state aid.

Banks were divided into four groups on the basis of the stress tests. Banks in Groups 1 and 2
were determined to need public support for their recapitalization, these included eight
entities or groups of former savings banks that were converted into normal commercial
banks to allow the implementation of recapitalization tools (BFA-Bankia, Catalunya Banc,
NCG Banco-Banco Gallego, Banco de Valencia, Banco Mare Nostrum, CEISS, Liberbank and
Caja 3). The European Commission approved resolution or restructuring plans for each of
them. These plans, which are expected to be completed by 2017, foresaw a comprehensive
range of measures to ensure the sustainability of the banks’ core activity, such as cost-cut-
ting both in staff and branches, lending restrictions (especially on new loans linked to real
estate developments), and limits on wholesale activity. The plans also defined and speci-
fied the mechanisms and amounts payable for recapitalization: public capital injections and
burden sharing exercises. Between December 2012 and February 2013, the FROB injected
EUR 38.8 billion through subscribing shares (EUR 37.7 billion) or contingent convertible
bonds (EUR 1.1 billion). The capital generated through burden sharing exercises affecting
holders of preference shares and subordinated debt amounted to EUR 13.6 billion.

To reduce the impact of burden sharing by taxpayers and investors, all state-aided banks
were obliged to transfer their most illiquid and impaired assets (Real Estate Development
loans and foreclosed real estate, above a certain value) to the SAREB, receiving as payment
government-guaranteed senior bonds issued by the SAREB itself. The total transfer value
of the assets segregated and transferred to SAREB was EUR 50.8 billion (at a media transfer
price of about 63 % of the asset’s book value).

Burden-sharing: Subordinated Liability Exercises (SLEs) in addition to public
recapitalization
One of the main commitments included in the MoU was the establishment of a rigorous legal
framework to conduct Subordinated Liability Exercises (SLEs). The result of these exercises
was that shareholders were almost completely wiped out. Holders of undated subordina-
ted debt and preference shares received common equity or equity-like instruments after a
haircut of the face value of their holdings (in an amount that was worth a non-negligible




68
                                                                                                                                          SPAIN




 Quantification of Public Financial Support - support provided/committed (mEUR)	


                                                                             FROB 1       FROB 2         Subsequent to Law 9/20121

                                                                 Preference debt
                                            CIDGS capital            instruments                                       Contingent
                          Date of the          and other         (participaciones                                     convertible
                          agreement        contributions2           preferentes)         Capital      Capital       bonds (CoCos)          Total

          CAIXA BANK	         2010	                      	                   977	              	              	                    	        977
          	                   2012	                      	                      	           998	              	                    	      5,498
          	                   2012	                      	                      	              	         4,500	                    	
          BBVA	               2010	                      	                   380	              	              	                    	        953
          	                   2011	                      	                      	           568	              	                    	
          	                   2012	                   953	                  -380	          -568	              	                    	
          	                   2010	                      	                 1,250	              	              	                    	     12,052
          	                   2011	                      	                      	         1,718	              	                    	
Group 0




          	                   2012	                      	                -1,250	         1,250	              	                    	
          	                   2012	                      	                      	              	         9,084	                    	
          IBERCAJA	           2012	                      	                      	              	                	               407	        407
          BANCO	              2011	                 5,249	                      	              	             	                     	      5,249
          SABADELL	           2013	                      	                      	              	          245	                     	        245
          UNICAJA	            2010	                      	                   525	              	                	                  	      1,129
          BANCO	              2013	                      	                      	              	                	               604	
          	                   2013	                      	                  -525	           525	                	                  	
          BANCO	              2010	                      	                   915	              	             	                     	      1,645
          MARE	               2012	                      	                      	              	          730	                     	
          NOSTRUM	            2013	                      	                  -915	           915	             	                     	
          BFA	                2010	                      	                 4,465	              	             	                     	     22,424
Group 1




          	                   2012	                      	                -4,465	         4,465	             	                     	
          	                   2012	                      	                      	              	       17,959	                     	
          NCG BANCO 	         2010	                      	                 1,162	              	              	                    	      9,052
          NOVACAIXA	          2011	                      	                      	         2,465	              	                    	
          GALICIA	            2012	                      	                -1,162	         1,162	              	                    	
          	                   2012	                      	                      	              	         5,425	                    	
          LIBERBANK	          2009	                 1,740	                      	              	                	                  	      1,740
Group 2




          	                   2012	                      	                      	              	                	               124	        124

          	                     	                  7,942	                   977	        13,498	       37,943	                1,135	      61,495
Group 1




          BFA	              2010 and	                    	                      	              	       15,638
          Bankia1	            2012


 1
  	 Contributions of EUR 38,833 million, made under the Financial Support Programme: EUR 37,943 million in capital contributions
    subsequent to Law 9/2012, plus EUR 1,135 million in contingent convertible bonds, less EUR 245 million in capital contributions
    to Banco Gallego that were not from ESM funds.
 2
  	 The Credit Institution Deposit Guarantee Scheme (CIDGS) receives from its member banks annual contributions
    that depend on the deposits they have attracted.
 3
  	 Restructuring support to Bankia, subsidiary of the BFA group (this support is already considered in the above table,
    under “Institutions included in BFA”)

                                                             Source: Banco de España, based on http://www.frob.es/es/Documents/presbe2016_41en.pdf




                                                                                                                                              69
SPAIN




fraction of the face value of their holdings). The holders of dated subordinated instruments
were able to choose between receiving equity or senior debt after a haircut of the face value
of their holdings.

This gave rise to unprecedented legal challenges regarding the retrospective application of
the new mechanism to instruments previously issued, the breach of the hierarchy between
creditors, and the infringement of the right of hearing in the resolution process. This was
resolved by linking the definition of resolution that might trigger those SLEs to the pre-exis-
ting Spanish insolvency legislation, which was clearly outlined in all investors' initial pros-
pectuses or contracts.

In conclusion, the resolution framework was designed as a special regime and more benefi-
cial to investors than the ordinary rules of insolvency, thus reducing litigation and allowing
the FROB to act with a margin of safety in compliance with the aforementioned No Creditor
Worse Off principle.

Capital generated through burden sharing exercises (million Euro)


                               Initial     Initial         Initial   Purchase price    Purchase price     Capital
                         outstanding     discount       discount         (exchange         (exchange    generated
     Credit entity        (nominal)                  (% nominal)        for capital)        for debt)
     BFA Bankia                 6,911       1,817            26 %              4,852              242       6,669
     NCg                        2,047         604            30 %              1,355               88       1,959
     CatalunyaBanc              1,818         457            25 %              1,218              142       1,676
     Liberbank                    866          63             7%                 787               16         850
     CEISS                      1,433         274            19 %              1,159                0       1,433
     Caja3                         91          35            39 %                  9               47          44
     BMN                          449         116            26 %                309               24         425
     Banco Gallego                192          45            23 %                122               25         176
     Banco de Valencia            416         357            86 %                 59                0         416
     Total                    14,223        3,768           27 %              9,870              584      13,648


Source: FROB




Loss absorption by Retail Investors
A remarkable feature in Spain was that the majority of holders of preference shares and sub-
ordinated debt holders of the Cajas were individuals, more traditionally linked to savings
products (similar to household bond holders in Italy. See Italian case study). This raised the
possibility of potentially large numbers of claims and complaints related to the mis-sel-
ling of products affected by bail-in. With this in mind, the measures implemented ensured
the effectiveness of SLEs and thereby reassured customers. Internal arbitration procedures,
based on previous court rulings, were drawn up by the Government for Catalunya Banc,
NCG Bank, and Bankia, and a similar mechanism for reviewing financial product sales was
created for Banco CEISS. Ultimately the number of legal claims could be reduced and 63 %
of retail investors’ either did not claim or settled their claims in non-judicial litigations
proceedings.




70
                                                                                            SPAIN




As part of SLEs and in case of unlisted banks (e.g. Catalunya Bank and NCG), a liquidity
mechanism was established for the conversion of former holders of hybrid instruments into
shareholders. This liquidity mechanism was financed by the Deposit Guarantee Fund (DGF)
which offered to buy shares from converted retail holders at a discount. As a result, the DGF
became the shareholder and bought shares up to EUR 1.8 billion. This mechanism in combi-
nation with a less aggressive SLE design i.e. one limited to preferential shares and subordina-
ted debt, was effective at reducing litigation. The SLEs allowed a significant part of the initial
value held to be converted into new debt or capital instruments and thus avoided a large
“haircut”. These measures enabled credit institutions to absorb the impacts of litigations,
without the need for further state aid, and through their own capacity to generate capital
organically via conversion.

Resolution of BFA-Bankia
The case of BFA-Bankia merits specific mention due to the amount of money involved – its
capital shortfall, after the relevant stress test, was set at EUR 24.74 billion – as well as its
systemic nature for the Spanish financial sector.

In December 2012, the FROB determined the economic values of both Bankia and its parent
company BFA based on reports commissioned from three independent experts. The econo-
mic valuation of the BFA Group fixed by the FROB on the basis of the experts valuations was
EUR -10.44 billion, whilst that of the listed bank Bankia was EUR -4.15 billion. In the event
of a liquidation the negative value determined by the same experts would have increased to
EUR -64.02 billion, so resolution was objectively justified in terms of public interest.

BFA-Bankia received a capital injection of EUR 18 billion via FROB and transferred “bad”
assets valued at EUR 22.3 billion to SAREB (representing nearly half of SAREB’s portfolio).
The FROB also demanded the issuance of contingent convertible bonds by Bankia without a
preferential subscription right amounting to EUR 10.7 billion, which were subscribed by BFA
(owned by FROB). These bonds were supposed to temporarily cover the capital shortfall in
Bankia and their repayment period was up to 5 years.

In April 2013, FROB completed the recapitalization of BFA-Bankia, adopting the following
measures: 1) a reduction in capital for loss-absorption that meant reducing the nominal
value of the existing shares from their then value of EUR 2 down to EUR 0.01; 2) following
the capital reduction, in order to reduce the number of shares outstanding and, especially,
to allow the shares to trade at an appropriate price, a counter-split or bundling of shares
was carried out to return the nominal value of the shares to EUR 2 ; and 3) an initial capital
increase, underwritten by the FROB through BFA, followed by a second capital increase so
that holders of the group’s preference shares and subordinated debt could be brought into
Bankia’s capital. By early 2015 the nominal value of a share had been reduced to EUR 0.8,
with FROB still owning 64 % of Bankia.

It should be noted that this percentage share has increased due to court rulings regarding
hybrid instruments claims. The Courts have ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in approximately
85 % of cases of mis-selling, which means the holders could recover their full investment.

Litigation
Although a high level of litigation was expected, the margin of safety with which the resolu-
tion actions were designed and implemented, vis-à-vis the results of any given liquidation
scenario (NCWOL), actually led to very few lawsuits challenging administrative decisions.




                                                                                                71
SPAIN




The FROB, in particular, has been sued fewer than thirty times, a relatively low number when
compared to the more than one million people affected by its decisions.

And while at the time of writing (2016) some of these lawsuits are still pending, the first
judgements have validated the initial decisions on the restructuring process. In April and
May 2016, the Audiencia Nacional has found in various cases that FROB’s measures regarding
shareholders and holders of preference shares and subordinated debt, were not expropri-
atory and fully complied with the legislation in force at the time – setting a clear precedent.

However, the Supreme Court recently found that information contained in the prospectus
registered for the issuing of Bankia shares was not accurate for retail investors, and, as a
consequence, has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in two cases. Subsequently, to avoid further
judicial claims, for the case of the civil proceedings relating to the initial public offering of
Bankia shares, the entity is returning the money to all individuals who subscribed through a
private mechanism.

Conclusions
The Spanish experience allows to draw certain lessons and conclusions relevant also for
future resolution cases under the newly established BRRD framework:

–	The transition from a bail-out to a bail-in scheme requires a learning period to minimize
  litigation risk. In Spain, this learning curve resulted in the implementation of a less aggres-
  sive SLE scope, i.e. preferential shares and subordinated debt. Law 11/2015 on recovery
  and resolution foresees that the bail-in could affect any creditor, except deposits guaran-
  teed by the Deposit Guarantee Fund, but the measure has not yet been applied in practice.
–	As resolution actions need to be implemented in a short period of time, legal and proce-
  dural safeguards–particularly, the permanent judicial control during the actions- cannot
  be the same as in an ordinary insolvency procedure. Administrative resolution powers are
  more dynamic than processes foreseen during the ordinary functioning of a company as
  board meetings and general assembly decisions are ex-lege substituted by administrative
  decisions.
–	The judicial process and audited accounts must be replaced by independent valuations
  and the right to appeal each administrative (FROB) decision. The ordinary insolvency pro-
  cedure requires audited financial statements which is not compatible with the need for
  taking quick resolution action under BRRD, which provides for independent expert valua-
  tion to be carried out in a short time frame (possibly even within 24/48 hours).
–	Resolution authorities must act with a clear safety margin between resolution and insol-
  vency scenarios, so that those affected by their decisions have no arguments to challenge
  them.
–	Flexibility in the process of resolution and an appropriate balance between public and pri-
  vate contributions minimize legal risks and preserve the stability and effectiveness of the
  capitalization tools.
–	An adequate balance between state aid rules and re-privatisation is needed. Some flexi-
  bility, in terms of timing for the sale of publicly-owned shares, should be given to the
  resolution authority to minimize the cost for the taxpayer.

Relevant Sources
Royal Decree-Law 24/2012 on restructuring and resolution of credit institutions, passed by
Parliament as Law 9/2012 on November 14.




72
                                                                                                                                    THE UK




THE UNITED KINGDOM
UK CO-OPERATIVE BANK: RESOLUTION VIA NEGOTIATED BAIL-IN
OUTSIDE THE BRRD (2013)




Author: Barney Reynolds




Summary
The UK Co-operative Bank was recapitalized via a commercially negotiated consensual
bail-in arrangement supported by retail investor groups. A “consensual bail-in” also known
as liability management exercise (LME) can provide a commercial solution to the problem of
a failing financial institution which, because it operates outside of the constraints of a sta-
tutory resolution, has certain advantages to it. Certainty of ownership rights in particular is
more achievable if the creditors of the financial institution agree to the proposed conversion
of their rights. Certain key issues will still require consideration but are not insurmountable.
The inclusion of consensual bail-in in a firm's recovery plan should, where appropriate, be
contemplated by national regulators and resolution authorities.

Background
A resolution authority can take resolution steps under the BRRD only if there is no reasonable
prospect of private sector measures preventing a financial institution from failing within a
reasonable timeframe. Where private sector measures are available, the institution cannot be
deemed “no longer viable”, even if the quantitative triggers for non-viability are met, making
the exercise of write-down/conversion powers by the authorities outside of resolution not
possible either (see chapters 13 and 14, FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).1

The BRRD does not state how far the requirement to prefer private sector measures extends.2
Before any resolution action is taken, a resolution authority would need to be satisfied that
private investors are unwilling or unable to recapitalize the institution, and that negotia-
tions with shareholders on dilution of their equity, and creditors on voluntary conversion of
their claims, have failed. In practice, a national regulator could also use its early intervention
powers to require a failing institution to consider a commercially negotiated bail-in without
specifying the terms of the restructuring.3




1
 	 BRRD, Articles 59(3)(b), (c) and (d) and Article 59(4). With regard to Article 59(3)(e), it should be noted that, under the 2013 Banking
   Communication of the European Commission, private capital solutions must be exhausted before state aid can be used for the purposes
   of recapitalization.
2
 	 BRRD, Recital 23 states that a resolution authority should consider the effectiveness of any early intervention measures that have been
   imposed.
3
 	 According to BRRD, Article 27(1)(e), a national regulator may require the management to draw up a plan for negotiation on restructuring
   of debt with some or all of the creditors.




                                                                                                                                          73
THE UK




An advantage of a commercially negotiated consensual bail-in is that it operates outside the
legal constraints imposed under the BRRD.4 It can be managed by the institution rather than
subject to the decisions of resolution authorities, but still meets the same core objectives of
a resolution action by keeping the financial institution operational, protecting retail custo-
mers, ensuring financial stability and avoiding the use of public funds (see chapters 3 and 4,
FinSAC Guidebook to the BRRD).

The Experience of the Co-operative Bank
The first creditor bail-in of a UK bank took place prior to implementation of the BRRD but
against a backdrop of UK legislation5 that permitted effectively the same actions. It was a
commercially negotiated consensual arrangement supported by retail investor groups that
provided for the recapitalization of the Co-operative Bank (the "Co-op").

Following the Co-op’s announcement on June 17, 2013, of its capital shortfall, the Pruden-
tial Regulation Authority (PRA) required the Co-op to raise £ 1.5 billion of further Com-
mon Equity Tier 1 capital by the end of 2013. The Co-op published its proposed recapita-
lization plan in June 2013, which was to be effected through an exchange offer. However,
by failing to provide bondholders with sufficient information about the proposed exchange
offer and related capital-raising, the Co-op was unable to secure bondholder support for its
proposed recapitalization plan. In October 2013, the Bank engaged with the bondholders
in lengthy negotiations regarding the terms of a revised plan. The terms provided that the
Lower Tier 2 bondholders (LT2 bondholders) would receive 70 % of the shares in the Co-op
plus £ 100 million in principal amount of newly issued Tier 2 securities, while the bank’s
parent, The Co-operative Group, retained a 30 % equity stake. The LT2 bondholders injected
£ 125 million capital into the Co-op. The consensual bail-in and rights offering was effected
through a UK Scheme of Arrangement under the Companies Act 2006, Part 26. The Scheme
was subject to court sanction and had to be agreed by a numerical majority, representing at
least 75 % in value, of each class of scheme creditors. The PRA also had to approve the plan.

This innovative restructuring put the Co-op on a sound financial footing. It was a
market-based solution agreed expeditiously between the bondholders and the bank.
­

Advantages and Issues of Consensual Bail-In
Consensual bail-in raises some key issues that require careful consideration. Practicalities
such as valuation, confidentiality, and access to and sharing of key data need to be worked
through. Most of the same issues would arise during a resolution. Consideration should be
given to any insider dealing issues and the duties of directors to creditors – uncertain in
many legal systems against the backdrop of regulatory capital or liquidity shortfalls as oppo-
sed to insolvency. Existing shareholders may potentially need to buy back into the equity
if the value of the institution means that this equity is effectively worthless and should be
treated as wiped out. Such issues are, however, not insurmountable.

The consensual bail-in route has the advantage, however, of not being subject to the tight
time constraints that a resolution imposes. As the financial institution remains a going

4
 	 For a discussion of the legal constraints to resolution under the BRRD see “Legal Constraints on resolution measures and the application of
   the bail-in tool under BRRD and SMR”, Dr. Axel Kunde, Single Resolution Board, presented at the European Central Bank Conference held
   on September 1 and 2, 2015.
5
 	 The UK Banking Act 2009 provided for the resolution of a bank according to a special resolution regime that included (and still does) many
   of the same resolution options available under the BRRD such as transfer to a bridge bank. There was no explicit provision for bail-in.




74
                                                                                                   THE UK




concern at all times, certain disadvantages can be avoided, such as a bank run or any mora-
torium on activities that the entity may carry out (although the regulator may separately
impose certain requirements if deemed necessary).

Conclusions
Consensual bail-in is potentially more favorable than bail-in within resolution in terms of
certainty of ownership rights. If the financial institution's creditors do not support a pro-
posed conversion of their rights, litigation is likely to ensue. Further, any resolution which
is based on the use of funds from a resolution fund is potentially subject to legal challenge
through the European courts. Under European laws, advances from resolution funds con-
stitute state aid. Resolution of a financial institution that is imposed on a non-consensual
basis is therefore open to a multitude of lawsuits. For example, litigation resulted from the
resolution action taken for Banco Espirito Santo (Portugal), SNS Reaal and SNS Bank (the
Netherlands) and Hypo Alpe Adria/Heta (Austria).

National regulators and resolution authorities should consider whether the specific circum-
stances of a financial institution warrant the inclusion of a negotiated bail-in as a recovery
option within the institution's recovery plan.6

Relevant Sources
–	UK Banking Act 2009
–	UK Companies Act 2006, Part 26
–	UK Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
–	"Legal Constraints on resolution measures and the application of the bail-in tool under
  BRRD and SRMR", Dr. Axel Kunde, Single Resolution Board, presented at the European
  Central Bank Conference held on 1 and 2 September 2015




	 This is anticipated by the BRRD through the early intervention rules, see BRRD, Article 27(1).
6




                                                                                                      75
AUTHORS




AUTHORS

ANDERSEN, JENS VERNER, DEPUTY CEO, CFO, DANISH FINANCIAL STABILITY COMPANY
Jens is responsible for finance and accounting issues related to the Financial Stability Com-
pany’s (FSC’s) main objective: resolution of weak financial institutions. Since joining FSC in
2009 he has been involved in the take-over and divestment of more than ten financial insti-
tutions. The main tasks are related to both conceptual and practical issues such as configu-
ration of resolution plans for Danish financial institutions, set-up of the Resolution Fund,
management of the Deposit and Guarantee Fund and divestment of previously acquired real
estate and securities that are currently offered for sale. Jens additionally holds the group
CFO responsibility and is thus responsible for safeguarding FSC’s financial resources, group
financial statements, asset and financial management of the Guarantee Fund and the Reso-
lution Fund. Moreover, he is CEO of the FSC’s main subsidiaries including Andelskassen JAK
Slagelse under control.

Jens previously worked for eight years for the Danish Central Bank, holding various posi-
tions. In his last job, as Head of Government Debt Management, he worked mainly with
risk management and funding strategies for the Danish Treasury. Jens worked as Financial
Advisor at the OECD in Paris as from 2001 to 2003. Jens holds a master degree in Economics
from the University of Aarhus.


CÁRCAMO, ALFONSO, GENERAL COUNSEL, BANCO MARE NOSTRUM SA (BMN)
Alfonso has more than 13 years of professional experience acquired in a combination of pub-
lic national entities and private companies. He is currently the General Counsel of Banco
Mare Nostrum SA (BMN), but before this he was working for three years in the Fondo de
Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB), the national banking resolution entity in Spain.
At the FROB, as its General Counsel, he was responsible of all the legal issues related to the
Spanish banking restructuring process. Prior to this, he worked for three years as General
Counsel in the Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores (CNMV), the markets and securities
supervisor in Spain where he was in charge of all the legal areas including IPOs, Takeovers,
Issuances, Investor’s Protection, Mifid.


GARCIA, ANA RITA, LEGAL EXPERT, BANCO DE PORTUGAL/RESOLUTION UNIT
Ana Rita works as a legal expert in the Resolution Unit of Banco de Portugal, with a particular
focus on matters related to bail-in, MREL and state aid. She was part of the team that over-
saw the implementation of resolution measures to Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. in 2014, and to
BANIF – Banco Internacional do Funchal, S.A. in 2015.

Ana Rita studied law at the University of Coimbra and holds a Master Degree in Criminal
Law. In 2014, she completed a Postgraduate Course on Financial Markets at the Institute for
Economic, Financial and Tax Law of the Faculty of Law of the University of Lisbon.


GKLEZAKOU, TRIANTAFYLLIA, RESOLUTION ANALYST, BANK OF GREECE
Triantafyllia has been working in the Resolution Department of the Bank of Greece (desig-
nated Greek national resolution authority) since 2012. She has been engaged in numerous




76
                                                                                       AUTHORS




Greek bank resolutions and has built solid experience, assisting with the preparation and
implementation of resolution measures (resolution plans, ex-post and ex-ante valuations,
drafting of legal decisions etc.). Currently, she is actively involved in the regulatory and
policy tasks related to the implementation of BRRD and SRM in Greece. She follows closely
developments in the European banking regulatory framework and participates in relevant
working groups.

She served as a member of the SRM Regulation negotiating and drafting team during the
2014 Greek presidency of the Council of the European Union and she contributed to the
preparation of policy notes and compromise texts for the political and technical trilogies
between the Council, the European Parliament and the European Commission in the course
of the negotiations. Triantafyllia has previously worked as an auditor and financial analyst.
She studied Economics and Banking & Finance and is currently performing research in the
area of banking.


GUINOT BARONA, MARÍA, STATE ATTORNEY AND LAWYER
María is a State Attorney and partner of one of the leading legal firms in Spain, CMS Albiñana
and Suárez de Lezo. She possesses vast professional experience in all fields related to Public
Authorities and Regulated Sectors (Finance, Energy, Telecommunications, and Infrastructure).

In the banking and finance sector, she advises credit institutions and other supervised or
regulated entities on aspects related to the performance of their activity, relations with regu-
latory and supervisory bodies. Specifically, she advises leading banks on regulatory compli-
ance, solvency, organization and discipline, as well as codes of conduct.

Maria began her professional career as a State Attorney, representing and defending the State
in civil, criminal, contentious-administrative and labor cases. Until 2012 she was the Chief
State Attorney for the Community of Valencia. In 2012 she was appointed as Deputy State
Attorney in the Secretariat of State for Budgets and Expenditure at the Ministry of Finance
and Public Administrations before moving on to work for the Fund for Orderly Bank Rest-
ructuring (FROB). Within these roles she was actively involved in the process of restructuring
the Spanish banking sector, assisting in the design and implementation of the Settlement
and Restructuring Plan for banking entities receiving public aid, as well as the formation
and running of the Management Company for Assets Arising from the Banking Sector Reor-
ganization (Sareb).

She was previously Chief Coordinator of Legal Aid Agreements entered into by the State
Legal Office-Directorate for State Legal Services and the State-owned Industrial Holding
Company (SEPI), and has held the position of Secretary and Advisor in several state-owned
entities. Additionally, she has served as speaker for the Central Administrative Tribunal of
Contractual Appeals and the Regional Economic-Administrative Tribunal of the Commu-
nity of Valencia.


PROF. DR. HAENTJENS, MATTHIAS, PROFESSOR OF FINANCIAL LAW
Matthias is full professor (chair) of financial law and director of the Hazelhoff Centre for
Financial Law at Leiden University. He teaches and publishes nationally and internatio-
nally on European banking law, insolvency law and on private international law. He is also
a deputy judge in the District Court of Amsterdam and a certified expert to the European




                                                                                             77
AUTHORS




Commission. Prior to joining Leiden University in 2012, Matthias was an attorney with De
Brauw Blackstone Westbroek. In this capacity, he handled cases both as an international
transaction lawyer and as a (supreme court) litigator.

Matthias studied Greek and Latin at the University of Amsterdam (BA cum laude), and
obtained his Master degree in 2001. He became a teacher of classics, but subsequently
obtained a Master degree in Law (cum laude) in 2003, also at the University of Amsterdam.
He obtained his PhD at the University of Amsterdam in 2007 and was a visiting scholar at
Université de Paris II (Panthéon-Assas), Harvard Law School and New York University School
of Law.

Key publications include: EU Banking and Insurance Insolvency (2nd ed., with G. Moss QC
and B. Wessels), (forthcoming); Research Handbook on Crisis Management in the Banking
Sector (M. Haentjens and B. Wessels eds.), 2015; European Banking and Financial Law (with
P. de Gioia Carabellese), 2015; Harmonisation of Securities Law: Custody and Transfer of
Securities in European Private Law, 2007.


LINCOLN, JOHANNA, CONSULTANT, THE WORLD BANK/FINANCIAL SECTOR
ADVISORY CENTER (FINSAC)
Johanna Lincoln joined the World Bank in Vienna in 2013. Her work focuses on private and
financial sector in Europe and Central Asia.

Prior to joining the World Bank, she worked as an Investment Banker at HSBC on various
equity and debt capital market transactions and strategic alternatives.

Before this, she worked as an Actuarial Associate for Towers Perrin in London and advised
FTSE 100 companies on their pension and benefit schemes. Johanna started her career in
the financial valuation department of Deloitte Corporate Finance in Paris and at Pricewater-
houseCoopers in Mauritius.

She holds a Master in Finance with Merit from the London School of Economics and a Master
in Economics and Management from the Université Paris Dauphine. Johanna is a Licensed
Investment Professional by the French Financial Market Authority and completed the Char-
tered Financial Analyst (CFA) program.


LINTNER, PAMELA, SENIOR FINANCIAL SECTOR SPECIALIST,
THE WORLD BANK/FINANCIAL SECTOR ADVISORY CENTER (FINSAC)
Pamela is a legal expert specialized in European financial services regulatory policy. She pro-
vides consulting on the establishment and enhancement of bank recovery and resolution
frameworks in FinSAC’s client countries in line with international best practice and with a
focus on BRRD alignment and home/host issues.

In her previous roles for the Austrian central bank (OeNB) Pamela headed the on-site inspec-
tions for the licensing process for the Austrian Central Counterparty (CCP.A) in 2014, and
represented the OeNB in several technical fora at the ECB and the European Commission.
Before that she applied her expert knowledge, including on CRD IV, crisis management,
deposit guarantee schemes, and MiFID, from a different angle at the Austrian Bankers Asso-
ciation where she also participated in respective EBF working groups. In her prior work at the




78
                                                                                        AUTHORS




Austrian Ministry of Finance she led the national delegation of the Council Working Group
on the Payment Services Directive and supported the Austrian Presidency of the European
Council in 2006.

Pamela studied law at the Universities of Linz, Vienna and Madrid and received a research
scholarship at the European Institute of Public Administration (EIPA)/Maastricht in 2004.
She holds a PhD from University of Linz.


MAVKO, MITJA, ADVISOR TO THE DIRECTOR, THE EUROPEAN BANK OF
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT (EBRD)
Mitja is responsible for relations between the EBRD and Slovenia and as such deals with all
projects, policies and institutional affairs of the Bank. He previously served as State Secretary
at the Ministry of Finance of Slovenia and was responsible for the financial system, treasury
operations, international affairs, state-owned enterprises and public procurement. He was
also a Non-Executive Director of the Slovenian Bank Asset Management Company (BAMC),
member of the Economic and Financial Committee of the EU (EFC) and served on Board of
the European Stability Mechanism.

Prior to becoming State Secretary, from 2001 he covered international relations in the
domain of the Finance Ministry. In 2009 he became Head of the International Finance
Department. His main obligations included relations with international financial institu-
tions, EU affairs under the competence of the Ministry of Finance and international develop-
ment cooperation.

Mitja holds an MA in Economics from the University of Ljubljana, Slovenia.


MARIA MAVRIDOU, DIRECTOR, RESOLUTION DEPARTMENT, BANK OF GREECE
Maria is the Director of Resolution Department which was established in March 2012. During
the period, March 2012 to end December 2015, her role involved the oversight and manage-
ment of the preparation process and due application of resolutions tools to 12 domestic cre-
dit institutions. With the transposition of BBRD in August 2015 and the entry into force of
SRM in beginning of 2016, currently the Department is focusing on implementing the new
framework, and particularly the drafting of resolution plans.

Since early 2015, she is a member of the Plenary Session of the SRB. Maria joined the Bank
of Greece in 1984. Previous roles include in Financial Stability Department, focusing on
the development of tools to efficiently monitor and assess financial stability issues, and in
Financial Operations Department, as Deputy Head of the Risk Management Office, analyst
and trader. During the Greek Presidency of the Council of European Union, she served as
President of the Ad hoc Working Party on Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) and was hea-
vily involved in the negotiations on the SRM Regulation among the European Council, the
European Parliament and the European Commission.

Maria studied Economics at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and received an MSc in
Project Analysis, Finance and Investment from University of York and an MSc in Statistics
from Athens University of Economics and Business.




                                                                                              79
AUTHORS




MERLER, SILVIA, SCHOLAR, BRUEGEL
Silvia is Affiliate Fellow at Bruegel, Brussels Economic Think Tank, and PhD student in Euro-
pean and Eurasian Studies at SAIS Johns Hopkins (Washington DC).

Her main research interests include international macro and financial economics, central
banking and EU institutions and European economic policy. At Bruegel, she has been writing
on various aspects of the sovereign-banking crisis, on monetary policy, on macroeconomic
imbalances and adjustment as well as on the dynamics of capital flows in the euro area.
Before joining Bruegel, Silvia worked as Economic Analyst in DG Economic and Financial
Affairs of the European Commission (ECFIN). There she focused on macro-financial stability
as well as financial assistance and stability mechanisms, in particular on the European Stabi-
lity Mechanism (ESM), providing supportive analysis for the policy negotiations.

Silvia holds a MSc in Economics and Social Sciences from Bocconi University in Milan and
graduated in 2011 with a thesis on Current Account Imbalances within the euro area. She
obtained a BA in Economics and Social Sciences from the same university in 2008, with a
thesis on Ukraine and Moldova in the European Neighborhood Policy.


MICHAELIDES, ALEXANDER, PROFESSOR OF FINANCE, IMPERIAL COLLEGE
BUSINESS SCHOOL
Alexander is Head of the Department of Finance, and a Research Fellow at the Centre for Eco-
nomic Policy Research (International Macroeconomics and Financial Economics programs).
His research interests include household finance (for example, portfolio choice over the life
cycle), asset pricing with heterogeneous agents and financial frictions, housing markets and
topics in the intersection of macroeconomics and finance.

Alexander was previously a lecturer (2001–2006) and associate professor (2006–2010) at
the Department of Economics, London School of Economics, and a professor of finance at
the Department of Public and Business Administration, University of Cyprus in 2010–2014.
Before that he was lecturer (1998–2000) and assistant professor (2000–2001) at the Depart-
ment of Economics, University of Cyprus.

He has held visiting scholar positions at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, was a Wim Duisenberg Research Fellow at the
European Central Bank (2012) and a senior researcher at the Central Bank of Cyprus (2009–
2010). Between May 2013 and November 2013 he was a non-executive member of the Board
of Directors of the Central Bank of Cyprus. His research has appeared in top scientific jour-
nals and he co-edited a book entitled “The Cyprus Bail-in” with Athanasios Orphanides pub-
lished in 2016.

He holds a Ph.D. in Economics from Princeton University (1997) and a B.A. in Economics
from Harvard (1993).


NYBERG, LARS, FORMER RIKSBANK
Lars has held positions as Executive Vice President in two commercial Swedish banks,
­
Handelsbanken and Swedbank. During the Swedish banking crisis of 1991–1993, he was the
deputy CEO of Föreningsbanken, and as such deeply involved in restructuring and recapita-
lizing the bank, including establishing its asset management company.




80
                                                                                      AUTHORS




Between 1999 and 2011 Lars was Deputy Governor of the Swedish Central Bank (­ Riksbanken).
He was a member of the board of the Swedish Financial Services Authority for 12 years, star-
ting 2000. He chaired for a number of years the ECB Task Force on Crisis Management. He
was a member of the de LaRoisière group, set up by the EU Commission to develop guidelines
for monitoring the European financial sector after the crisis which began in 2008. He also
chaired the EFC High Level Working Group that drew the policy conclusions from the crisis.
Between 2013 and 2015, Lars was chairman of the Slovenian asset management company,
BAMC. At present, he is among other things a board member of the Nasdaq-OMX Clearing AB.

Lars has a PhD in Economics from the Stockholm School of Economics.


RASCHAUER, NICOLAS, PROPTER HOMINES CHAIR FOR BANKING AND FINANCIAL
MARKETS LAW, UNIVERSITY OF LIECHTENSTEIN
Since July 2016, Nicolas holds the Propter Homines Chair for Banking and Finan-
cial Markets Law at the Liechtenstein House of Finance, University of Liechtenstein,
Vaduz. His current areas of research include on payment services, Fintechs and the new
EC-Anti-Money-Laundering-Directive.

Prior to this, from 2014, Nicolas worked as Of Counsel at Cerha Hempel Spiegelfeld Hlawati
Attorneys-at-Law, Vienna. His key activities were European Law and Austrian Administrative
Law. From 2009 to 2014, Nicolas held a chair for Public and Economic Law at Johannes Kep-
ler University of Linz where he focused on Financial Markets Law, Environmental Law and
Data Protection Law in Austria and Europe.

Nicolas studied law at the universities of Salzburg and Vienna before joining the Austrian
Financial Market Authority in 2002. From 2003 till 2008 he worked as Assistant Professor at
the Vienna University of Economics, Institute for Public Law. In December 2008, he qualified
as a professor for constitutional law, administrative law and European Law.

REYNOLDS, BARNEY, PARTNER, SHEARMAN & STERLING LLP
Barney is head of the global Financial Institutions Advisory & Financial Regulatory team and
co-head of Financial Institutions at the firm. He advises the full range of financial market
participants on their businesses in the London and European markets. His practice focu-
ses on financial institution law and regulation and legal risk management, national and
cross-border.

Barney has been involved in all significant recent Greek bank recapitalizations, including
advising Piraeus Bank on its EUR 4.9 billion recapitalization, Eurobank on its EUR 2 billion
recapitalization and the bondholders on the recapitalization of the National Bank of Greece.
He also advised the Lower Tier 2 bondholders on the first ever creditor bail-in of a UK bank
without taxpayer support in acquiring 70 % of shares in The Co-operative Bank, in connec-
tion with the bank’s £ 1.5 billion recapitalization plan; as well as a consortium of subordina-
ted bondholders on the Bank of Portugal’s decision to place Banco Espirito Santo (BES) into
“resolution”. Barney continues to advise on the implementation and impact of the EU/UK
regulatory reforms and how local initiatives fit into the global regulatory architecture, such
as MiFID II, regulatory capital, recovery & resolution planning and bank structural reforms
(ring-fencing).




                                                                                             81
AUTHORS




SCHROEDER, SUSAN, CONSULTANT, THE WORLD BANK/FINANCIAL SECTOR
ADVISORY CENTER (FINSAC)
Susan works with the FinSAC team to produce written content for FinSAC's website, publicity
materials and specialist publications in support of the Center’s activities.

As a member of the British diplomatic service, Susan lived and worked in many countries in
a range of foreign policy roles including political, economic, trade, press and public affairs.


TEO, ELLERINA, ASSOCIATE, SHEARMAN & STERLING LLP
Ellerina is an associate in the Financial Institutions Advisory & Financial Regulatory team at
the firm. She was the lead regulatory associate on recent significant Greek bank recapitaliza-
tions, including advising Piraeus Bank on its EUR 4.9 billion recapitalization and Eurobank
on its EUR 2 billion recapitalization. She was also the lead regulatory associate advising
Lower Tier 2 bondholders, on the first ever creditor bail-in of a UK bank without taxpayer
support, in acquiring 70 % of shares in The Co-operative Bank in connection with the bank’s
£ 1.5 billion recapitalization plan.

Ellerina advises the full range of financial market participants on their businesses in the
London and European markets and on the implementation and impact of the EU/UK regula-
tory reforms, including MiFID II, EMIR, recovery & resolution planning and bank structural
reforms.


THEODOSSIOU, AIKATERINI, DEPUTY HEAD OF REGULATORY FRAMEWORK SECTION,
BANK OF GREECE
Since 2013, Katerina serves in the Resolution Department of the Bank of Greece, designated
as the Greek National Resolution Authority. Currently she holds the position of Deputy Head
in the Regulatory Section. Katerina is responsible for the drafting of Resolution Decisions
as a Secretary of the Resolution Measures Committee; and she participates in several Com-
mittees of the Single Resolution Board. During this period, she has been involved with the
preparation and implementation of resolution measures in Greek banks while assisting in
the drafting of resolution plans. In 2014 she was a member of the SRM Regulation negotia-
ting and drafting team during the Greek presidency of the Council of European Union, and
thereafter was a key member and secretary of the BRRD Committee for the transposition of
the Directive into Greek Legislation.

During 2011–2013, Katerina served as an investment officer in the Hellenic Financial Stabi-
lity Fund. She studied European Economics at the Economic University of Athens and recei-
ved her Master in Finance from Cass Business School in London.




82
NOTES




        83
T	 +43 121 70761
E	kdhulster@worldbank.org
	plintner@worldbank.org
W	www.worldbankgroup.org/finsac
Praterstraße 31-19th Floor
1020 Vienna, Austria
