   LE A R N ING PR O DUC T




    Women’s
Empowerment
      in Rural
  Community-
        Driven
 Development
     Projects
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington DC 20433                            this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
Women’s Empowerment in Rural Community-
Driven Development Projects




An IEG Learning Product
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................................................................ IV

MANAGEMENT RESPONSE ..................................................................................................................... VIII

1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................... 1
           Methodology...................................................................................................................................................................... 2
           Organization ...................................................................................................................................................................... 3


2. THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT .......... 4
           Empowerment and CDD: A Process and an Outcome ..................................................................................................... 6
           Empowerment: Economic, Political, and Social Dimensions ............................................................................................ 8
           How Is Female Empowerment Integrated in the CDD Results Chain? ............................................................................. 9
           How Do World Bank CDD Projects Address Women’s Empowerment? ......................................................................... 13


3. GENDER FEATURES IN CDD ............................................................................................................... 17
           Rural Women Face Many Obstacles to Community Participation: How Can CDD Effectively Address Them? ............. 17
           Do World Bank–Supported CDD Projects Address Constraints to Women’s Empowerment? ....................................... 20
           Strategies to include Women in World Bank–Supported CDD Projects ......................................................................... 22


4. DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?...................................... 26
           Women’s Empowerment as a Process: Outputs Achieved by Project’s Activities .......................................................... 26
           Women’s Economic, Political, and Social Empowerment: Intermediate and Development Outcomes .......................... 29


5. DISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNED ............................................................................................ 38
           Key Findings ................................................................................................................................................................... 38
           Lessons Learned............................................................................................................................................................. 39


REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................ 42

APPENDIX A. LIST OF PROGRAMS INCLUDED IN THE DESK REVIEW ............................................... 47

APPENDIX B. METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................................ 50

APPENDIX C. INDICATORS OF WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT ................................................................ 54

APPENDIX D. DESK REVIEW PROJECT TEMPLATE.............................................................................. 57

APPENDIX E. ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT IN CDD PROJECTS .......................................................... 61




ii
                                                                                                                                                       CONTENTS


BOXES
Box 2.1 Approaches to Measuring Female Empowerment ....................................................................................................... 7
Box 3.1. Project designs change over time building on gender analyses and lessons learned .............................................. 21
Box 4.1. The impact of rural livelihoods programs and self-help groups: Lessons from India ................................................ 35

TABLES
Table 2.1. Indicators of Empowerment in CDD Projects ......................................................................................................... 14
Table 3.1. Design Elements for Improving Women’s Participation in World Bank–Supported CDD Projects ........................ 24

FIGURES
Figure 2.1. Dimensions of women’s economic, political, and social empowerment ................................................................. 9
Figure 2.2. Community-driven development results chain, with reference to empowerment dimensions .............................. 12




                                                                                                                                                                    iii
Abbreviations
ADB     Asian Development Bank
CBO     community-based organization
CDD     community-driven development
FAO     Food and Agriculture Organization
ICR     Implementation Completion and Results
ICRR    Implementation Completion and Results Review
IEG     Independent Evaluation Group
IFAD    International Fund for Agricultural Development
KDP     Kecamatan Development Program
M&E     monitoring and evaluation
MASAF   Malawi Social Action Fund
MCC     Millennium Challenge Corporation
NGO     nongovernmental organization
MIS     monitoring information system
NSP     National Solidarity Project
NUSAF   Northern Uganda Social Action Fund
OECD    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OED     Operations Evaluation Department
PNPM    Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Mandiri (National Program for Community
        Empowerment)
PPAR    Project Performance Assessment Report
PRF     Poverty Reduction Fund
SHG     self-help group
TASAF   Tanzania Social Action Fund
UNDP    United Nations Development Programme




iv
Acknowledgments
This learning product was prepared by Elena Bardasi (task team leader) and Gisela
Garcia. It was carried out under the direction of Nick York (former director), Marie
Gaarder (acting director), Mark Sundberg (former manager) and Anjali Kumar (acting
manager), under the overall guidance of Caroline Heider (director-general, Evaluation).
Evie Brown conducted the literature review on the gender aspects of community-driven
development interventions and Trufat Woldesenbet undertook the literature review on
female empowerment. The desk reviews of individual project documents were
conducted by Javier Bronfman, Hjalte Sederlof, Monica Vidili, and Disha Zaidi.
Kimberly Parekh helped with report writing.

Peer reviewers were Anis Dani (development effectiveness expert) and Richard Chase
(adviser OPSRR, World Bank).

The team also appreciates the advice of Nora Dudwick (director of Gender and Social
Inclusion, Millennium Challenge Corporation) and comments provided by Independent
Evaluation Group colleagues Lauren Kelly, Tony Tyrrell, and others. The team is
particularly grateful to World Bank colleagues in the Community-Driven Development
Community of Practice who have provided comments at various stages: Sean Bradley,
Helle Buchhave, Helene Carlsson Rex, Natasha Hayward, Stephanie Anne Kuttner,
Kaori Oshima, Dan Owen, Parmesh Shah, Mio Takada, Emcet Tas, Varalakshmi
Vemuru, Ingo Wiederhofer, Susan Wong, and many task team leaders who shared
information on specific projects.

Kia Penso and Cheryl Marie Toksoz edited the report. Team assistance by Yezena
Zemene Yimer and Carla Fabiola Chacaltana is gratefully acknowledged.




                                                                                      v
Highlights and Lessons Learned
     Features of CDD
  Community-driven development (CDD) projects aim to empower communities, in
   particular disadvantaged members. They target women as beneficiaries and many directly
   refer to women’s empowerment (chapter 2).
  CDD interventions have the potential to address some of the constraints to women’s
   economic, political, and social empowerment that exist in the rural areas where they
   operate. Their activities can have both direct impacts (especially on economic
   empowerment) and indirect impacts (mostly on political and social empowerment)
   (chapter 3).
  CDD projects use diverse strategies to ensure that women participate in the community
   needs identification process and in subprojects’ selection and prioritization stages. The
   most common strategy is the use of quotas. This participation is regularly tracked in
   monitoring and evaluation frameworks (chapter 3).
  CDD programs pay less attention to ensuring women’s participation in project
   implementation, operation and maintenance, and monitoring (chapter 3).
  Indicators of empowerment are typically limited to outputs of project activities rather than
   development outcomes. Impacts “outside the project boundaries,” or spillovers, are rarely
   measured, partly because impact evaluations are still very few (chapters 2 and 4).
     Results of CDD
  CDD programs generally succeed in increasing female participation in village committees.
   Less is known about the impacts of this participation because most of the programs do not
   measure the quality and results of participation (chapter 4).
  CDD programs that support livelihoods or income-generating activities often succeed in
   improving women’s access to credit, training, and jobs. Impacts on economic
   empowerment in terms of changes in earnings, consumption, productivity, education, and
   health are not normally measured (chapter 4).
  CDD programs can increase women’s voice and decision making in project activities,
   especially when a share of subprojects is reserved for women to choose. Political
   empowerment at higher levels, such as women’s ability to engage with local authorities or
   participate in the formal political process, is not normally measured (chapter 4).
  Mixed evidence exists regarding impacts on social empowerment. In some cases higher
   participation in project’s activities led to higher social capital, voice, and decision making
   in the community, but not always. Little is known of changes at the household level
   (chapter 4).
  Because CDD interventions can impact empowerment both “within” and “outside” the
   project boundaries and irrespective of their stated goal, they would benefit from being




vi
                                                              HIGHLIGHTS AND LESSONS LEARNED


   more intentional in defining, discussing, and measuring empowerment in their results
   chain (chapter 5).
 The design of CDD projects could benefit from being informed by gender-specific needs
  assessments to identify the constraints that women face in the rural space where they
  operate. CDD interventions can enhance women’s empowerment and inclusion by
  addressing those constraints in their design, or leave women behind for lack of doing so
  (chapter 5).
 Impacts on empowerment may take time to materialize, and depend on a range of factors,
  several beyond the project’s span of control. CDD interventions should better frame what
  they can affect both in the short- and in the long-term (chapter 5).
 More systematic assessment, monitoring, reporting, and evaluation are needed to increase
  learning of what works to increase women’s empowerment through CDD (chapter 5).




                                                                                             vii
Management Response
World Bank Management welcomes the IEG learning product, Women’s Empowerment in
Rural Community-Driven Development Projects. Management appreciates the active
engagement with IEG during the preparation of the report, which provided an
opportunity to learn from successful efforts to engage women through the community-
driven development (CDD) approach. In response to the final product, Management
has the following comments.

While the report brings forward many useful insights and suggestions, Management
feels that the opportunity to gain knowledge from CDD programs regarding women’s
voice and agency would have been maximized if the report had focused more on
extracting helpful lessons on what has worked and why. Rather than exploring in detail
the conditions under which CDD operations have encouraged women’s participation
and empowerment, the report appears to have taken a more evaluative perspective,
highlighting what CDD projects didn’t do, or didn’t do enough of, in terms of
participation and empowerment. The problem with this approach is that women’s
empowerment is rarely part of the stated objective of CDD projects. Thus it should not
be surprising that projects did not dedicate more time and effort to measuring and
analyzing the complex facets and dynamics of empowerment. For this reason, a number
of statements in the report may be ambiguous and misleading on the overall
achievements of CDD programs if taken out of context.

At the same time, Management agrees that it is worthwhile for all projects to seek,
either directly or indirectly, to enhance women’s participation and empowerment
whenever feasible, and that there are valuable lessons to be learned from CDD projects
that have resulted in greater voice, participation and agency of the citizens of poor
communities (including both men and women). The report’s learning value for staff
would be enhanced by more deeply exploring and better presenting the specific
contextual dynamics and design elements of CDD projects in which women’s voice and
agency appear to have improved as well as by drawing lessons from operations that
explicitly target women’s empowerment to help enhance this dimension of CDD
operations. Management remains ready to work closely with IEG in this further level of
learning during the dissemination phase of the report, as IEG proposed.




viii
1. Introduction
Community-driven development (CDD) interventions rest on the principle of
empowering communities. Yet, the gender-specific impacts of CDD, especially on
empowerment, have not received due attention in evaluation and, more generally, in
the theoretical and empirical literature. There are several reasons for this. First,
programs may not have gender-specific outcomes as explicit objectives. Second, even
when they do indicate that they want to increase women’s participation and inclusion,
programs are not very specific about which dimensions of female empowerment they
can plausibly affect, which activities need to be implemented to make a difference (and
in what sequence), and in which timeframe one can reasonably expect results. Finally,
there are few impact evaluations that measure the effects of CDD on various
dimensions of empowerment in a sex-disaggregated way.

This report explores evidence of how the CDD approach can create and enhance
participation and decision making when women, as well as men, are to be included in
the “community” voice and choice. It reviews the theoretical and empirical literature
and analyzes World Bank–supported CDD projects. Its intent is to help practitioners
who implement CDD interventions more explicitly define, discuss, and integrate
gender-relevant elements in the design of CDD projects; be more effective in
implementing and monitoring features that may affect men and women differently; and
identify meaningful indicators and information to assess gender impacts.

The available evidence discussed in this report shows that CDD projects typically
mention women among their intended beneficiaries and succeed in engaging women
through participation (chapter 2). Projects increasingly respond to the findings of social
assessments and gender assessments in the project design. They commonly include
activities to engage women, particularly to support their participation in project
activities. They are less likely to take steps to ensure that women’s participation
improves their standing in the community and contributes to overcoming the specific
obstacles they face in the rural space (chapter 3). CDD projects track mostly output, not
intermediate or development outcome indicators. This limits the evidence about their
impact on the economic, political, and social empowerment of women (chapter 4).

As a result, evidence, where it exists, is mostly about the immediate impacts of the
project on the inclusion of women and on some of the economic benefits from the
project’s activities. Positive impacts are documented on outputs such as participation
and engagement, and in some cases on intermediate outcomes such as social capital and
women’s increased confidence. These results are mostly restricted to the CDD project
sphere. Very little information is found on impacts of CDD on the economic, political,


                                                                                          1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
and social empowerment of women at the level of broad development outcomes. Where
it exists, evidence is mixed on effects on women’s political participation and attitudes
and behavior change with respect to gender roles within formal and informal
institutions. It is unclear if this is because such effects are negligible or because they
haven’t been properly measured and documented.

It is important to recognize that CDD projects by themselves cannot be expected to
easily change social norms, perceptions, and attitudes that have been in existence for
generations, especially when it comes to women’s empowerment. CDD projects are
only one element in the broader country context. Yet, addressing empowerment more
explicitly in the results chain and documenting evidence even when it is about
contribution and not causation can help define the potential role of these projects and
learn about their impact.


Methodology
This report uses evidence from 20 longstanding rural CDD programs1 that have
received sustained support from the World Bank (the list is presented in Appendix 1,
Table A.1). The analysis was guided by the following key questions:

Do CDD interventions result in women’s economic, social, and/or political
empowerment, as well as men’s? And what are the conditions (including contextual
elements) and the design elements that enhance or hamper these impacts?

Specifically, the report aims to address:

       Design elements: How are CDD projects designed to enhance women’s
        economic, political, and social empowerment?
       Indicators: How do CDD projects measure women’s economic, political, and
        social empowerment?
       Outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes: What are the outputs,
        intermediate outcomes, and outcomes of CDD projects for women’s economic,
        political, and social empowerment?




1
 This report uses the terms “project” and “intervention” interchangeably to indicate the bundle of
activities that are planned and implemented to achieve the CDD goals. The report also uses “project” in a
more specific way to indicate the individual World Bank loan supporting a CDD intervention, as opposed
to “program,” which is used to identify a series of loans (individual projects) to support over time a
specific CDD in a given country. For example, the Indonesia PNMP Rural (National Community
Empowerment Program in rural areas) has been supported by four completed projects so far.



2
                                                                                  CHAPTER 1
                                                                               INTRODUCTION
To answer these questions, the report:

      Reviewed gender dimensions of CDD projects, using project documents and
       other project-specific analysis, as well as IEG evidence, particularly from project
       performance assessment reports (PPARs)( eight of the programs reviewed had a
       PPAR); and
      Reviewed the theoretical literature on female empowerment and on gender
       impacts on CDD (including, when available, impact evaluations).


Organization
The report is organized as follows: chapter 2 reviews the concept of empowerment,
presents the CDD approach, and discusses its potential to affect women’s
empowerment. This section analyzes the narrative around empowerment in project
documents and how it is reflected in the results framework—and links these with the
broader theoretical literature on women’s empowerment. Chapter 3 discusses gender
features of selected World Bank–supported CDD interventions and how they relate to
women’s constraints to economic, political, and social empowerment, especially in rural
areas. Chapter 4 presents the available evidence on women’s economic, political, and
social empowerment. Chapter 5 discusses the findings and their implications.




                                                                                             3
2. The Community-Driven Development
Approach and Women’s Empowerment
This chapter reviews the concept of empowerment, and how it applies to CDD. It makes
a distinction between empowerment as a process and empowerment as a goal, and
organizes the potential impacts of CDD projects in three domains—economic, political,
and social. It proposes a results chain for CDD that explicitly incorporates
empowerment dimensions at the level of outputs, intermediate outcomes, and
development outcomes, and identifies empowerment indicators at those levels.

Community-driven development (CDD) is “an approach to local development that
gives control over planning decisions and investment resources to community groups
(including local governments).”1 The approach has been widely used at the World Bank
and elsewhere in different contexts, including fragility and conflict.2 CDD interventions
are based on the principle that community involvement in identifying needs and
priorities, making decisions about investments, and managing investment funds can
produce better development outcomes than more centralized, top-down approaches.
Moreover, involving communities is also an end in itself—the “bottom-up approach” to
poverty reduction that CDD projects embed has been promoted on the grounds that it
makes development more inclusive and responsive to the real needs of the poor,
because it has the potential to empower poor people, improve governance, build social
capital, strengthen communities’ collective action, and shift public spending to
represent the needs of the excluded (Mansuri and Rao, 2013; Casey, Glennerster, and
Miguel, 2012).

Although specific CDD objectives may differ, empowerment is a foundational element
of all CDD projects. CDD objectives can include expanding access to services by
strengthening education, health, and access to markets; public infrastructure projects;


1 World Bank CDD core course material:
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTCDD/Resources/430160-1361480685593/9058621-
1366731546330/Session1_IntroductionCDD.pdf. This definition corresponds to the one
provided in the PRSP Sourcebook: “Community-driven development (CDD) gives control of
decisions and resources to community groups.” (World Bank 2003, p. 3).
2 The World Bank Group invests a sizeable part of its portfolio in CDD projects. According to
more recent data (as of December 2015) from the CDD Community of Practice at the World
Bank Group, the CDD portfolio consists of 178 active projects across 72 countries for $17.1
billion in active financing and 5 to 10 percent annual World Bank lending. With the World
Bank’s support, the CDD approach has a great potential to advance the gender equality agenda.


4
                                                                                 CHAPTER 2
                        THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
increasing collective or individual income and consumption through microfinance and
skill development; supporting local governance or decentralization; and helping the
government to reconnect with its citizens and rebuild trust after a period of conflict.
Irrespective of the specific objective, though, there is a common CDD approach, which
consists of empowering communities by giving them more control over development
resources and strengthening their ability to identify priorities and manage development
activities directly. Because of the specific modality used to achieve these various
objectives—through direct community involvement—empowerment is central to the
CDD approach.

Communities are diverse—made of different groups with different preferences and
goals, facing different constraints and responding differently to incentives. In most
communities poor women are likely to be more disempowered than their male
neighbors. CDD projects often recognize this explicitly and, to increase the agency of
disempowered people in these communities, they seek to make specific efforts to reach
and empower women.

By giving voice to women, CDD provides an opportunity for women to influence local
decisions so that they more closely reflect their preferences and their needs, as stressed
by the recent World Bank Group Gender Strategy (World Bank 2015). CDD projects
may also generate indirect positive impacts to the extent that they succeed in decreasing
poverty and boosting communities’ well-being. The strong link between poverty
reduction and gender equality (World Bank 2011a) thus provides a rationale for an
additional focus on women’s empowerment (World Bank 2007). Moreover, because
most CDD projects are implemented in rural areas, they can drive change where
women tend to be at greater disadvantage and gaps are wider. Investing in rural
women was, indeed, identified as one of the priority areas for “global action” in the
World Development Report 2012 on Gender Equality (World Bank 2011a, Table 9.1).

Even when CDD projects are successful in increasing women’s participation in project
activities, they may not succeed in achieving sustained and lasting change in local
decision-making or on shifting social norms. This is because CDD projects may not have
changing power relationships as their main and explicit goal, or they may not recognize
that the project could be an opportunity to do so. Furthermore, empowering
communities, especially traditionally excluded groups, takes time and cannot be
accomplished simply by a project. Encouraging communities toward greater inclusion
may not necessarily change power brokers within the communities (Casey, Glennerster,
and Miguel, 2012). Finally, specific CDD interventions may be more successful in
effecting some specific types of empowerment than others. One research study on Sierra
Leone “GoBifo” project found the distribution of benefits within a community to be



                                                                                         5
CHAPTER 2
THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
more equitable for local infrastructure projects, while no fundamental change was
achieved at the political or social level (Casey, Glennerster, and Miguel, 2012).


Empowerment and CDD: A Process and an Outcome
Involving communities and empowering them to take control of decisions regarding
their own development is both the means to achieve better development outcomes and
an outcome in its own right. Empowerment is embedded in the whole approach and at
all stages of the CDD results chain: “targeted community-driven approaches devolve
control and decision making to poor women and men, which empowers them
immediately and directly.” (World Bank 2003, p. 308). It is both a final objective and a
functional one to achieving other project objectives—for example, to increase income
and access to services (Jorgensen 2005). Thus, it is a process—to achieve other
outcomes—and an outcome in itself. This distinction is important as we assess
empowerment in relation to CDD projects.

Empowerment has different interpretations. The World Bank, defining its approach to
empowerment for economic growth and poverty reduction, describes empowerment as
“… the expansion of assets and capabilities of poor people to participate in, negotiate
with, influence, control, and hold accountable institutions that affect their lives” (World
Bank 2002, p.14; Narayan 2005, p. 5). This definition highlights the dimensions of
choice, action, and ability to influence institutions. According to Alsop, Bertelsen, and
Holland (2006), empowerment is about strengthening individuals’ asset-based agency
and their ability to change the institutional rules that shape human behavior and social
interactions. Community members who are able to participate in making key decisions
and effectively exercise their voice and choice are empowered—and this is an outcome
that CDD interventions have the potential to pursue for the community as a whole, for
its male and female members, and for the poor and other traditionally excluded groups,
such as ethnic minorities.

Because it is complex and multifaceted, measurement of empowerment presents several
challenges (Narayan, 2005; Alsop, Bertelsen, and Holland, 2006).

First, the multidimensional nature of “empowerment” makes it difficult to measure
with simple metrics (for example, being empowered in one dimension does not
necessarily imply being empowered in another dimension; see Kabeer 2001 and 2012;
Duflo 2012).

Second, as mentioned earlier, empowerment is both a process and an outcome. Finding
an indicator able to capture the process of empowerment as opposed to a (static)
outcome has proven difficult. Outcomes can be more easily expressed using


6
                                                                                    CHAPTER 2
                         THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
quantitative data, but measuring processes requires (participatory) qualitative data
collection and analysis. Balancing the use of quantitative versus qualitative data to
measure empowerment is challenging, but necessary to capture its many facets (O’Neil,
Domingo, and Valters 2014; Kabeer 2001; Rao and Woolcock 2005).

Third, empowerment is highly contextual, because social, cultural, political, and
economic conditions vary across societies and over time, as do institutions.
Empowerment also depends on the characteristics of the groups that are part of the
population.

Fourth, comparing different groups, such as men and women, requires a deeper
analysis than solely looking at averages and sex-disaggregated indicators. Men and
women face different constraints which are also based on age, race, social status,
education, and other socioeconomic characteristics (Pereznieto and Taylor 2014); hence,
both individual-level “absolute” indicators and relative measures are needed to assess
empowerment and capture the power dynamics within the community and the
household. All these difficulties explain why thus far, despite the existence of multiple
indicators and indices, there are no universally agreed measures or indicators of female
empowerment (Box 2.1).


 Box 2.1 Approaches to Measuring Female Empowerment
 Different institutions have proposed their own measures of gender equality and women’s
 empowerment, each reflecting their distinct emphases and perspectives. The United Nations
 Development Programme’s (UNDP) Gender Development Index, Gender Empowerment Measures,
 and Gender Inequality Index capture absolute levels of women’s economic participation,
 economic opportunity, political empowerment, educational attainment, and health and well-
 being. The World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index measures gender gaps in four
 dimensions: economic participation and opportunity, educational attainment, overall health,
 and political empowerment. The Economist Intelligence Unit’s Women’s Economic Opportunity
 Index covers five dimensions of women’s empowerment: labor policy and practice; women’s
 economic opportunity; access to finance, education, and training; women’s legal and social
 status; and the general business environment. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation
 and Development’s (OECD) Social Institutions and Gender Index focuses on social institutions
 that impact equality between men and women, and considers the four dimensions of family
 code, physical integrity, ownership rights, and civil liberties. Alkire and others (2013)
 developed the Women Empowerment in Agriculture Index to measure the impact of agricultural
 interventions on women’s empowerment in five domains: production, resources, income,
 leadership, and time. The World Bank Group’s Women, Business, and the Law database
 compiles information on laws, regulations, and institutions that differentiate between women
 and men in seven areas: accessing institutions, using property, getting a job, providing
 incentives to work, building credit, going to court, and protecting women from violence.




                                                                                                7
CHAPTER 2
THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
    In addition to indices, other measures are derived from household-level data. Alkire and
    Ibrahim (2007) propose a shortlist of internationally comparable indicators of individual
    agency and empowerment. Alsop and Heinsohn (2005) assess degrees of empowerment
    within three domains and eight subdomains: state (justice, politics, and service delivery),
    market (credit, labor, and goods) and society (family and community) at three levels—macro,
    intermediate, and micro. The recently launched Roadmap for Promoting Women’s Economic
    Empowerment Initiative (Buvinic and others 2013; Buvinic and Furst-Nichols 2014, 2016)
    analyzes best practices and recommends outcome measures (direct, intermediate, and final)
    of women’s economic empowerment, classified along increased productivity, income, and
    well-being. Many researchers and institutions propose single indicators or a combination of
    indicators that can be reported disaggregated by sex and collected at the community,
    household, or individual level using a variety of methods.



Empowerment: Economic, Political, and Social Dimensions
Empowerment is typically conceptualized in three domains: economic, political, and
social. Economic empowerment refers to the market domain, in which a person is an
economic actor. Political empowerment refers to the state domain, in which a person is
a civic actor. Social empowerment refers to the society domain, in which a person is a
social actor (Alsop, Bertelsen, and Holland 2006; World Bank 2007).

The manifestations and measurement of what empowerment is about, however, depend
on the context and on the characteristics of each group in the society. Changes in
empowerment for one person or group cannot be assumed to apply to other individuals
or groups (Alsop, Bertelsen, and Holland 2006). Furthermore, little is known about
whether changes in one realm of empowerment (such as economic) could have negative
repercussions in another realm of empowerment (such as social).

Women’s empowerment means creating the conditions for women to be able to make
choices, which implies that women may have different preferences than men, but also
different abilities to make choices because of gender inequalities in bargaining power
and access to resources (these constraints will be reviewed in the next chapter).
Economic empowerment involves improving the ability of women to access resources
and employment, higher productivity and earnings, and increases in the income, assets,
expenditure, and consumption they control. The legal and institutional barriers in the
labor market and the way unpaid domestic work and care work are shared at the
household and societal levels heavily influence this domain. Political empowerment is
about participation and decision making in formal institutions, including local
government, interest groups, and civil society and women’s ability to set and influence
the political discourse. Social empowerment refers to women’s status in society, which
depends on social norms, gender roles within the household and the community, and


8
                                                                                 CHAPTER 2
                         THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
social capital. Figure 2.1 summarizes the main components of female empowerment;
Appendix C presents a list of dimensions and indicators in the three domains.

Figure 2.1. Dimensions of Women’s Economic, Political, and Social Empowerment




How Is Female Empowerment Integrated in the CDD Results Chain?
Figure 2.2 summarizes the main elements of CDD projects and proposes a theoretical
results chain that reflects the different stated objectives that CDD interventions may
have for men and women (individual CDD projects may only have one or some of
them). It also applies the broader empowerment framework to the specific case of CDD
projects and identifies the manifestations of empowerment under the economic,
political, and social domains that are pertinent to CDD.

To achieve their objectives, CDD projects include a number of activities (these may vary
depending on the specific goal of the CDD intervention). They support training and
facilitation activities aimed to strengthen the community organization and its decision-
making role and capacity (Institution building), as well as assets creation through block
grants provided to the communities (Asset creation) and income generation programs to
individuals (Livelihoods support). Program conditions are meant to ensure greater
inclusion and citizens’ engagement.

CDD projects include activities aimed to strengthen community participation, decision
making, and control of resources to enable communities to build assets and
infrastructure and support income-generating activities. At the Outputs level, projects
aim to ensure that community members are involved in choosing, planning,
implementing, participating in, and monitoring subprojects. These outputs are meant to


                                                                                         9
CHAPTER 2
THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
generate several Intermediate outcomes, which may include increased skills and capacity
and improved livelihoods (at the economic level); increased voice and decision making
in project activities and better ability to relate with local authority structures (at the
political level); and increased social capital, social cohesion, and improved attitudes
regarding the role of women in the household and the community (at the social level).
The ultimate Development outcomes may include economic empowerment, in terms of
higher income, consumption, productivity, assets and financial stability, as well as
positive outcomes from better access to services (improvement in education, health,
time savings, better quality of life); political empowerment, in terms of greater
participation in the local political decision-making process; and social empowerment, in
terms of positive changes in social relationships and gender norms. The conditions,
design, outputs, and outcomes of each specific CDD intervention are influenced by
formal and informal institutions, community characteristics, and social norms,
including attitudes toward women’s participation and empowerment (Context).

Figure 2.2 shows explicitly that the CDD approach has the potential to empower
women as much as men in the economic, political, and social domain.

By increasing access to livelihood opportunities, jobs, and income, CDD projects can
increase women’s economic empowerment, to the extent that the choices regarding
infrastructure, assets, and income-generating activities respond to the needs of both
men and women. CDD projects can also improve access to services such as education
and health, in ways that are particularly beneficial to women and girls and generate
substantial time savings for women thanks to rural infrastructure, water in particular.

CDD projects can enhance women’s political empowerment at different levels.
Strengthening women’s participation in decision making with respect to project
activities is crucial if CDD projects want to be inclusive of all community members.
Although fundamental, this “lower-level” exercise of voice is not yet defined as political
empowerment. At a higher level, though, women’s increased participation and decision
making regarding project activities may translate into an increased ability to engage in
public debate and in a more assertive relationship with power authorities, such as
government administrators and local leaders. An even higher level impact could be the
increased ability of women to be active participants in the formal political process,
which has been more typically considered as political empowerment.

Finally, women’s increased ability to access social services and participation in
community decisions can enhance their social empowerment or confidence and
autonomy. Social empowerment, which involves a change in gender norms and
increased voice and bargaining power of women in the household and the community,




10
                                                                                 CHAPTER 2
                        THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
is—like political empowerment—an impact that is rarely identified as an explicit result
of the project.

Impacts at the level of political and social empowerment may occur even if they are not
made explicit within the results framework of the project, though deliberate support
may be needed to generate positive change. For example, impact evaluations of the
Afghanistan National Solidarity Project have documented impacts on women’s political
and social empowerment (this and other impacts are discussed in chapter 4). As
women’s needs, preferences, and constraints generally differ from men’s (as discussed
in the next chapter), CDD interventions that explicitly recognize the critical gender gaps
and adopt approaches to address them may be less likely to leave women behind.




                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                                   THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
Figure 2.2 Community-Driven Development Results Chain, with Reference to Empowerment Dimensions
      GOVERNMENT                                                              Development outcomes
 -    Legal,
      institutional,
                                     - Economic empowerment: Increased income and financial stability for women and men; increased control over
      political
                                     household consumption by women, increased access to services (such as education and health) and asset building
      framework
                                     (such as infrastructure) for women and men, time savings
 -    Decentralization
                                     - Political empowerment: Increased ability of women and men to participate in the political life and political
                                     processes; women and men become more active citizens and are able to influence local development processes
    FORMAL AND
                                     - Social empowerment: Changes in gender norms, attitudes, and behaviors for men and women inside the household
     INFORMAL              C         and within the community
   INSTITUTIONS,
 INCLUDING THOSE
    RELATED TO             O
      GENDER
                           N                                                  Intermediate outcomes
       COMMUNITY                     - Economic empowerment: Improved livelihoods of men and women, including access to relevant training; increased
       ATTITUDES           T         skills and capacity
        TOWARDS                      - Political empowerment: Increased ability of women and men to exercise voice and decision-making regarding the
     INCLUSION AND         E         project (project-level); Increased ability of women and men to exercise voice in relation to authority structures such
     PARTICIPATION                   as government administrators or local leaders (local-level)
                                     - Social empowerment: Improved women’s role in household decision -making; improved attitudes regarding women’s
                           X         involvement and engagement at the community level
       COMMUNITY
 -    Community            T
      assets
      (financial, labor,                                                                  Outputs
      social)
 -    Community
      participation
                                                                     Women and men participate in project activities
 -    Transparency
      and                                          Women and men are involved in choosing, planning, implementing, participating,
      accountability                                                       and monitoring subprojects




                                                  CDD PROGRAM – COMPONENTS
         Program conditions: Rules for selecting micro-projects; Implicit or explicit quotas; Rules and activities for citizen’s engagement;
                                                   Women’s-only spaces and groups; etc.

          Institution building                                Asset creation                                  Support to livelihoods
      Capacity building; awareness raising;
       gender awareness training; social             Block grants to support investments in
     mobilization; support to local/community        human, financial, social, physical, and
                                                                                                            Support to income-generating activities
                    governance                                   natural capital

Source: Adapted from Wong (2012).




12
                                                                                    CHAPTER 2
                         THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT

How Do World Bank CDD Projects Address Women’s Empowerment?
This report reviews major long-term community development programs in rural
contexts. All projects reviewed, explicitly or implicitly, emphasize their empowerment
potential and include an empowerment component or some indicators of
empowerment. Specifically, of the 20 programs reviewed for this report, eight explicitly
include empowerment in the project development objective (Malawi, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Uganda, and Yemen), most often as “empowering the
community,” not necessarily women. In some cases, earlier projects did not have an
empowerment goal (Pakistan, Philippines, Yemen), but this was added later in the
program. In one case (Tanzania) empowerment as an objective disappeared over time
from the Project Development Objective, but not from the intent of the project.

Empowerment means different things in different projects. An analysis of the narrative
around empowerment in project documents reveals that most programs refer to a
dimension of empowerment that relates to the definitions provided in the general
literature (summarized in Appendix C), even if the emphasis is on a few specific
dimensions (most frequently the economic one, especially when it comes to indicators
included in the results framework), not all of them. For example, in the Nepal Poverty
Alleviation Fund project, empowerment is interpreted as voice, decision-making, ability
and opportunity for poor people to participate in, negotiate with, influence, and control
the institutions that affect their lives and livelihoods. In the Nigeria Fadama project, it is
about empowering communities to take charge of their own development agenda. In
Indonesia, an Implementation, Completion, and Results (ICR) observes that “the PNPM
has empowered people, made them more independent, capable of collective action, and
has developed behavior and mindsets to be involved in solving their development
problems compared to before.” Afghanistan and Morocco emphasize aspects related to
local governance, decentralization, and representativeness. In a few cases (Laos,
Rwanda, Vietnam,) the interpretation is narrower and empowerment is intended
primarily as the ability to manage project activities.

All programs specify women as beneficiaries, and several refer directly to the
empowerment of women (Afghanistan, Andhra Pradesh, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh,
Nepal, and Pakistan). Yet few projects are clear about the specific empowerment aims
as they relate to gender. Only in a few instances do project documents clarify the sense
in which the project aims to empower women (for example, Sri Lanka and Tanzania
emphasize women’s economic empowerment; Azerbaijan specifically refers to an
economic leadership program for women).

Although they refer to women and women’s empowerment, projects do not commonly
make explicit the gender-specific outputs and outcomes in the results chain. When they


13
CHAPTER 2
THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
do, they do not link output to outcomes to explain how the components they integrate
are expected to change the lives of women. Indicators of empowerment are typically
limited to outputs of project activities (for example, the percentage of community-based
organizations functioning well, or the number of subprojects implemented at the
community level, or the number of subprojects proposed by women, and so on). At this
level, a distinction is normally made between results achieved “within the project
boundaries” and those “outside the project” or “spillovers.” The latter are frequently
overlooked, but may nevertheless be important.

Table 2.1 presents examples of indicators of empowerment—at the levels of process and
outcomes—that can be mapped to Figure 2.2.1 The indicators are heterogeneous. Some
are quantitative, others are qualitative and better expressed by text (narratives). Some
indicators measure observable traits, others measure perceptions and opinions. The
sources of information are also different. Some indicators can be easily included in the
project’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework; others require household,
individual, or community (quantitative) surveys or qualitative methods, such as
participatory assessments, focus group discussions, and key informant interviews (on
the use of mixed methods to measure empowerment, with applications also to CDD
interventions, see Rao and Woolcock 2005).2

Table 2.1. Indicators of Empowerment in CDD Projects

    Empowerment as a process (outputs)         Empowerment as an outcome (intermediate* and
                                               development outcomes)

       Women and men participate in           Economic Empowerment
        decision making at the community        Women and men receive credit or get jobs in
        and district levels (frequency,           public workfare schemes*
        quality of participation, influence,
                                                  Women and men receive vocational or
        knowledge)
                                                   entrepreneurship training*


1 These indicators have been mostly derived from the literature on CDDs, gender features of
CDDs, and female empowerment (see Appendix 3). Some are frequently used in projects, while
others are hardly or never found in M&E frameworks. Chapter 3 and 4 will discuss the actual
evidence provided by projects.
2 The Social Observatory, a collaboration between the World Bank’s South Asia Region
Livelihoods Team and government officials in Indian States implementing livelihoods projects,
uses participatory methods to develop relevant indicators grounded in the local context that can
be tracked, monitored and measured by the communities themselves, and that are also used in
rigorous impact evaluation to track impact over time. These efforts require resources, capacity
building, inter-disciplinary collaboration, and a high level of coordination, but it is an approach
that can generate valuable knowledge (in addition to effective monitoring and program
correction) well beyond what is typically allowed by standard monitoring information systems.


14
                                                                                          CHAPTER 2
                          THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT

Empowerment as a process (outputs)         Empowerment as an outcome (intermediate* and
                                           development outcomes)
   Women and men prefer/choose               Women and men (and girls and boys) have
    subprojects (differences between men       better access to education and health*
    and women in preferred subprojects
                                              Women and men have greater access to
    and approved proposals)
                                               infrastructure, such as roads, water, electricity,
   Women and men received training            etc.*
    in planning, financial
                                              Women’s and men’s personal income and
    management, procurement,
                                               expenditure and access to assets increase.
    operation and maintenance of
                                               Stability of income and household
    subprojects (attendance,
                                               consumption increases
    learning/knowledge acquired)
                                              Women’s and men’s livelihoods improve, and
   Women and men are involved in
                                               they have more productive and more stable
    planning, implementing, and
                                               employment
    managing subprojects (roles,
    attitudes, compensation)                  Women have more control over household
   Women and men are involved in              consumption
    participatory monitoring and              Education and health outcomes improve
    evaluation                                 (more learning, better health)
                                              Better infrastructure generates time savings
                                               for men and women in particular, improved
                                               livelihoods, and better access to markets
                                           Political Empowerment
                                            Women and men have greater knowledge of
                                              the political landscape, and better access to
                                              political institutions
                                              Women and men feel confident in their ability
                                               to participate and influence local decision
                                               making
                                              Women and men feel that their views are
                                               taken into account in the local development
                                               process
                                              Women’s demands are integrated as much as
                                               men’s in local development plans and
                                               institutional instruments and conventions

                                           Social Empowerment
                                            The community’s attitudes toward women
                                              improve
                                              Men and women in particular are able to have
                                               greater mobility and freedom of movement.
                                              Women’s voice and bargaining power are
                                               increased within and outside the household



                                                                                                    15
CHAPTER 2
THE COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT APPROACH AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT

 Empowerment as a process (outputs)                     Empowerment as an outcome (intermediate* and
                                                        development outcomes)
                                                           Women are less likely to be victims of
                                                            domestic violence

Source: IEG. Note: * indicate an intermediate outcome

Based on the analysis of M&E frameworks of the 20 programs reviewed, indicators in the
first column (process indicators, mostly outputs) were much more likely to be collected
than the outcome indicators in the second column. Output indicators were more easily
integrated into the projects’ M&E frameworks, while outcome indicators were measured
almost exclusively in (a very few) impact evaluation studies (for example, Afghanistan and
Uganda). It is probably not feasible for projects to measure all these indicators during
project implementation and at the time of completion. And not all CDD projects can or
even should be expected to impact empowerment in all its domains. However, CDD
projects report surprisingly little information on which gender gaps they aim to address
and which results they achieve, especially considering the programs’ rhetoric on
empowerment and the long implementation period of many of them. chapter 4 gives a
more detailed account of the evidence.




16
3. Gender Features in CDD
This chapter discusses the main obstacles that women face in the rural space and the
strategies used by CDD projects to address them. It reviews the most common and not
so common, but promising design elements in the 20 CDD projects analyzed for this
report.

CDD interventions can be successful in addressing gender issues in design and
implementation only if they are based on a good diagnosis of how and why the
livelihood needs and strategies of men and women differ. These differences exist
because of assigned gender roles and responsibilities, and the different ability of men
and women to access resources at both the household and community levels. CDD
projects that ignore these differences may not be effective in empowering women or
may leave women behind, which would limit or undermine their overall effectiveness.
By contrast, CDD projects that pay particular attention to gender impacts have the
potential to achieve better results on the ground and succeed in empowering the whole
community, women included.


Rural Women Face Many Obstacles to Community Participation: How Can CDD
Effectively Address Them?
To ensure that projects match the needs of excluded groups, assumptions about who is
poor must be questioned, intersecting inequalities taken into account, and a thorough
needs analysis should take place before the menu of CDD subproject options is decided
(World Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). Depending on the context, women and other
groups may experience ethnic and class discrimination as well as gender inequality, or
a lack of education as well as a disability, for example (World Bank 2013). Yet,
conducting a gender-specific needs assessment to inform the design of a CDD project
does not appear to be common practice, at least not until very recently.1 In the absence
of these assessments, projects may operate with implicit assumptions: women are
willing and able to participate; derive benefits from participating; have time and control
over how they use their time; receive their family support for childcare; and will
automatically be involved in the decision-making process once they attend meetings
(Azarbaijani and Moghaddam 2010).




1
 The team found it difficult to locate reports and assessments beyond formal project
documents.


17
CHAPTER 3
GENDER FEATURES IN CDD
The constraints to economic, political and social empowerment that place rural women
at a disadvantage are especially relevant for CDD projects aiming to empower all
members of a community. These constraints have been extensively documented in the
literature (World Bank 2011a; World Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). If they are ignored,
CDD projects can have the undesirable effect of leaving women behind and
exacerbating gender gaps. If instead they are understood and addressed through the
adoption of specific strategies and design elements, CDD projects have the potential to
effectively include women and contribute to their empowerment.1

Constraints related to women’s economic empowerment have to do with women’s
limited access to resources and women’s domestic responsibilities. Women’s economic
potential is not fully realized in most countries because women are often prevented
from participating in the labor market to the same extent that men do. Women tend to
work in subsistence agriculture and low-productivity jobs because they have limited
access to land; insecure property rights or none at all; low access to credit, agricultural
inputs, and extension services; and limitations in physical mobility and in accessing
networks and information. When women engage in nonfarm activities, these are often
concentrated at the lower end of the market and tend to be less profitable than men’s
work. In addition, women spend a larger proportion of time on domestic tasks than do
men, leaving less time for income-generating activities, leisure, and education (Bhatt
and Brown, 2011; De Sousa Amazonas and others, 2011). If women’s responsibilities
increase, the burden of domestic tasks often falls on their daughters, keeping them out
of school.

Constraints related to women’s political empowerment have to do with restrictions in
access to decision-making power and women’s low levels of literacy, confidence, and
leadership. At the project level, women are less likely to be substantively involved in
community projects because they have less skills and experience than men do (World
Bank 2007). The complexity, criteria, time, and difficulty of applying for funds all affect
women’s ability to participate (World Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). At the level of local
government, women are very often excluded from collective decision-making
processes, often because of the inability to speak against the powerful (OED 2005).
Moreover, women’s mobility restrictions and lack of experience may prevent their
engaging with high-level political processes (World Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). At the
higher political level, women are underrepresented in the formal political sphere



1
  CDD projects are obviously not the magic bullet for empowering communities and women; other
relevant elements that have an impact on empowerment are formal and informal institutions, country
conditions, and existing policies and programs. However, the CDD programs highlight the important role
they can play in this respect.


18
                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                                   GENDER FEATURES IN CDD
everywhere in the world. Patriarchal structures and norms mediate women’s ability to
access formal, local, and higher-level government fora.

Constraints related to women’s social empowerment have to do with patriarchal
attitudes and social norms regarding women’s roles that persistently limit women’s
ability to participate in community life. In some cultures, women’s mobility is
restricted, they are expected to stay at home, keep quiet in public meetings, and agree
with decisions made by men. Attitudes of local male leaders may be particularly
problematic (World Bank 2007). In the home, women typically do not have the same
decision-making power as men do—and differences exist also among women with
different rank (for example, among wives in polygamous households, or between the
daughter-in-law and the mother-in-law).

The literature reviewed for this report suggests that CDD interventions have the
potential to address some of these mentioned constrains to women’s economic, political,
and social empowerment.

At the level of economic empowerment, for instance, CDD investments in infrastructure
can improve women’s physical access to markets and resources, and subprojects
providing microfinance and livelihoods support can increase women’s income-
generating activities and access to credit (World Bank, 2007). Also, by improving rural
infrastructure, such as water supply, CDD can reduce the amount of time women spend
fetching water, which in turn could allow them to spend more time in alternative
activities—potentially productive ones. By providing training through livelihoods
interventions, CDD can increase the quality of goods for market and increase good
business practices (Bhatt and Brown, 2011).

 In terms of political and social empowerment, CDD can make it easier for women to
access decision-making arenas by decentralizing power to the community level (World
Bank, IFAD and FAO 2009). CDD can also enable women’s voices to be heard, and
establishes precedents for women’s participation in planning and decision-making
which may be replicated in other fora (World Bank 2007). Participation in CDD can
build women’s skills and confidence through training and capacity-building so that
they can take up greater roles in community life. Women-only spaces and groups in
CDD projects can encourage women to put forward their ideas and voice their needs in
a supportive environment. CDD can support women’s groups to present, defend, and
lobby for their priorities in the community.

As existing power structures can disadvantage women, not explicitly addressing power
relationships does not result in a neutral outcome. Working with existing institutions,
such as local government or traditional authorities, risks to mimic discriminatory power



                                                                                          19
CHAPTER 3
GENDER FEATURES IN CDD
structures and may not lead to improvements for the poorest people (Cornwall 2003;
Lubbock and Carloni, 2008; Poncin, 2012).

By providing gender awareness training to local leaders and community members and
allowing women to prove their capabilities through participating in decision-making,
CDD projects can help change traditional perceptions about gender roles. The approach
needs to be very strategic, because the active promotion of women’s involvement and
empowerment can meet with resistance from local (male and female) elites if it is
perceived as a threat to the established way of doing things (World Bank, FAO and
IFAD, 2009).


Do World Bank–Supported CDD Projects Address Constraints to Women’s
Empowerment?
Several toolkits and reports acknowledge that CDD interventions should take the above
discussed constraints to women’s empowerment into consideration (World Bank 2007;
World Bank 2011b; World Bank 2011c; World Bank 2012; Porter and Zovighian 2014;
MCC 2013; ADB 2012; Burjorjee and Jennings 2008; World Bank and DfID 2006). Only a
few projects, however, include in official project documents a comprehensive and
context-specific discussion of these constraints and their causes to motivate the
activities they propose. Projects more and more frequently refer to social or gender
assessments, but normally these documents are not easily accessible.

Furthermore, the findings of social assessments that explore the constraints or needs of
women are not always reflected in project documents (Azerbaijan, Uganda). Gender
“responsiveness” is often found as a guiding principle in operational manuals1 and
gender strategies are sometimes part of implementation plans but little is said in
available World Bank documents as to how these are operationalized. This is not to say
that CDD projects do not include strategies to “include women” and facilitate women’s
participation. They often do, but they do not necessarily build these design features to
address specific constraints and gender gaps identified in the local context.

Strategies used in World Bank–supported CDD projects have evolved over time; more
recent projects tend to be more explicit and deliberate in referring to context-specific
gender and other constraints. For example, the first Azerbaijan project’s social
assessment acknowledged women’s needs but made no mention of specific activities in
the project document; however, the second Azerbaijan project not only explicitly

1
 The team was able to consult five operation manuals for this review. None of them provided
details on how activities meant to enhance women participation are actually organized and
implemented.


20
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 3
                                                                                           GENDER FEATURES IN CDD
supported women’s empowerment but also included specific indicators in its
monitoring and evaluation framework to track gender-relevant outputs and outcomes.

Recently approved projects provide some insights on how project design has absorbed
the lessons and built on them (see Box 3.1).


 Box 3.1. Project Designs Change over Time Building on Gender Analyses and Lessons Learned
 Projects that have been approved over the past 3-4 years are much more likely than older
 projects to reflect on lessons learned from gender analyses and to refer explicitly, in official
 project documents, to adjustments in design that integrate those lessons. For example, in 2012
 the Indonesia PNPM added female village monitoring teams and women in procurement
 committees to address unsatisfactory results with regard to women’s participation.a In the
 Philippines, changes to Kalahi-Cidss in 2014 included: (i) additional diagnostic tools using
 Participatory Social Analysis; (ii) further capacity building of community volunteers and
 women’s groups; and (iii) greater attention to women’s involvement in paid labor. In Nigeria,
 changes introduced at the time of Fadama Additional Financing in 2013 included the
 development and testing of: (i) new information and communications strategies and (ii) a
 series of pilots aimed at helping female farmers to access project resources (for example,
 financial literacy, peer learning, and mentoring programs).b
 Projects are also increasingly planning to assess the effectiveness of the different mechanisms
 used to encourage women’s participation. A planned Rapid Assessment of Women’s
 Participation in Indonesia’s PNPM aims to examine the strategies that have been adopted to
 encourage women’s participation and the factors that have affected uptake, success,
 sustainability, and outcomes.c In Nigeria, the project plans an impact evaluation to assess the
 most effective ways to open opportunities for equitable access to agriculture services for all
 female farmers.b Reference to a future process evaluation to review results of gender
 mainstreaming efforts is also included in the Philippines. Recently approved projects are also
 more likely to recognize the need to further assess the impact of CDD on the lives of poor
 women and plans for such evaluation (Brazil, Indonesia).
 Nonetheless, recognizing the need of further evaluation is not enough if current projects do
 not take into account lessons from past projects. An exploratory evaluation of a small-scale
 pilot d included in the Rio Grande do Norte CDD assessed whether investments aimed at
 reducing time spent by women in household activities (such as water supply systems for
 drinkable water and productive gardens) created the enabling environment for women’s
 empowerment and helped reduce poverty. The study was small in scale and could not
 determine causality; it called for further assessments of sex-disaggregated long-term impacts.
 Yet, its promising results did not appear to be reflected in the design of other CDD projects in
 northern Brazil. This study was the only one of its kind found for any of the projects analyzed
 in this report.
 a Indonesia PNPM PAD (P128832) p.18-19 and Annex 2.
 b Zovighian 2014.
 c World Bank 2012.
 d De Sousa Amazonas and others 2011. Funded by the World Bank Gender Action Plan in 2009, the pilot evaluated 15

 subprojects (primarily water supply and productive gardens) in 12 communities, benefitting 35 families.



                                                                                                                    21
CHAPTER 3
GENDER FEATURES IN CDD

Strategies to include Women in World Bank–Supported CDD Projects
CDD projects commonly use diverse strategies to ensure women’s participation in the
needs identification process and in subprojects’ selection stages. Strategies adopted by
World Bank–supported CDD projects include women’s quotas in community forums
and project selection committees; women-only meetings; separate voting for men and
women; minimum thresholds or earmarked allocations for the percentage of
subprojects coming from women’s groups; recruitment of women’s facilitators and
community mobilizers; gender training and support to women beneficiaries and project
staff.

The most common strategy found in the projects reviewed for this study is the use of
quotas. Almost all projects reviewed include quotas or targets to increase women’s
participation in project selection committees (Yemen is among the few exceptions).1
They are set between 30 percent and 50 percent and are generally reported as met in
project documents.

A number of other strategies have been used. A common one is the recruitment of
female mobilizers and facilitators to raise awareness among women about the project,
increase women’s participation in project’s activities, and help identify women’s
priorities (Andhra Pradesh, Azerbaijan, Indonesia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Philippines,). Projects often utilize separate meetings for men and
women to ensure that women’s priorities are addressed and to assess their needs and
priorities (Indonesia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Lao PDR, Philippines). Several projects also
provide training for women to facilitate needs identification and prioritization. In the
Kyrgyz Republic, the project delivered specific support to women to increase their
confidence to lobby for their own needs at broader community events. In the Lao PDR
Poverty Reduction Fund project a clever voting system was introduced to make it easier
for everybody to vote, including illiterate villagers (disproportionately women).
Villagers were invited to deposit in a box three seeds for the most preferred option, two
seeds for the second best, and one seed for the third best.

Limited evidence is available on the effectiveness of these strategies, however. Despite
the widespread use of women quotas in World Bank–supported CDD projects, no
assessment is available on whether quotas have a positive impact on subproject
selection or women’s (active) participation. Similarly, there is no evidence on the impact
that a higher percentage of female facilitators can have on women’s participation in the
project’s activities. The only study found on the effect of the sex of the facilitator on the
percentage of proposals coming from women’s groups, and the type of proposals

1
    Quotas may not be present in the beginning but may be introduced later on.


22
                                                                                          CHAPTER 3
                                                                              GENDER FEATURES IN CDD
submitted (infrastructure vs. economic activities), is a bit outdated and shows no effect
(Wong 2002).1

CDD projects try to ensure women’s presence in the community needs assessment and
prioritization exercise (Table 3.1). They pay less attention to women’s participation in
the implementation, operation and maintenance, and monitoring of subprojects. Yet,
there are notable exceptions. For example, Fadama in Nigeria and the Rwanda Rural
Sector Support projects made training compatible with women’s daily schedules so as
to encourage women to participate (none of the two projects measured the impact of
this design feature on female participation, however). As with assessing the evidence,
newer projects seem to be doing a better job at this. In Bangladesh and Indonesia a
quota for women’s participation in village monitoring teams was recently introduced.

Table 3.1 provides an overview of project design features intended to improve women’s
participation. These features have been identified based on projects documentation and
on studies and assessments commissioned by projects. Features more commonly found
in projects are listed in the first column, emerging examples of promising practices are
listed in the second. The former were discussed earlier in this section; the latter are only
found in very large and longstanding projects, with several gender studies (such as
Indonesia and the Philippines) and maybe more opportunities to experiment.

Projects recognize the importance of including excluded groups and support female
participation, but do not always articulate the benefits of their increased participation.
They do not explicitly link women’s participation (and therefore women’s
empowerment) to other project elements or specific outcomes. Sometimes projects refer
to “plausible” impacts, such as “more inclusive decision-making processes,” which
however are generally not tracked or evaluated. Women’s participation, for example, is
not seen as functional to strengthening the mix and impact of basic infrastructure and
social services delivered by the project—or of the outcomes expected from higher social
services (as pointed out by, among others, Azarbaijani and Moghaddam 2010). When
participation is not functionally linked to specific outcomes, it is hard to determine
whether it is meaningful, whether it influences decisions regarding subprojects, and
whether, as a consequence, it can bring actual benefits to women (or men).

An exception is represented by livelihoods programs, which have been able to
document the positive impacts that group membership have on social capital and



1
  The sex of the facilitator did not have an influence on the likelihood of women’s proposals being
selected either. Also, there was no correlation between the percentage of women attending meetings and
the percentage of women’s proposals being selected.


                                                                                                     23
CHAPTER 3
GENDER FEATURES IN CDD
various dimensions of women’s economic, political, and social empowerment (see end
of chapter 4).

Table 3.1. Design Elements for Improving Women’s Participation in World Bank–Supported CDD
Projects

 Activity                       Common Practices                                         Promising Practices
 Gender-               Refer to key constraints and general         Include detailed discussion of context-specific constraints
 informed social         assumptions about women’s roles                   and vulnerabilities, practices related to women’s
 analysis                                                                 participation, women’s access to resources, etc.
                                                                                 (Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Kyrgyz Republic)
                                                                     Include detailed discussion of the implications of a gender
                                                                        study for project design and document, including clear
                                                                      articulation of women’s needs and priorities (Afghanistan,
                                                                                   Andhra Pradesh, Kyrgyz Republic)
 Community                   Use female facilitators                 Include gender awareness modules in ongoing training
 mobilization       Provide capacity building/training to female      for district- and project-level facilitators (male and female)
                                     facilitators                      Ensure ongoing capacity building for supervision and
                    Provide capacity building through the form                           mentoring on facilitator role
                          of gender sensitization training to        Provide ongoing capacity building for gender sensitization
                     community leaders, project or government                         to religious or community leaders
                                       officials                                         Use media for outreach
                      Set quotas for women’s participation             Use women’s traditional meeting places (Vietnam)
                       Monitor sex-disaggregated data on                          Engage existing women’s groups
                        attendance to community meetings                Create optimal conditions for women to participate
                                                                                   (meetings location, timing, child care)
                                                                      Assess the quality of women’s participation in meetings
                                                                                               (Andhra Pradesh)
                                                                      Offer incentives at the local level for innovative ideas to
                                                                         improve women’s participation (Indonesia, Sri Lanka)
 Needs               Create separate meetings and voting              Create optimal conditions for women to participate
 assessment/        Set quotas for women in project selection                  (meetings location, timing, child care)
 Prioritization                     committees;                         Train or coach women to actively participate and
 exercise             Set a minimum number of proposals                   lobby/defend their priorities (Kyrgyz Republic)
                           coming from women’s groups                Use creative ways of voting/expressing preferences that
                                                                        do not require participants to read or write (Lao PDR,
                                                                                               Vietnam)
                                                                       Ensure that goods and services offered addresses
                                                                           women’s constraints and livelihoods (Vietnam)
 Implementation        Identify specific activities for women          Create optimal conditions for women to participate
 (including              (social infrastructure, microcredits)                  (meetings location, timing, child care)
 Operations &           Set quotas for women recipients              Provide equal opportunities to work on project activities,
 Maintenance)            Provide training for specialized                     including equal pay (Uganda, Vietnam)
                               positions/specific skills                 Support women’s participation in nontraditional
                                                                                      roles/activities (Afghanistan)
                                                                     Provide skills training for all, including for project planning
                                                                                     and management (Sri Lanka)
 Monitoring,        Plan for sex-disaggregated data collection         Gather women’s feedback independently (Kyrgyz
 supervision,                                                                                Republic)
 and evaluation                                                       Consult women when developing indicators for impact,
                                                                               performance, and process monitoring
                                                                       Collect and report on sex-disaggregated indicators



24
                                CHAPTER 3
                    GENDER FEATURES IN CDD

 Evaluate strategies used to improve women’s
 participation and feed into project design (recently
approved phases of Indonesia, Philippines, Nigeria)




                                                 25
4. Did World Bank–Supported CDD Projects
Empower Women?
This chapter organizes and summarizes the evidence available for the World Bank’s
funded projects (the sources and the approach are discussed in Appendix B). The
results are organized under general outputs (mostly related to women’s involvement in
the project’s activities) and the specific intermediate and development outcomes for
economic, political, and social female empowerment.

Women’s Empowerment as a Process: Outputs Achieved by Project’s Activities
CDD interventions aim at increasing women’s participation in project activities and
generally succeed in achieving it. All projects reviewed aimed to increase women’s
participation and integrated some mechanisms for this purpose, such as community
outreach to women, quotas in meetings, separate meetings for men and women, female
facilitators, and so on, as documented in the chapter 3. All projects monitored and
reported women’s participation, and generally succeeded in mobilizing women to
attend community meetings. This is probably the most clear-cut, across-the-board
positive result.

Attention has been drawn to the need for more evidence on the quality of participation.
Participation is often interpreted as attendance at meetings, which projects regularly
track in a sex-disaggregated way. Projects may also track the share of women in
community committees or in formal leadership roles (Azerbaijan, Indonesia, Kyrgyz
Republic). However, especially when women’s attendance is mandated as a
requirement of the project, it is unclear whether participation can be considered
anything other than compliance with the rules of the project. A question arises with
respect to quality of participation—are women merely present? Do they speak? Are the
conditions ‘right’ for them to speak freely? Is their opinion taken into consideration?
Does their participation have impact?

Increasingly projects recognize that it is important to assess quality of participation. So
far reporting is mostly anecdotal and there is no agreed-upon way to measure it.
Already in 2002, Wong observed that quality of participation was an issue in the early
implementation of Indonesia Kecamatan Development Program (KDP): in that study
quality of participation was reported by facilitators and was interpreted as “activeness”
or “ability to lobby for their own group’s proposals.” Problems with the quality of
participation were not unique to KDP. A gender assessment of all Indonesian CDD




26
                                                                               CHAPTER 4
                                   DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
interventions,1 prepared to facilitate the integration of gender features in the Indonesia
National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM) (World Bank 2007)
recognizes that, although all Indonesian CDD projects had strategies to support
women’s participation in meetings they all struggled in improving the quality of
women’s participation. It noted that women lacked confidence and experience in
speaking out at meetings and were not comfortable in expressing their opinions in the
presence of their husbands or male relatives, which in turn reinforced the stereotype of
women being unable or unwilling to participate.

Despite the difficulties, there have been some promising approaches to understanding
quality of participation. For example, the Brazil Rio Grande do Norte Regional
Development and Governance project uses social experts to assess whether women are
truly participating in subproject eligibility and selection, or whether their participation
is merely pro-forma. A working definition of quality of participation was proposed by
the 2012 PNPM Gender Study (World Bank 2012). It was defined using a combination of
output indicators (“Projects proposed by women are funded and funded projects
respond to women’s need as defined in the local context”) and process indicators
(“Women are actively involved in every stage of project planning and implementation,
as well as in every level of program implementation and management. Moreover all
women are heard and involved, not just elite women”). While the approach has
potential, no project has adopted a definition of quality of participation to be monitored
through the monitoring information system and there is no evidence that this has been
solved for Indonesia or for any other of the CDD projects reviewed.

Women’s participation may favor elites, which needs to be explicitly recognized when
designing and implementing projects. Women are often considered a homogeneous
group, but they are not; some of them are in more powerful and privileged positions
than others. Elite dominance and elite capture are very possible among women. Indeed,
it has been noted that some women, thanks to the status they enjoy in the community,
are better able to take advantage of CDD sub-projects and activities. In Bangladesh, the
project provided financial skills training to women but the training was mostly limited
to the leader and cashier of each institution and therefore skills were transferred to a
very limited group of women (IEG 2016a). In Indonesia, more educated and affluent
women were likely to get to elected to leadership roles within community organizations
and have access to credit groups (World Bank 2007).


1
 These are the Kecamatan Development Program (KDP), Urban Poverty Project (UPP),
Neighborhood Upgrading and Shelter Sector Project (NUSSP), Water Supply and Sanitation in
Low-Income Communities (WSLIC-2), Australian Community Development and Civil Society
Strengthening Scheme (ACCESS).


                                                                                         27
CHAPTER 4
DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
IEG field assessments in Lao PDR, Malawi, Nigeria, and Tanzania have shown that
some women have more influence than others, within the group of women and in the
community (IEG 2016b, 2016d, 2014b, 2016c). The IEG project evaluation of the
Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) II found that women’s increased participation
made them more self-assured in their interactions within the household and in the
community. Interviewees pointed to the increasing number of women who were
entering local and even national political life as an effect of this kind of participation.
However, it was also noted that this is a small minority of better-off women, not poor
women (IEG 2016c). A similar phenomenon was observed in Malawi (IEG 2016d). In
Nigeria, only a few women are actually offered the chance to participate in the Fadama
User Groups, because group access is highly correlated with interpersonal networks
and men’s support (IEG 2014b).1 In the Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Fund this was the
case for women who were very active members of the Lao Women’s Union, but also for
older women (for example, at meetings the daughter-in-law spoke after the mother-in-
law, if she spoke at all) (IEG 2016b). This aspect of “capture” within groups of villagers
was not recognized by the Poverty Reduction Fund project—and it is not frequently
recognized by CDD projects in general.

Project requirements may sometimes inadvertently restrict women from participating in
a more meaningful way; these restrictions may be easier to overcome for certain types
of women. A review of the Indonesian CDD projects (World Bank 2007) revealed that
women from the poorest households were less likely to participate in the project
activities because the only individuals eligible were those who were part of groups
established for at least a year and, in some cases, individuals who already had a small
business. These requirements clearly biased the selection of beneficiaries toward the
better off.2 In other cases, women’s participation was limited because it entailed certain
tasks requiring women to be literate (this is the case of Indonesia, Malawi, Morocco,
Nigeria, and Tanzania). In Nigeria’s Fadama project, for example, it was found that
women’s education affected the extent to which women could participate in the project
(IEG 2014b). Women’s lower literacy and education (common in rural, low-income
countries) are constraints that can generate asymmetric benefits from CDD. Other
factors were also important, such as gaps in land ownership and social capital (e.g.,
networks, connection to power holders and community leaders).




1 Men have helped women gain access to the project because of the high level of
interdependency between men (farming) and women (processing) in the sector.
  is, however, unclear whether this was to be interpreted as a negative outcome, that is,
2 It

whether the interests of women who were excluded were also not represented.


28
                                                                               CHAPTER 4
                                   DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?

Women’s Economic, Political, and Social Empowerment: Intermediate and
Development Outcomes
DO CDD PROJECTS INCREASE WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT?
Projects document increased access to livelihoods and services by tracking the number
of beneficiaries, disaggregated by sex. Projects that do include a component to support
livelihoods and income-generating activities, such as, for example, a microfinance or
public workfare component, report the percentage of women recipients of these
activities. This is the case, for example, in Tanzania and Malawi (where about half of the
temporary jobs created went to women, according to the project-reporting documents),
Bangladesh, Andhra Pradesh, and the Kyrgyz Republic. The CDD projects that support
the creation of public goods—investments in wells and water points, roads, classrooms,
and health centres—typically track the type and number of subprojects and the size of
the population living in the villages where the infrastructure was built (the assumption
being that all benefit from it).

There is less evidence, however, on the impacts of infrastructure on the lives of men and
women. For example, little information is found on the gender-specific impacts of
having a water point in the community, or more classrooms, or living close to a new
health center. More classrooms and health centers are meant to generate higher
enrolment (as well as attendance and retention) rates, which ultimately affect children’s
levels of education and learning. Better access to health centers should increase (to the
extent they are able to offer a basic package of services) health outcomes (vaccinations,
assisted deliveries, etc.).

Of the projects reviewed, only a few provide some evidence of improved health
outcomes and improved education for girls. In Afghanistan, the National Solidarity
Project (NSP) increased girls’ school attendance and learning, but there was no impact
on boys’ school attendance. It was not fully clear what drove this result, because NSP
did not fund access to education. In Pakistan, the Implementation and Completion and
Results report of the second phase of the project (p.5) reports that better access to
education—thanks to greater geographical proximity, affordability, and quality of
service—has led to increased enrolment and retention rates of students, especially girls,
and better learning outcomes (stronger literacy and numeracy skills). In Afghanistan
and Yemen, better access to maternal and prenatal care has been reported.

Although most projects provide anecdotal evidence that investments in water are
particularly beneficial to women, only a few reported the time gains in fetching water
thanks to the project. In Azerbaijan, better access to water did indeed benefit women, in
terms of time saved, according to the Implementation Completion and Results report.
The Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) Implementation Completion and


                                                                                        29
CHAPTER 4
DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
Results report mentions the positive results of an impact assessment, which found that,
thanks to the provision of water, women experienced a reduction in the time spent
fetching water. In Afghanistan, the ICR mission’s field visits to NSP communities found
that women’s time in employment was freed up due to mechanized threshing of wheat;
moreover, time savings were achieved also in fetching water, owing to the provision of
hand pumps for drinking water.1 In Brazil, quite interestingly, the project produced
time savings mostly for young men, because they were (along with women) in charge of
fetching water. This case is very instructive because it challenges assumptions that are
commonly made about women.

Some livelihood interventions indicate that women can especially benefit in terms of
higher employment and earnings. For example, the impact evaluation of Uganda’s
NUSAF II found that both young men and women receiving vocational training and
support to business startups experienced a similar increase in business assets, work
hours, and earnings after four years. However, the impacts were stronger for women,
because they were poorer than men at the start of the program. The intervention also
played a more important role for women; it was found that their earnings and
participation in employment would have stagnated without the program. After four
years, the income gain of those receiving the intervention was, in percentage, much
larger for women than for men (Blattman, Fiala, and Martinez 2014).

In Brazil, it was found that women’s participation in income-generating activities
increased (as did their income relative to men’s) in communities that received both
water supply and productive gardens (although it was impossible to isolate the
individual effects, owing to small sample size). Moreover, households’ income from
agricultural activities increased, as did women’s income from paid work; but whether
women spent more time in off-farm work could not be determined. In Sri Lanka,
according to the findings of focus groups discussions conducted for IEG’s PPAR (IEG
2014c, p. 20), participation in Village Savings and Credit Organizations supported
“enhanced financial literacy, confidence with regard to the use of money, and greater
unity owing to the transparency of the process about who received funds and their
intended purposes.”

Public work programs do measure how many men and women were employed, but not
necessarily how this was beneficial in terms of greater earnings, assets, or consumption
for women (or men). For example, the Tanzania TASAF does not measure whether the




1Prior to the project, each family used to travel 3 to 4 km and spend a total of four hours daily
to get water.


30
                                                                                 CHAPTER 4
                                     DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
women who got employed through the public work scheme were able to increase their
savings, assets, and control over economic resources.

By contrast, in Malawi, where women’s participation in public works schemes and
savings-investment groups was relatively high, the program was able to document
immediate benefits in terms of higher earnings (from public works) and long-term
benefits in terms of asset building through participation in saving-investment groups.1
It appears that saving-investment groups offered a rare opportunity to directly
empower women. The beneficiary assessment found that small business development
in savings groups was primarily driven by women. Surveyed villages saw a 55 percent
increase in women engaged in business as a result of participating in those groups.

Some dimensions of female economic empowerment are not measured (for a detailed
list of indicators tracked by projects see table A5 in Appendix E). This is the case, for
example, for income stability, employment stability, or changes in the level of control
over household income and household consumption. Moreover, in some cases
outcomes that could be measured at the individual level (such as increase in assets,
savings, and income) are measured only at the household level, and not separately for
men and women, which could provide more meaningful information.

DO CDD PROJECTS INCREASE WOMEN’S POLITICAL EMPOWERMENT?
Projects can provide the right conditions for women to successfully exercise voice and
decision making with respect to project activities. In the Indonesia KDP, an early
analysis of the breakdown of proposals by sex (Wong 2002) showed that women’s
groups overwhelmingly chose economic activities over infrastructure. Specifically,
women were more likely to choose loans and savings (51 percent of all proposed
activities), while clean water projects represented only a tiny minority of all women’s
proposed activities. According to the author, this was probably because women, who
run the majority of small businesses in the village were quite familiar with loan
programs. Moreover, Wong notes, women may have preferred loans because they
needed not only to finance their business but also some of the household expenses.2




1 An IEG report found that there is limited impact evaluation evidence of public works (IEG
2014a). The report highlights the need to collect sex-disaggregated information of public works
results and investing in more impact evaluations.
2 Other  hypotheses were more related to the project implementation modalities. For example, it
could have been the perception of facilitators that women preferred economic activities, which
would have led them to provide this type of information. The option of choosing economic
activities was later removed from the Kecamatan Development Project.


                                                                                              31
CHAPTER 4
DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
However, men and women may indicate similar preferences, even when projects are
designed so that both men and women can have an independent voice in community
decisions. In the Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Fund project, nine times out of 10 men
and women were expressing the same priorities for subproject selection, according to
the monitoring and evaluation data. It is not clear whether this is because preferences
coincided, because community needs transcended gender (given the very limited set of
options offered to villagers), or because men were able to influence women’s
preferences. This was the case in the Philippines too.

Sometimes external circumstances, rather than genuine differences in preferences, can
make the project more appealing to women than to men. According to the IEG project
evaluation of the Bangladesh Social Investment Program (IEG 2016a), when measures
were taken at restructuring to increase community participation of women and youth
by integrating them in local rural institutions, women became the de facto participants in
the project because many of the men residing in these areas were too busy or too
uninterested in joining once the project was geared to being truly pro-poor.

Higher participation of women does not necessarily translate into greater control of
project resources—frequently a reflection of engrained gender roles that are hard to
change. In the Indonesia PNPM, high rates of participation still resulted in dominance
of men within the project. The Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Project is one of the very
few projects that set a threshold of a minimum percentage of proposed subprojects that
need to come from women, in an attempt to explicitly address gender asymmetries in
decision-making power. It is also the only project that reports the percentage of
approved proposals coming from the women’s list.1

When it comes to higher-level impacts on political empowerment, mixed evidence was
found by those projects that measured the impact of participation “outside the project
boundaries.” In Afghanistan, the National Solidarity Project (NSP) increased women’s
participation in the 2010 parliamentary elections, and in dispute mediation and aid
allocation decisions. However, the project did not change the way women viewed
democratic elections or participatory decision-making. In India, the ICR for the Andhra
Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project noted that the political voice of the poor and
the number of women leaders of the community-based organizations (CBOs) increased.


1 Inthe case of the Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Fund project there is a large overlap between
men’s and women’s preferences (90 percent of approved proposals are equally preferred by
both). With respect to the early Kecamatan Development Program experience, Wong (2002) also
observes that it is not clear whether proposals from women’s groups truly reflect women’s
needs and aspirations or whether there has been intervention by men when the proposals were
being prepared.


32
                                                                                CHAPTER 4
                                    DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
According to the ICR, many CBO leaders from the poorest households contested and
won local government elections, and CBO women leaders made up 25 percent of
Panchayat (local government) seats at all levels.

In Bangladesh, the Asian Development Bank’s Country Gender Assessment Report
(ADB 2010) revealed that women who have been integrated into community
institutions have gone on to participate on elected local government councils. In
Azerbaijan, women were found to participate increasingly in national multidisciplinary
forums on investment, not just in gender sessions. In Vietnam, while women’s
participation in village meetings ranged between 45 percent and 67 percent, they still
remained underrepresented in decision-making bodies such as the Commune
Development Boards and Commune Supervision Boards.

Change in the political sphere requires time, but in certain contexts even small changes
can represent substantial progress. In Afghanistan, the first NSP program created-
women only Community Development Councils which provided the first opportunity
for women to meet and discuss shared concerns. The 2009 midline survey of the NSP
found that the program increased the engagement of women across a number of
dimensions of community life, while also increasing respect for senior women in the
village and making men more open to female participation in local governance. The
interim evaluation of the second phase of the NSP reports that the project increased the
participation of women in local governance and their awareness of village leadership
and local governance services. An impact evaluation found that women in the villages
where the NSP was implemented were more frequently meeting women from other
villages, as well as district government officials. The NSP increased men’s openness to
female electoral participation, national candidacy by women, and women holding
positions in the civil service and working with nongovernment organizations. The NSP
also increased the acceptance of female membership in village councils and of female
participation in the selection of the village headman. However, although the role of
women in village life had increased, there was no impact on women’s position within
the family—for example, on women’s decisions regarding money and assets that
women identify as their own (Beath, Christia, and Enikolopov 2013).1




1There is a unique reason why Afghanistan NSP discusses political participation. The PDO of
NSP 3 aims “to build, strengthen, and maintain Community Development Councils (CDCs) as
effective institutions for local governance and social-economic development.”


                                                                                          33
CHAPTER 4
DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
DO CDD PROJECTS INCREASE WOMEN’S SOCIAL EMPOWERMENT?
Although changing attitudes takes time, and this is not an explicit development goal of
CDD interventions, some projects report change in gender roles, when it comes to
household decision-making and women’s role in society.

With respect to household decision making, in Andhra Pradesh Prennushi and Gupta
(2014) found improvements over the evolving societal trends at the time regarding a
woman’s ability to leave the home without permission, to disagree with her husband,
and to participate in village meetings. In Nepal, although the impact evaluation
(Parajuli and others, 2012) did not find any statistically significant impact on social
capital or female empowerment, the ICR suggests that women gained greater voice in
the household as a result of the project, measured by the number of husband-wife joint
decisions made in the household (as reported by women). In Yemen’s Social Fund for
Development 3, women were the majority of multilateral financial institution clients,
and they expressed a high level of satisfaction with microfinance programs, recognizing
several benefits from their participation, namely greater independence and self-
confidence, greater respect and decision making in the household, improved economic
situation, and the opportunity to have a home-based job (Micro Finance Gender Impact
Study, 2008, as reported by the Implementation Completion and Results report).

With respect to the role of women in society, some projects report, anecdotally, that
women have become more vocal and confident in public decision-making fora, and
claim that women’s status has been elevated thanks to their participation in the
program (Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka). Several projects also
report increased empowerment based on women’s self-assessment, but do not discuss
how this information was collected (for example, Rwanda). More robust evidence on
the benefits of participation is available for Andhra Pradesh. In Andhra Pradesh,
women’s participation in self-help groups led to a greater voice in decision-making
within and outside the household. Moreover, the Impact Assessment found that the
percentage of women marrying below the legal age was reduced among project
participants.

CDD may contribute to increasing women’s social capital by strengthening networks of
trust and reciprocity among women, but evidence is more anecdotal and less
systematic. The ICR for Rwanda’s Rural Sector Support Project I states that the project
has played a key role in creating social capital in the areas where it intervened, and
because of the strong participation of women in project-financed activities, it has been
instrumental in mainstreaming gender and social equity in the local development
agenda. The IEG evaluation of Bangladesh Social Investment Program I (IEG 2016a)
indicates that women’s active participation in the project after midterm, in accessing
savings and credit activities, had positive impacts in the community and the


34
                                                                                 CHAPTER 4
                                     DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
households. The findings from the field research suggest that the formation of women-
only community institutions, their access to credit, and livelihood interventions helped
build women’s capacity to make collective decisions and take action. It also helped to
strengthen social capital as measured by community cohesion and inclusion in the
community institutions, which categorically enhanced women’s empowerment—in the
form of participation in community decisions and social and legal awareness.

Stronger evidence is emerging for self-help groups (Box 4.1). Women from JEEViKA
self-help groups in Bihar experienced significant improvements in empowerment
dimensions such as mobility, decision making in the household (regarding, for
example, the primary livelihood activity and their own work), and propensity toward
collective action (Datta, 2015). A more recent mixed-methods evaluation, Datta and
others (2015), confirms that participation in self-help groups has dramatically increased
and so did savings, but found more muted impacts on empowerment.

Some indicators of women’s empowerment show improvement: for example women in
self-help groups have higher mobility to places that are important for the project (such
as group meetings and banks) but not to other places. Women are more likely to discuss
problems and potential solutions with social contacts outside of their families (with
regard to food or health emergencies) and are more likely to participate in decision
making within their households (this latter is true also of women in control areas).


 Box 4.1 The Impact of Rural Livelihoods Programs and Self-Help Groups: Lessons from India
 Livelihoods programs provide a grant to individuals or groups for productive investment,
 often including a training component and multisectoral links (Mansuri and Rao, 2013). They
 may have a strong focus of women and include one or more of the following elements: self-
 help groups; microcredit; savings and loans groups; women’s community groups for village
 development; women’s groups for management of community resources (World Bank, FAO,
 and IFAD, 2009). They are antipoverty interventions that contain strong elements of collective
 action and community empowerment. Self-help groups are small groups of people who make
 regular savings contributions, and then borrow or loan the pool of funds for productive
 investments. Cooperatives and self-help groups or project management committees which
 receive community investment funds, or perform institutional development or skills
 building, follow the community-driven development (CDD) approach (Tanaka, Singh, and
 Songco, 2006). There is increasing evidence that these programs have positive impacts on
 women’s economic and social empowerment, as the economic ties they create generate trust,
 group networks, and group participation (Sanyal, 2009 on West Bengal).
 A mixed-methods systematic review (Brody and others, 2015) found that women’s economic
 self-help groups have positive statistically significant effects on various dimensions of
 women’s empowerment, including economic, social, and political empowerment, but not on




                                                                                              35
CHAPTER 4
DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
 psychological empowerment. There was no conclusive evidence on domestic violence: self-
 help groups do not seem to decrease or increase domestic violence.
 Group membership builds social capital, including self-esteem, solidarity, and shared
 identity (World Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). The systematic review found that the positive
 effects of self-help groups run through several channels including: solidarity; improved social
 networks; and respect from the household and other community members (Brody and others,
 2015). The empowering effects of group belonging are often stated by women as the most
 important outcome of their membership (World Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). The evidence
 consistently finds that trust, cooperation, and social capital can be increased through
 women’s self-help groups, though only to a moderate extent (see for example Janssens, 2010,
 on the Mahila Samakhya program in India, and Koyabu, 2014, on the Community
 Empowerment Programme for Women in Afghanistan).
 Self-help groups also have effects on women’s ability to control aspects of their lives, such as
 family planning, mobility, and controlling household income (Saha and others, 2013; World
 Bank, FAO, and IFAD 2009). Familiarity with handling money and independence in financial
 decision making was cited in the systematic review as a route to empowerment (Brody and
 others, 2015). In Afghanistan, the Community Empowerment Program for Women increased
 women’s income and savings, which increased their ability to make choices, their mobility
 and their decision-making (Koyabu, 2014). Also notable was that men changed their minds
 about women’s possession of their own assets. In some cases there have also been effects on
 women’s political participation, household decision making, and service provision (World
 Bank, FAO, and IFAD, 2009).
 Improving the enabling environment for women is challenging, however. Neither livelihoods
 programs nor self-help groups directly address, for example, land rights for women, or
 changes in the household division of labor (World Bank, FAO, and IFAD, 2009). Most of the
 benefits accrue to middle-class or better-off women, not resource-poor women, who may not
 be able to participate (World Bank, FAO, and IFAD, 2009). The systematic review suggests
 that participation of the poorest of the poor is perceived to be low as compared to less poor
 women (Brody and others, 2015). In part, this might be because the poorest of the poor are
 too financially and/or socially constrained to join self-help groups or to benefit from the
 financial services they provide. Poorer or vulnerable women may not feel accepted by groups
 that are made up of wealthier or more well-connected community members. Women’s other
 forms of identity such as class, caste, language, age, and marital status mediate the extent to
 which they are able to gain from group membership.


Sometimes the projects themselves may inadvertently reinforce traditional gender roles.
In the Indonesian CDD program it was observed that the type and size of activities
women were engaging were limited and unable to change the traditional economy of
the family. They were small in scale and with low returns. Moreover, they reinforced
women’s traditional roles (such as preparing cakes and snacks, or sewing), which
limited the new opportunities that could have made a difference sufficient to lift the
household out of poverty (World Bank, 2007). The IEG PPAR assessment of the Gemi
Diriya project in Sri Lanka (IEG 2014c) found that loans were often taken by women for
needs other than their own, suggesting that more research is needed on intrahousehold


36
                                                                              CHAPTER 4
                                  DID WORLD BANK–SUPPORTED CDD PROJECTS EMPOWER WOMEN?
decision-making and its effect on women’s welfare. According to an assessment by the
Asian Development Bank (ADB 2012), women’s significant involvement in the
Philippines KALAHI-CIDSS project increased their self-confidence and enhanced their
analytical, management, and leadership skills. However, men still outrank women in
leadership positions of the various KALAHI-CIDSS volunteer committees. In many
instances, women are assigned such roles as documenter, treasurer, cook, recordkeeper,
and other traditional roles that are, in effect, extensions of their responsibilities as
household managers. More generally, women do not have primary roles in CDD and
tend to be in traditional supporting roles. In almost all projects men outnumber women
in positions of power and responsibility. These findings led to modifications in the
design of the National Community-driven Project.

CDD may produce unintended impacts, including negative spillovers. Changing
gender norms may require time and adjustments at the household and community
levels. The potential negative behavioral responses to project activities and
requirements introduced with good intentions need not be overlooked and, if possible,
anticipated, given the context. In Uganda, the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund I
ICR mentions that increased women’s participation in projects may place an increased
demand on their time: “In order to strengthen its gender outcomes, implementation of
NUSAF should have taken into consideration the fact that women experience
difficulties combining responsibilities in the projects with their other household
responsibilities and chores. This was not sufficiently addressed in the project design.”
(ICR, p. 17) The IEG evaluation of the Bangladesh Social Investment Program noted that
the original community groups were not provided with basic gender awareness
training, knowledge, and understanding on prevention of violence against women. This
was a missed opportunity to raise awareness around such issues as the dowry, early
marriage, women’s health, pregnancy, and hygiene, as well as violence against women
(IEG 2016a).




                                                                                      37
5. Discussion and Lessons Learned
This report analyzed the gender features of CDD projects, the extent to which they
respond to women’s specific constraints, and their impact on women’s empowerment,
in the economic, political, and social domains. The key findings and lessons learned are
summarized as follows:


Key Findings
CDD projects aim to empower communities and traditionally excluded groups. Women
are increasingly recognized as a group that CDD interventions need to reach out to with
specific activities to ensure that they fully benefit.

The review of project objectives, indicators, and results documented in project
documents indicates that World Bank-supported CDD projects actively pursue and
generate high female participation at the level of specific project activities. Women’s
attendance at meetings is actively supported. Quality of participation and women’s
involvement in implementation, management, and maintenance of subprojects is less
well understood. Project teams increasingly recognize that they need to pay more
attention to these dimensions.

CDD programs track outputs of project activities, such as the number of subprojects
proposed by women or the number of women who received credit. Very few projects
identify and measure outcomes in their results frameworks to explain how project
activities can change the lives of women. Results at this level are measured by those
evaluations that focus on both impacts “beyond the project boundaries” and expected
impacts. Evaluations of CDD, especially rigorous ones, are, however, still very few,
particularly when compared with other interventions (such as, for example, cash
transfers).

Most activities included in CDD projects support economic empowerment, and this is
the focus of the majority of indicators in results frameworks. Little information is
collected on how CDD affect political and social empowerment, though the principles at
the basis of the approach mostly speak to these two dimensions of empowerment.

Impacts of CDD projects on women’s economic empowerment that are frequently
documented include access to credit and training; the ability of women to choose
subprojects that address their needs; the number of jobs that went to women in projects
that include a public works component. Most projects show improvements in these
output-level indicators. Higher-level impacts on economic empowerment, such as


38
                                                                                  CHAPTER 5
                                                             DISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNED
changes in women’s income and control of resources, and changes in education and
health outcomes, are virtually never tracked. The few existing impact evaluations were
able to document some positive results for women at this level (especially in Uganda; in
Afghanistan and Andhra Pradesh results were more mixed).

In the realm of political and social empowerment, most impacts occur “beyond the
project’s boundaries” and are therefore rarely identified and measured.

Positive impacts on political empowerment have been documented at the level of higher
voice and decision-making in project activities (especially when a share of subprojects is
reserved to women), but women’s participation in the formal political process is not
normally contemplated. The Afghanistan impact evaluation is the only one to measure
the impact of the project on women’s voting behavior and attitudes to the political
system, and this is because political empowerment was part of the project’s objective.

Positive impacts on social empowerment have been measured in rural livelihood
programs and self-help groups, which appear to strengthen trust and solidarity among
group members. Little is known about changes that occur at the community level,
beyond participation in project committees, and at the household level. It is unclear
how these projects change traditional gender roles in society. This is obviously highly
contextual; in some environments merely participating in project activities can
challenge the traditional position of women (a typical example is Afghanistan, where
women’s physical mobility is severely restricted).


Lessons Learned
Because empowerment is a key element of the CDD approach it is important to bring it
out explicitly in the results chain of the project. Recognizing explicitly the power
relationships among groups and individuals in the community helps to understand
how project activities can support the inclusion or reinforce the exclusion of specific
groups, even inadvertently, and address inequalities; for example through the use of
quotas or other design elements. Evidence on empowerment impacts of CDD is thin
largely because CDD projects rarely discuss in a systematic way which dimensions of
empowerment they aim to affect, directly or indirectly, and how.

The design of CDD projects could benefit from being informed by gender-specific needs
assessments to identify the constraints that women face in the rural space. If these
constraints are ignored, CDD projects can have the undesirable effect of leaving women
behind and exacerbating gender gaps. Conversely, a good contextual analysis of
women’s needs and constraints can indicate where and how to strengthen the design of
project activities to potentially produce positive impact on women’s empowerment.


                                                                                        39
CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNED
It is useful to think of empowerment along the three categories of economic, political,
and social empowerment to identify the mechanisms CDD interventions can leverage,
and to identify direct and indirect effects. Economic empowerment can be more directly
supported by project activities that are intended to strengthen livelihoods or provide
infrastructure to improve access to services. Impacts on political and social
empowerment are generally more indirect and more likely to be part of the spillover
category, but these can nonetheless be transformational. By increasing women’s
participation, decision making and control of resources, CDD interventions may
strengthen women’s voice and self-confidence, increase their ability to engage with
local authorities, and even contribute to changing perceptions about gender roles in the
community. These processes require time, are heavily influenced by the context, and
generally need to be deliberately supported to generate positive change.

CDD projects cannot be expected to affect all dimensions of empowerment; hence the
importance of defining which dimensions can be affected, through which channels, and
how these effects can be measured. Empowerment is both a process and an outcome; it
requires both qualitative and quantitative indicators to measure its progress and
achievements. In addition to outputs and intermediate outcomes achieved through
project activities, it is important to measure change in power relationships, including
those affecting women, because these will be altered by the project.

Participation needs to be measured in a comprehensive way by the use of multiple
indicators. Participation in community meetings and village committees, which projects
increasingly measure separately for men and women, is only one dimension of
engagement. Quality of participation and consequences of participation need also to be
understood and measured to assess whether and how participation generates
empowerment “outside of the project boundaries” (increased voice, social cohesion,
women’s decision-making power, and sense of citizenship).

CDD interventions should better frame what they can impact both in the short and the
long term. It is simplistic to assume that CDD interventions can—easily, in the short
term—“empower communities” and “empower women.” Impacts at the higher level,
“beyond the project’s boundaries,” are more meaningful and lasting, because they are
about deeper change in people’s lives; but they depend on elements beyond the
project’s span of control, such as context, community characteristics, and other existing
policies and interventions. Moreover, they can emerge only in the longer timeframe.
Projects need to be aware of what can be achieved in their timeframe and in the longer
time horizon of the program (what the outcome and what the trajectory toward that
outcome is). Projects need to specify the more immediate achievements, such as
increased participation in meetings, more active decision making regarding subprojects,
and increased capacity to manage funds and activities, but also longer-term and higher-


40
                                                                                 CHAPTER 5
                                                            DISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNED
level impacts—increasing the voice and the agency of communities, women, and
disadvantaged groups.

The learning potential of what works to increase women’s empowerment can be
improved through more systematic assessment, reporting and evaluation. Although
there has been increasing attention to monitoring and evaluation of gender impacts,
especially for recent projects, the analysis of project documentation produced a
relatively small and scattered amount of statements, facts, and evidence as to the gender
dimensions in CDD and the impacts of these projects on women’s empowerment.
Project staff indicate that projects do much more than what they report, and produce
impacts that are not documented, but this information is lost if it is not systematically
recorded. Increased awareness, better reporting, and more assessments and evaluations
are fundamental to increasing knowledge and learning.




                                                                                       41
References
Alkire, Sabina, and Solava Ibrahim. 2007. “Agency and Empowerment: A Proposal for Internationally
         Comparable Indicators.” Oxford Development Studies 35 (4): 379–403.
Alkire, Sabina, Ruth Meinzen-Dick, Amber Peterman, Agnes Quisumbing, Greg Seymour, and Ana Vaz.
         2013. “The Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index.” World Development 52: 71–91.
Alsop, Ruth, and Nina Heinsohn. 2005. “Measuring Empowerment in Practice: Structuring Analysis and
        Framing Indicators.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3510. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
Alsop, Ruth, Mette Bertelsen, and Jeremy Holland. 2006. Empowerment in Practice: From Analysis to
        Implementation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Asian Development Bank. 2010. Bangladesh: Country Gender Assessment. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
______. 2012. “The KALAHI-CIDS Project in the Philippines Sharing Knowledge on Community-Driven
        Development.” Manila: Asian Development Bank.
Azarbaijani Azarbaijani and Moghaddam, S. 2010. If Anyone Listens, I Have a Lot of Plans: A Study of Gender
       Equity through the National Solidarity Programme’s Community Development Councils. Kabul: Danish
       Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees.
       http://www.nspafghanistan.org/files/NSP%20Gender%20Study%20Report.pdf
Beath, Andrew, Christia Fotini, and Ruben Enikolopov. 2013. “Empowering Women through
        Development Aid: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan.” American Political Science
        Review 107 (3): 540-557.
______. 2015. “The National Solidarity Programme: Assessing the Effects of Community-Driven
        Development in Afghanistan.” International Peacekeeping 22 (4): 302-320.
Bhatt, Nina and Brown, Gillian. (2011). Measuring the Impact of Community-Driven Development Projects on
        Gender: A Toolkit for the Poverty Reduction Fund, Lao PDR . Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/10/15556413/measuring-impact-
        community-driven-development-projects-gender-toolkit-poverty-reduction-fund-lao-pdr
Bigio, A.G. (ed.). 1997. Social Funds and Reaching the Poor: Experiences and Future Directions.
        Proceedings from an international workshop organized by The World Bank and AFRICATIP, La
        Red Social de América Latina y el Caribe, and NGO-WB Committee with the support of African
        Development Bank, Canadian International Development Agency, International Labour Office,
        and Organization of American States. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Blattman, C., N. Fiala, and S. Martinez. 2014. “Generating Skilled Self-Employment in Developing
       Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2): 697-
       752. http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/129/2/697
Brody, C., De Hoop, T., M. Vojtkova, R. Warnock, M. Dunbar P. Murthy, and S. Dworkin. 2015. “The
        Effects of Economic Self-Help Group Programs on Women’s Empowerment: A Systematic
        Review.” Campbell Systematic Reviews 11 (19). http://campbellcollaboration.org/lib/project/257/
Burjorjee, D. and M. Jennings. 2008. “Microfinance Gender Study: A Market Study of Women
        Entrepreneurs in Yemen.” Prepared for the Social Fund for Development.
Buvinic, Mayra, Rebecca Furst-Nichols, and Emily Courey Pryor. 2013. ”A Roadmap for Promoting
        Women’s Economic Empowerment.” United Nations Foundation and ExxonMobil Foundation.




42
                                                                                            REFERENCES

Buvinic, Mayra, and Rebecca Furst-Nichols. 2014. “Measuring Women’s Economic Empowerment.”
        Companion to A Roadmap for Promoting Women’s Economic Empowerment. United Nations
        Foundation and ExxonMobil Foundation.
Buvinic, M., and R. Furst-Nichols. 2016. “Promoting Women’s Economic Empowerment: What Works?”
        The World Bank Research Observer 31 (1): 59-101.
Casey, Katherine, Rachel Glennerster, and Edward Miguel. 2012. “Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on
        Aid Impacts Using a Preanalysis Plan.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (4): 1755–1812.
Cornwall, A. (2003). “Whose Voices? Whose Choices? Reflections on Gender and Participatory
      Development.” World Development 31 (8): 1325–1342.
Datta, Upamanyu. 2015. “Socio-Economic Impacts of JEEViKA: A Large-Scale Self-Help Group Project in
        Bihar, India.” World Development 68: 1-18.
Datta, Upamanyu, Vivian Hoffmann, Vijayendra Rao, and Vaishnavi Surendra. 2015. Report on the Impact
        of JEEViKA: Evidence from a Randomized Rollout 2011-2014. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/769421459872408091/How-do-Self-Help-Groups-empower-
        women-and-reduce-poverty-and-by-how-much-do-they-do-so.pdf
De Sousa Amazonas, M. D. F., T. Barbosa, A. C. G. Costa, and C. B. Romano. 2011. “Community-Driven
       Development (CDD) Initiatives in Mainstreaming Gender in Northeast Brazil: An Exploratory
       Case Study.” Gender Action Plan; Agriculture and Rural Development. Washington, DC: World
       Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/12/16609464/community-driven-
       development-cdd-initiatives-mainstreaming-gender-northeast-brazil-exploratory-case-study.
Duflo, Esther. 2012. “Women empowerment and economic development.” Journal of Economic Literature 50
        (4): 1051-1079.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014a. “Social Safety Nets and Gender: Learning from Impact
        Evaluations and World Bank Projects.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. (2014b). “Project Performance Assessment Report, Nigeria, Second National Fadama
     Development Project IDA-38380,” Report No. 88958. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014c. “Project Performance Assessment Report, Lessons from Two Decades of Village
     Development in Sri Lanka: A Project Performance Assessment of the Gemi Dirya Project in Sri
     Lanka (2004-2010),” Report No. 92788. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015. “Project Performance Assessment Report, India, Ten Million Women and Counting: An
     Assessment of World Bank Support for Rural Livelihood Development in Andhra Pradesh,
     Andhra Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project, Credit No. 33320-IN, and Andhra Pradesh
     Rural Poverty Reduction Project, Credit No. 37320-IN, 37321-IN, 46750-IN,” Report No. 95274.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016a. “Project Performance Assessment Report, Bangladesh, Social Investment Program Project,
     Credit IDA-3740,” Report No. 106442. Washington, DC : World Bank.
———. 2016b. “Project Performance Assessment Report, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Poverty
     Reduction Fund Project IDA-H4180 AND IDA-36750,” Report No. 106387. Washington, DC:
     World Bank.
———. 2016c. “Project Performance Assessment Report, Tanzania, Second Social Action Fund, IDA -4002,
     IDA-4636,” Report No. 106388. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016d. “Project Performance Assessment Report, Malawi, Third Social Action Fund (MASAF 3)
     APL II (LDF Mechanism) Project, IDA-44830, IDA-47880, IDA-51420, IDA-H7940,” Report No.
     106389. Washington, DC: World Bank.



                                                                                                        43
REFERENCES

Janssens, W. 2010. “Women’s empowerment and the creation of social capital in Indian villages.” World
        Development 38 (7): 974-988. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2009.12.004
Jorgensen, Steen Lau. 2005. “Framing the logic of CDD operations: Toward a project theory for CDD
        design and evaluation.” Social Development Department. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://connect.worldbank.org/explore/SDV/cdd/_layouts/WordViewer.aspx?id=/explore/SD
        V/cdd/Lists/Community%20Driven%20Development%20CDD%20Resources/Attachments/140
        /CDDprojecttheory.docx&Source=http%3A%2F%2Fconnect%2Eworldbank%2Eorg%2Fexplore%
        2FSDV%2Fcdd%2Fdefault%2Easpx&DefaultItemOpen=1.
Kabeer, Naila. 2001. “Discussing Women’s Empowerment: Theory and Practice. Sida Studies 3.
______. 2012. “Empowerment, Citizenship and Gender Justice: A contribution to Locally Grounded
        Theories of change in Women’s Lives.” Ethics and Social Welfare 6 (3): 216–232.
Koyabu, M. 2014. “Community-Driven Development and women's empowerment in the reconstruction
       of Afghanistan: a case study on Community Empowerment Programme for Women (CEPW) in
       Balkh province, Afghanistan.” 同志社グローバル・スタディーズ 4: 93-120.
       https://doors.doshisha.ac.jp/duar/repository/ir/16354/049000040007.pdf
Kuehnast, Kathleen. 2003. “Gender and Social Funds: Challenges and Opportunities.” Social Protection
      Discussion Paper 0309. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Lubbock, A., and A. Carloni. 2008. Does unfettered CDD hurt women more than it helps them? Discussion
       paper submitted by IFAD. World Bank - SDN Week - 22 February 2008.
       http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/documents/654016/94152/Does+unfettered+CDD+hurt+w
       omen+more+than+it+helps+them/f116fb32-31ef-41b9-9e34-624e4f779f27?version=1.5.
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work?
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
Millenium Challenge Corporation. 2013. The Kalahi-CIDSS Gender Toolkit: Mainstreaming Gender in the
        Community Development Project February 2013. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Munoz Boudet, Ana Maria, Patti Petesch, and Carolyn Turk with Angelica Thumala. 2012. On Norms and
      Agency: Conversations about Gender Equality with Women and Men in 20 Countries. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.
Narayan, Deepa. 1995. “Designing Community-Based Development.” Social Development Paper 7.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
Narayan, Deepa. 2005 (ed). Measuring Empowerment: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.
O’Neil, Tam, Pilar Domingo, and Craig Valters. 2014. “Progress on Women’s Empowerment.” London:
        Overseas Development Institute.
OED (Operations Evaluation Department). 2005. “A Review of the Literature on Participatory
      Approaches to Local Development for an Evaluation of the Effectiveness of World Bank Support
      for Community- Based and -Driven Development Approaches.” Background Paper to The
      Effectiveness of World Bank Support for Community-Based and -Driven Development. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.
Parajuli, Dilip, Gayatri Acharya, Nazmul Chaudhury, and Bishnu Bahadur. 2012. “Impact of Social Fund
         on the Welfare of Rural Households Evidence from the Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund. World
         Bank Policy Research Working Paper 604.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
Pereznieto, Paola, and Georgia Taylor. 2014 . “A Review of Approaches and Methods to Measure
        Economic Empowerment of Women and Girls.” Gender & Development 22 (2): 233-251.



44
                                                                                               REFERENCES

Poncin, E. 2012. “Hegemony, Transformism and Anti-Politics: Community-Driven Development
        Programmes at the World Bank.” PhD thesis, The London School of Economics and Political
        Science (LSE). http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/id/eprint/625.
Porter, R., and Zovighian, D. 2014. Unpacking Performance and Empowerment in Female Farmers' Groups: The
         Case of the Fadama Project in Nigeria. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/21117.
Prennushi, G., and A. Gupta. 2014. “Women’s Empowerment and Socio-Economic Outcomes Impacts of
       the Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Program.” Policy Research Working Paper 6841.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
Rao, Vijayendra, and Michael Woolcock. 2005. “Mixing Qualitative and Econometric Methods:
        Community-Level Applications” in Measuring Empowerment: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
Saha, Somen, Peter Leslie Annear, and Swati Pathak. 2013. “The Effect of Self-Help Groups on Access to
        Maternal Health Services: Evidence from Rural India.” International Journal for Equity in Health.
        12:36. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3673812/pdf/1475-9276-12-36.pdf
Sanyal, P. 2009. “From Credit to Collective Action: The Role of Microfinance in Promoting Women’s
        Social Capital and Normative Influence.” American Sociological Review 74: 529-550.
Tanaka, S., J. Singh, and D. Songco, 2006. A Review of Community-Driven Development and Its Application to
       the Asian Development Bank. Asian Development Bank.
       http://brownschool.wustl.edu/sites/DevPractice/Reports%20of%20Development%20Agencies
       /A%20review%20of%20CDD%20to%20ADB.pdf
Wong, Susan. 2002. Do Women Make Any Difference? KDP1 Gender Data Analysis—Interim Report.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2002/02/23167169/women-make-difference-
       kdp1-gender-data-analysis-interim-report
Wong, Susan. 2012. “What Have Been the Impacts of World Bank Community-Driven Development
       Programs?” CDD Impact Evaluation Review and Operational and Research Implications,
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2002. Empowerment and Poverty Reduction: A Sourcebook. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2003. “Community-Driven Development” Chapter 9 in PRSP Sourcebook. Washington, DC: World
        Bank. http://go.worldbank.org/FAURGRFIP0
______. 2007. Gender in Community Driven Development Project: implications for PNPM strategy. Working
        paper on the findings of joint donor and government mission. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2007/01/8236420/gender-community-driven-
        development-project-implications-pnpm-strategy
______. 2011a. The World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development . Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
______. 2011b. Gender Dimensions of Community-Driven Development Operations: A Toolkit for Practitioners.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2011c. Making Everyone Count: Gender-Sensitive Monitoring and Evaluation in a CDD Project: The Case
        of The Philippines KALAHI-CIDSS. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://imagebank.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2011/12/15/00033303
        7_20111215235726/Rendered/PDF/660340WP00PUBL0aking0everyone0count.pdf
______. 2012. PNPM Gender Study 2012: Increasing the Quality of Women’s Participation . Final Report PNPM
        Support Facility. The World Bank: Jakarta



                                                                                                            45
REFERENCES

______. 2013. Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity . Washington, DC: World Bank.
        https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16195
______. 2014. “Engaging Youth through Community-Driven Development: Operations Experiences,
        Findings, and Opportunities.” Global Stocktake Synthesis Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/613671468149947712/Engaging-youth-through-
        community-driven-development-objectives-experiences-findings-and-opportunities.
______. 2015. “World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16 -23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction, and
        Inclusive Growth.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/12/25691813/world-bank-group-gender-
        strategy-fy16-23-gender-equality-poverty-reduction-inclusive-growth
World Bank and DFID (U.K. Department for International Development). 2006. Unequal Citizens: Gender,
       Caste and Ethnic Exclusion in Nepal. Kathmandu: World Bank and Department for International
       Development. http://www-
       wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2006/12/05/000090341_2
       0061205151859/Rendered/PDF/379660Nepal0GSEA0Summary0Report01PUBLIC1.pdf
World Bank, FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), and IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural
       DevelopmentD). 2009. Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Zovighian, Diane. 2014. “Budget and Procurement Monitoring in Nigeria: A Civil Society Perspective .”
       Perspectives on Social Development, Briefing Notes from Nigeria. Washington, DC: World Bank.
       https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/21116/927260WP0budge00Bo
       x385377B00PUBLIC0.pdf?sequence=1




46
Appendix A. List of Programs included in the
Desk Review
Appendix Table A.1 – List of CDD programs
 Country          Project name       Implementation period                        Project objective
 India           Andhra Pradesh           2003- 2011         Enable the rural poor, particularly the poorest of the poor, to
                  Rural Poverty                                       improve their livelihoods and quality of life
                Reduction Project;
 Sri Lanka          Community             2004-2014             Improve livelihood and quality of life of targeted poor
                Development and                              communities by enabling them to build accountable and self-
                    Livelihood                                 governing local institutions and to manage sustainable
               Improvement “Gemi                                                      investments
                  Diriya” project
 Nepal            Nepal Poverty          2004-present                Improve access to income-generation projects and
                 Alleviation Fund                             community infrastructure for the groups that have tended to
                                                               be excluded for reasons of gender, ethnicity, and caste, as
                                                                     well as for the poorest groups in rural communities
 Bangladesh     Social Investment         2003-2016              Develop effective and efficient financing and institutional
                    Program                                  arrangements for improving access to local infrastructure and
                                                                   basic services through community-driven small-scale
                                                                   infrastructure works, social assistance programs, and
                                                                                  income-generating activities
 Pakistan      Poverty Alleviation        1999-2016                 Reduce the incidence of poverty through provision of
                     Fund                                            resources and services to the poor and low-income
                                                                     population, particularly women. PPAF 3 focuses on
                                                             empowering targeted poor with increased incomes, improved
                                                                  productive capacity, and access to services to achieve
                                                                                      sustainable livelihoods
 Afghanistan   National Solidarity        2003-2015           Lay the foundations for a strengthening of community-level
                    Project                                   governance, and support community-managed subprojects,
                                                                comprising reconstruction and development, that improve
                                                                    access of rural communities to social and productive
                                                                                   infrastructure and services.
 Kyrgyz        Village Investment         2004-2014          Contribute to the alleviation of rural poverty by: (a) improving
 Republic            Project                                 governance and capacity at the local level; (b) strengthening
                                                                  the provision of, and access to, essential infrastructure
                                                                   services; and (c) supporting private small-scale group
                                                                 enterprise development. The second project focus is on
                                                                empowering communities to improve access to social and
                                                                      economic infrastructure services and employment
                                                                                           opportunities
 Azerbaijan     Rural Investment         2004-present        Reduce poverty, improve living standards, expand economic
                    Project                                   activities for rural households, and increase access and use
                                                                        of infrastructure services in rural communities
 Lao PDR       Poverty Reduction          2002-2016                 PRF I: alleviate poverty by: (a) financing community
                     Fund                                        infrastructure activities; (b) building local capacity at the
                                                                  village level to manage public investment planning and
                                                               implementation; and (c) strengthening the capacity of local




                                                                                                                        47
APPENDIX A
LIST OF PROGRAMS INCLUDED IN THE DESK REVIEW
                                                                     institutions to support participatory decision making at the
                                                                                   village, Kum Banh, and district levels.
                                                                           PRF II: to improve access to and utilization of basic
                                                                   infrastructure and services in a sustainable manner through
                                                                       inclusive community and local development processes.
 Philippines      KALAHI-CIDSS                2002-2014               Strengthen local communities’ participation in barangay
                                                                            governance, and develop their capacity to design,
                                                                   implement, and manage development activities that reduce
                                                                   poverty. Modified with the Additional Financing to: empower
                                                                         local communities in targeted poor municipalities and
                                                                          selected urban areas to achieve improved access to
                                                                    sustainable basic public services and to participate in more
                                                                                  inclusive LGU planning and budgeting
 Indonesia          PNPM Rural                2008-2015               Improve the economic and social welfare of the poor by
                                           (KDP since 1998)                expanding their employment opportunities through
                                                                      community consultations, revolving funds, and capacity
                                                                                          building at the local level.
 Vietnam         Northern Mountain           2001-present             Enhance the living standards of project beneficiaries by
                 Poverty Reduction                                      improving their access to productive infrastructure, the
                                                                     productive and institutional capacity of local governments
                                                                          and communities, and market linkages and business
                                                                                                  innovation
 Tanzania         Tanzania Social            2001-present           Empower communities to access opportunities so that they
                   Action Fund                                    can request, implement, and monitor the delivery of services
                                                                   through subprojects that contribute to improved livelihoods.
                                                                  The project development objective was simplified to: improve
                                                                  beneficiary households’ access to enhanced socioeconomic
                                                                              services and income-generating opportunities
 Malawi         Malawi Social Action         2003-present           Improve livelihood of poor and vulnerable households and
                       Fund                                         strengthen the capacity of local authorities to manage local
                                                                                                 development
 Nigeria              Fadama                 2004-present           Sustainably increase the incomes of Fadama users, those
                                                                       who depend directly or indirectly on Fadama resources
                                                                         (farmers, pastoralists, fishers, hunters, gatherers, and
                                                                  service providers), through empowering communities to take
                                                                                charge of their own development agenda
 Rwanda         Rural Sector Support          2001-2015                   Increase agricultural production and marketing in an
                       Project                                     environmentally sustainable manner. The III project aims at
                                                                           strengthening the participation of women and men
                                                                               beneficiaries in market-based value chains
 Uganda          Northern Uganda             2003-present                Empower communities living in Northern Uganda and
                Social Action Fund I,                             influence their livelihood through: (a) enhancing the capacity
                      II and III                                    of the communities to systematically identify, prioritize, and
                                                                           plan for their needs; (b) strengthening the ongoing
                                                                           reconciliation process in Northern Uganda; and (c)
                                                                         implementing sustainable development initiatives that
                                                                       improve socioeconomic services and opportunities and
                                                                       support vulnerable groups, including youth and women
                                                                                              affected by conflict
 Yemen            Social Fund for               1997-2009          Improve the living conditions, range of services and options
                   Development          (fourth phase 2010-2016        available, including economic opportunities, of the poor
                                               suspended)




          48
                                                                                     APPENDIX A
                                                   LIST OF PROGRAMS INCLUDED IN THE DESK REVIEW
Morocco   National Initiative for    2006-2016         Improve inclusion, participation, and transparency in
          Human Development                        decision-making and project implementation at the local level
                (INDH)                             so as to promote the use of social services among vulnerable
                                                                       groups and the poor
Brazil       Rural Poverty          2002-present     Improve wellbeing, employment, and incomes of the rural
           Reduction Project -                        poor through better access to basic social services and
          Rio Grande do Norte                      economic infrastructure and services, and support productive
                                                                             activities




                                                                                                          49
Appendix B. Methodology
1.    The questions that guided this analysis were: “Do CDD interventions result in
economic, social, and/or political empowerment of women, as well as men’s?” and
“What are the conditions (including contextual elements) and the design elements that
enhance or weaken these impacts?” More specific questions that the report tackles are:

     a. With respect to design elements. Do CDD interventions deliberately aim to
        enhance women’s empowerment and achieve greater gender equality as one of
        their main objectives? If so, which dimensions of gender equality do they focus
        on and what elements do they incorporate in their design to achieve this goal?

     b. With respect to indicators. Which indicators do CDD projects use to measure
        empowerment or social capital? And women’s empowerment in particular? How
        do these indicators compare to those discussed in the broader female
        empowerment literature?

     c. With respect to impacts and results. What are the impacts of CDD interventions
        on women’s empowerment? Does participation of women in community
        decision-making processes increase as a result of CDD projects? What about
        household decision-making? What about alternative measures of empowerment?
        Does a higher participation of women result in different choices regarding
        community projects? Are CDD interventions that deliberately aim to improve
        women’s empowerment more effective than those that do not target women
        explicitly? Is there evidence of increased impacts over time with respect to
        empowering women?

2.      Three complementary exercises were conducted to answer these questions:

In depth review of gender dimensions in rural CDD projects supported by the World
Bank (IBRD and IDA)
3.     The team conducted a desk review of project documents and independent
assessments, including impact evaluations (when available) to document the evolution
of the approach to gender integration and the results achieved over time. The sample
included longstanding CDD programs, defined as well-established programs that have
received long-term government commitment.1 This sampling criterion led to the


1
 We defined long term commitment as countries with at least two consecutive projects
supported by the Bank.


50
                                                                                         APPENDIX B
                                                                                      METHODOLOGY
inclusion of 20 programs in as many countries in the desk review.1 Projects selected
have an average of slightly more than eight years of implementation. The team focused
on “programs that include community control and management of funds and
emphasize community inputs into the planning and decision-making process” (Wong
2012, p. 4). Sector-specific projects with a CDD approach or component were excluded.
Only one CDD program was selected for each country (where more than one program
existed), but for the selected program the analysis focused on the whole sequence of
projects. Appendix D presents the template used to collect the information.

4.     Project objectives, components, outcome indicators, and reported results were
analyzed using available information from project documents and the broader literature
to assess the level of gender integration, the approaches adopted, the types of indicators
used to measure and monitor results, and how gender-relevant results were
documented. Task team leads were contacted to provide additional information
(including beneficiary assessments, impact evaluations, and other evidence on
outcomes) as needed to supplement the desk review of project documents, and were
asked clarifying questions as needed. Country strategies were analyzed to situate the
CDD in the broader country engagement framework. Economic and social work and
other relevant analytical work were used to analyze contextual elements (such as
specific gender issues in the country or region, type of livelihood, level of government
decentralization, and so on). The design of currently active projects was compared to
the design of closed projects to assess whether the approach to address gender issues
has changed over time.

Critical review of the literature
5.      The critical review of the literature appraised three main strands of literature—
the literature on CDD, with a specific focus on the mechanisms meant to enhance
participation, inclusion, social capital, and empowerment; the literature on gender in
CDD, especially the more recent, analyzing the specific gender impacts of CDD projects;
and the literature on empowerment, female empowerment in particular, to define the
concept and the dimensions that are relevant for CDD projects and are or could be
affected (including impacts that are unintended). This exercise was not limited to World
Bank projects, but focused on the literature at large.2 The exercise helped define the

1The CDD Community of Practice shared with the team a list of long-running CDD programs
in 25 countries identified in consultations with task team leads, which were used as a starting
point for our selection. After further refinement 20 projects were selected, based on the criteria
defined for the analysis. These projects are listed in Appendix A, Table A.1.
2
 Two background papers, one on women’s empowerment, and one on the gender implications
of CDD interventions have been produced for this report.


                                                                                                 51
APPENDIX B
METHODOLOGY
conceptual framework that guided the organization of the main messages emerging
from the empirical analysis.

6.      An internet search was conducted to identify relevant CDD impact evaluations
and program documents in English, using both search engines and hand-searching
organizations’ websites. Key search terms were ‘gender, women, empowerment,
community driven development, CDD.’ Hand searching was conducted at 3ie, R4D,
and the World Bank CDD site. Individual programs were also re-searched to double-
check that all relevant documents had been captured. The results from each program
evaluation were then synthesized into major common themes. The literature review
relies on published and accessible documentation but, owing to resource limitations, is
not a systematic review, and may not capture all available knowledge.

7.     Many documents, assessments, and reviews on CDD were examined. These were
searched for key gender terms (women, gender, female). If they did not contain any of
these terms or only referred to them in passing, they were excluded from the
background literature. Both rural and urban contexts were included in the search, but
only documents that referred to rural programs were eventually retained.

8.     The review of the literature on empowerment helped define meaningful
dimensions and indicators that were tracked in the desk review. The team reviewed the
recent literature that proposed and piloted a number of indicators comparable across
countries, with special attention to the rural context (for example, Alkire and Ibrahim,
2007; Alkire and others 2013). The team also referred to indicators proposed in the
toolkit for gender integration in CDD (World Bank, 2011b) and to the few existing
impact evaluations that have analyzed the impact of CDD interventions on women’s
empowerment (a good example is Beath and others 2013; also Beath and others 2015).
The identification of appropriate indicators of women’s empowerment in CDD allowed
the team to prepare instruments for qualitative work (focus group discussions)
conducted in Lao PDR as part of a project performance assessment report (PPAR) of a
CDD project.1 This empirical exercise provided the opportunity to test women’s
empowerment indicators in the context of an actual CDD project, in addition to
generating additional evidence for one of the projects in the sample.2



1The team also drew from the focus group discussions tools used by Munoz Boudet and others
(2012).
2The focus group discussions tool was also piloted in Nepal toward the project performance
assessment of the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF), a program also included in the sample of
World Bank projects analyzed. However, because of the recent earthquake and the subsequent
crisis, the PPAR was put on hold, and the fieldwork was only recently carried out, too late for

       52
                                                                                      APPENDIX B
                                                                                    METHODOLOGY

Compilation and summary of findings of Project Performance Assessment Reports of
CDDs and other IEG evidence
9.     This review benefited of the field evidence collected by eight Project Performance
Assessment Reports (PPARs): the Nigeria Second National Fadama Development
Project PPAR (IEG 2014b), the Gemi Dirya Project PPAR in Sri Lanka (IEG 2014c), the
Andhra Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project (APDPIP) and the Andhra Pradesh
Rural Poverty Production Project (APRPRP) PPARs (IEG 2015); the Bangladesh Social
Investment Program Project PPAR (IEG 2016a), the Malawi Third Social Action Fund
PPAR (IEG 2016d), the Tanzania Second Social Action Fund PPAR (IEG 2016c), and the
PPAR of the Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Fund project (IEG 2016b).

10.    Most of these projects, more or less explicitly, aimed to reach out to women and
enhance their participation in community activities and in the identification and
management of subprojects. Often, they aimed to fund investment in micro-
infrastructure that meets women’s needs or enhances women’s livelihoods. The
projects’ monitoring and evaluation frameworks include variables that are meant to
capture several dimensions of participation and empowerment. PPARs assessed
projects’ achievements with respect to women’s increased participation and access to
services—as per their explicit design and motivations—and also investigated other
empowerment dimensions that may be affected as opportunities and voice increase.
PPARs reviewed also evidence on those empowerment dimensions that “extend
beyond the boundaries of the project.”

11.    Other country and thematic evaluations and learning products provided useful
material for this review. In particular, we used material prepared as background
analysis for the Evaluation of World Bank Support to the Rural Non-Farm Economy,
the Brazil Country Program Evaluation, and the Evaluation of World Bank Support to
Fragile and Conflict-affected States.




the results to be reflected in this report. Evidence for the Nepal PAF was, however, derived
from the desk review of project documents and impact evaluations.


                                                                                               53
Appendix C. Indicators of Women’s
Empowerment
12.     In discussing indicators of female empowerment, the team was guided by a set
of indicators that were organized according to the indications of the theoretical and
empirical literature. A compact list is presented below. The indicators are grouped into
three main categories: (i) women’s economic empowerment; (ii) women’s political
empowerment; and, (iii) women’s social empowerment. There is no clear-cut
classification of these indicators, however, and overlaps across categories are possible.
So, some indicators can be included under more than one category. The context and
goals of the projects can help define the meaning of these variables more specifically. 1

WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT

     ● Income and Expenditure. It is important to distinguish between the woman’s
       own earned income and other income she may receive; identify its source, type,
       and regularity, and the share of the woman’s contribution to the household
       income (relative to the man’s share). An important dimension of empowerment
       is manifested by the woman’s control over her own and her household income
       (whether the woman can decide how to use the income she earns and the
       household income, whether this decision is made jointly with her husband or
       other household members or whether it is her independent decision).
     ● Assets. Identify women’s ownership of housing, land, livestock, and other
       productive assets, durable goods, or communal resources. As with income it is
       also important to assess not just the ownership, but also women’s control over
       these assets (who decides the purchase, sale, use, and transfer of women’s own
       and shared assets). It is also important to identify women’s access to financial
       assets, credit, and saving accounts. Formal and informal laws and their
       enforcement regarding property and inheritance are also relevant dimensions
       under this category.
     ● Employment. Identify women’s participation in paid and unpaid (or family)
       employment over time. It is important to recognize the type of employment (for
       a wage, public or private, formal, vulnerable or casual, self-employment, family
       farm work, and so on); women’s participation in “good” vs. “bad” jobs; the

1A more detailed and exhaustive list of variables is presented in the paper “Women’s
Empowerment: Concepts, Framework, and Measurement,” commissioned for this report, which
also includes a discussion of why a specific variable is a meaningful measure of a specific
dimension of empowerment, and all the references to the relevant literature.


54
                                                                              APPENDIX C
                                                       INDICATORS OF WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
     regularity of employment, number of hours worked, benefits attached to her job
     (child care, maternity, and so on); gender segregation in occupations and
     industries; and wage differentials. It is important to identify time allocated
     between productive and domestic tasks.
   ● Human Capital. Identify women’s access to education, skills, and training;
     women’s access to health; and levels and changes over time. Identify any gender
     gap in key outcomes.
   ● Access to Infrastructure. Identify access to basic services such as water,
     sanitation, and electricity. Also includes access to markets, information, and
     technology.

WOMEN’S POLITICAL EMPOWERMENT

   ● Knowledge. Knowledge of government and the political system, and of the
     means to access it.
   ● Participation. Exercising the right to vote, strength of women as a voting bloc,
     participation in public protests and political campaigning. Women’s involvement
     or mobilization in the local political system and campaigns, and in village
     council. The number of women participating in the political process.
   ● Decision Making. Women’s representation in local, regional, and national bodies
     of government and parliaments. The number of women in position of political
     influence. Representation of women’s interests in effective lobbies and interest
     groups.
   ● Institutions. International instruments and conventions on civil and political
     rights ratified. Women’s ability to use and access public service entitlements, and
     local formal and informal justice and dispute resolution systems. Prevalence of
     crimes rooted in living, customary, or religious laws (honor killing, domestic
     violence, sexual abuse).

WOMEN’S SOCIAL EMPOWERMENT

   ● Mobility and Freedom of Movement. Identify places where women are not
     allowed to go alone, if any. Measure women’s visibility and access to social
     space.
   ● Status within the Household. Several indicators give a sense of women’s status
     within the household such as: assets brought to the marriage and a woman’s
     relative contribution to household income; the relative level of education of the
     husband and the wife; women’s financial assets and labor contribution to the
     household; the mean spousal age difference; help received from the husband and
     other relatives in domestic tasks; participation in household decisions (health
     and education of children, own health, purchase of consumption goods,


                                                                                      55
APPENDIX C
INDICATORS OF WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
       purchase of durable goods, visits to family and friends, women’s right to refuse
       sex, contraceptive use, family planning)—both actual participation and
       perceptions of her ability to make or contribute to a decision.
     ● Women’s Social Status, Social Norms, and Gender Roles. Existence and shifts in
       patriarchal norms (such as the preference for sons , discrimination against
       daughters—in education, nutrition, and health), marriage and kinship systems
       indicating greater value and autonomy for women (such as later marriages, the
       self-selection of spouse, reduction in the practice of dowry, and the acceptability
       of divorce); age at marriage and attitudes toward and prevalence of domestic
       violence; effective local enforcement of legal rights; symbolic representation of
       the female in myth and ritual (what is considered possible for women), including
       positive media images of women, women’s roles, and their contribution; and
       women’s sense of inclusion and entitlement.
     ● Social Capital. Kinship structures; participation in extra-familial groups and
       social networks (type of social network group, roles); and self-perceived
       exclusion from community activities.




56
Appendix D. Desk Review Project Template
13.    The desk review of project documents was carried out using this template. One
questionnaire was filled in for each program.

Introduction
14.    The unit of observation of each case study is a specific longstanding CDD project
(with more than one operation). The review will examine several elements of the CDD
focusing particularly on the gender-relevant design and implementation features, and
results on women empowerment.


     Appendix Box D.1 Instructions for the Evaluator:
           Template outline. The case study has 3 sections and one annexed table: The first section
            briefly presents the country context over the life of the project; the second section
            describes the project(s) reviewed and its gender relevant design features and results; the
            third section describes the governance and institutional arrangements of the project. The
            annex table includes additional information on the project.
           Scope. [Add period and the number of projects that will be reviewed here].
           Responses. Do not use passive form. Please answer all questions that are relevant to your
            particular case study. [Add page limit here]
           Sources. You will receive a folder with relevant documents and tables for this country.
            You are expected to search for additional information to respond to the questions (please
            document and collect all supporting evidence). Sources that should be consulted for each
            case study include, as appropriate:

                o   World Bank Group documents: CASs, PADs, ICRs, ICRRs, PPARs, PAs, gender-
                    relevant ESW and AAA documents relevant to the project.
                o   Other Documents prepared by the government, research institutes or other lending
                    partners: This may include regional Banks and major bilateral donors. It may also
                    include research or study reports or evaluations.


I.          Country Context:
15.    Briefly describe the country context at project design and approval – in relation
to the project. Discuss the relevance of design given the country context. Pay particular
attention to women’s or gender issues highlighted in the country diagnostics or the
supporting analytical background (look at CAS, PAD and other supportive analytical




                                                                                                         57
APPENDIX D
DESK REVIEW PROJECT TEMPLATE
underpinnings1). These could be, for example, women’s poor access to services or assets
(finance, land, productive technology, etc.) or productive activities, or gaps in
participation in local decision-making, etc.

16.    Note any relevant changes on the country context during the life of the project.

II.    Project Description and Achievements:
       Brief description of the project itself.
       State the original and (if appropriate) revised PDOs.
       Discuss whether the PDOs has a special gender relevance:
          o Does the operation states specifically that it will improve women’s life in
              any way? (e.g., women empowerment, participation, livelihoods, access to
              services, etc.).
          o Does the operation target women explicitly or implicitly?
          o Are women included as part of other vulnerable groups?
          o Are there any other particular groups targeted?
          o Does the project aim to solicit/enhance women’s participation in deciding
              upon, managing, and controlling project’s resources?
          o Does the project aim to change the relationships between men and women
              as members of the community, as producers, as individuals?

       Report any changes in the targeting and/or project focus over time.
       Focusing ONLY on gender relevant results:
          o What are the stated expected results?
          o What are the indicators to measure achievements?
          o Report the actual results (if available). Make sure to refer to the source of
             information and check the original source if possible.
          o Report any information on how it was possible to achieve the results
             achieved, what elements of design and/or implementation contributed to
             the success (or not) in changing relationships between men and women
             and women’s standing in the community.
          o Discuss any potential missed opportunities, (e.g., indicators that are not
             presented in a disaggregated manner, other elements that were not
             reported or discussed but would have been important to understand how
             something was or not achieved. Also report elements of design that, based
             on the experience of the evaluators, appears to have been overlooked)

1For example, poverty assessments, gender assessments, beneficiary assessments, relevant
analytic and advisory activities and economic and social work. Also, research material prepared
by other donors and institutions (especially if they were also involved in the project).


58
                                                                                     APPENDIX D
                                                                   DESK REVIEW PROJECT TEMPLATE


       Sub-project activities:
          o Briefly describe the sub-project activities including any changes over time,
             categorizing the sub-projects in: (i) livelihood (income generating
             activities), (ii) infrastructure, (iii) capacity building, and/or (iv) a mix.
          o Discuss the process of sub-project selection (at design stage and what
             actually happened during implementation). Note any gender relevant
             feature.
          o Report on the intended mix of sub-projects and the actual realization.
          o Discuss any specific gender benefits or costs (implicit or explicit)
             associated with the sub-project activities. Were these costs or benefits
             noted in the project documents?(both at design and completion)
          o Discuss the specific gender relevant results of the sub-project activities (if
             any).
          o Were those results expected at entry?
          o Report the source and review the original work if possible (e.g., impact
             evaluations)

       Participation:
          o Was women participation encouraged or mandated at the design stage?
              How? (e.g., attendance quotas, informal networks, information
              channeling, representation in project’s implementation agencies, etc.)
          o How is participation (and in particular, participation of women)
              monitored? Discuss indicators and other supporting information
          o Was there any evaluation of or reference to the type and quality of women
              participation?
          o Did women participation translate into decision making/empowerment
              (within or outside the project)? What is the evidence of this?

III.   Governance and Institutional setup:
       This section has two goals: 1. allowing for a classification of the type of CDD (is the
       emphasis more on improving rural infrastructure? Decentralization? Supporting
       livelihoods? Etc.); and 2. understanding how the institutions in the country internalize
       gender issues and gender messages emerging from the project and respond to them.

       Describe the project institutional arrangements/management; please note any
       change over time.
          o Was there any new institution created?




                                                                                                  59
APPENDIX D
DESK REVIEW PROJECT TEMPLATE
          o Describe the level of community involvement (expected and effective).
            Describe how women’s instances are diagnosed and taken into account.
          o Do communities make decisions on planning, implementation, O&M?
            (communities could do all or just some of these activities, specify and
            describe). How are women and men involved?
          o Do communities directly manage the funds? What is the role of men and
            women?
          o What is the role of the project management unit and government?




60
Appendix E. Economic Empowerment in CDD Projects
Appendix Table A.5 – Economic empowerment. Documented results
 Country         Project name                           Economic Empowerment                                          Better Access to Services
 India          Andhra Pradesh           Access to finance: millions of women accessed formal        Positive impact through village health centers which focused
                 Rural Poverty            banking finance, over which many had at least partial     on teaching visitors, especially women, about nutrition, as well
               Reduction Project;     allocative control (PPAR). Data at the household level (not    as maternal and child health. The centers were accessible to
                                                                 individual).                       both self-help group participants and nonparticipants. Data on
                                     Access to assets: Increased livestock and durable assets for      health-related outcomes are mostly unavailable in project
                                              the poorest; increase in nonfarm assets (poor)          documentation. Children were slightly more likely to attend
                                           Consumption: Increase in overall consumption, and           school, but indicators of maternal and child health did not
                                                     especially education expenditure                                  show much improvement.
 Sri Lanka         Community         Access to finance: one-time grants provided to the poorest,
               Development and          including widows without income and single mothers, to
                   Livelihood                        “bridge” access to microfinance.
                 Improvement          Employment: Skills development training program allowed
                 “Gemi Diriya”         access to employment for men (mostly as wage earners)
                     project                      and women (mostly as self-employed)
 Nepal           Nepal Poverty        Increased Income: Beneficiary households increased their
                Alleviation Fund           income by at least 15% compared to the base year.
 Bangladesh    Social Investment     Skills: saving and credit management training was provided               Time savings: expected but not measured.
                    Program          but mostly leaders and cashiers received it because women
                                                               did not rotate.
                                     Women took up nonfarm livelihood activities thanks to credit
                                               and infrastructure (better access to markets)
 Pakistan      Poverty Alleviation     Access to credit: about half of microcredit loans given to               Education: increased girls’ enrolment
                     Fund                                          women
 Afghanistan   National Solidarity          Higher involvement in income-generating activities.       Women's time: time savings in employment (thanks to
                    Project                    No evidence on impacts on asset ownership.            mechanized wheat threshing) and to fetch water (thanks to
                                       No evidence on impacts on household decision-making.                provision of hand pumps for drinking water).
                                                                                                      Health: health-related problems caused by waterborne
                                                                                                               diseases decreased after the project.
                                                                                                        Health: modest improvement in women's access to
                                                                                                                  professional medical services.



                                                                                                                                                                       61
APPENDIX E
ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT IN CDD PROJECTS
                                                                                                           Education: Some evidence of increased girls’ school
                                                                                                                          attendance rates.
 Kyrgyz        Village Investment      Employment: small businesses for women were created
 Republic            Project                             through micro-projects.
 Azerbaijan    Rural Investment      Skills: increased women's leadership skills and increased        Time savings in fetching water: almost cut in half thanks to the
                     Project         number of households in which women were consulted on                                       project.
                                                            financial matters.
 Philippines    KALAHI-CIDSS        Employment: Women’s employment increased thanks to the
                                    project, but they got only 5 percent of the total employment
                                                        generated by the project.
 Indonesia       PNPM Rural           Increase in loans disproportionately for better-off women.
                                     Insufficient training activities funded. Little improvement in
                                                           income generation.
 Vietnam       Northern Mountain         Employment: Lack of gender-disaggregated data on             Health: women were the main beneficiaries of the rural health
               Poverty Reduction            beneficiaries of paid labor opportunities (ICR).                                   component.
                                                                                                             Investments: equal benefit for men and women.
 Tanzania       Tanzania Social       Employment: half of the participants in public works were          Education: the conditional cash transfer component had
                 Action Fund                                     women                                 strong impacts on primary school completion rates for girls.
                                    Access to credit: women were the majority of participants in
                                                       savings-investment groups
                                        Small businesses created, thanks to loans obtained by
                                        women public works participants from the savings and
                                     investment groups. The large majority of participants were
                                    women (82%); nearly all women who created an enterprise
                                                         were earning income.
 Malawi          Malawi Social       Employment: short-term gains in jobs and earnings thanks          Health: reduced mortality among pregnant women in areas
                 Action Fund        to public works schemes; long-term gains in building assets                   where MASAF III was implemented.
                                               thanks to savings-investment programs.
                                      Small businesses creation: villages in the program saw a
                                    55 percent increase in women engaged in business (thanks
                                                 to the savings-investment programs).
 Nigeria           Fadama           Access to assets: it was difficult for women (especially poor
                                    ones) to make the contribution for asset acquisition. Several
                                       indicators (household income, access to markets, asset
                                          acquisition) measured only at the household level.
                                      Assets: women’s private asset value increased less than



62
                                                                                                                                           APPENDIX E
                                                                                                                 ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT IN CDD PROJECTS
                                men's; however, but women's group assets increased much
                                 more than men's group assets. Female farmers were more
                                likely to invest in milling machines, while male farmers were
                                            more likely to invest in irrigation pumps.
Rwanda      Rural Sector                Women farmers benefited from training in crop
           Support Project      management, inputs use, and integrated pest management
                                    practices; no information on the impact of that training
Uganda    Northern Uganda           Incomes: profits from business startups supported by          Time savings: in fetching water, owing to the provision of
          Social Action Fund      training and grants. Higher gains from women (who were                                  water points
              I, II and III                  starting from a lower base than men)               Education: intermediate outcomes (better dormitories for girls)
                                                Employment: business startups                    Health: intermediate outcomes (midwives improved services
                                                    Skills: training provided.                                       for pregnant women)
                                                  Productive assets: increased
Yemen      Social Fund for           Access to finance: increased access to microfinance            Education: increased education for girls (enrollment)
            Development                      (borrowers were 75 percent women)                     Health: increased probability that women would seek a
                                                                                                midwife for delivery; majority of women think access to health
                                                                                                                      care has increased
                                                                                                   Time savings: average travel time is reduced by about
                                                                                                    30 minutes per round trip, benefiting mostly women
Morocco   National Initiative      Income: half of the beneficiaries of income generating       Access to infrastructure and services increased, according to
             for Human           activities were women (1/3 of agricultural projects), but no                 more than 2/3 of men and women
            Development                        evidence of impacts on incomes
               (INDH)
Brazil      Rural Poverty        Off-farm paid work (agricultural) for women increased and        Time savings for women and young men thanks to water
          Reduction Project     women’s salaries increased (no significant change for men);                              points
           Rio Grande do        women’s income rose 124% while the income of women in
                Norte                            the control group fell 7%
Laos      Poverty Reduction                   No evidence of impact collected                   Education: It was noted that girls now go to school as much as
                Fund                                                                            boys, though the girls’ drop-out rates are high in grade 5 (IEG
                                                                                                                   focus group discussions)




                                                                                                                                                                  63
