A Briefing Note   Transfer Pricing
                  in Mining with a
                  Focus on Africa
                  Summarized by Pietro Guj, Stephanie Martin
                  and Alexandra Readhead

                  January 2017
   Transfer Pricing
in Mining with a Focus
      on Africa
           A Briefing Note

Summarised by Pietro Guj, Stephanie Martin
        and Alexandra Readhead

                January 2017
NOTES:
1—This publication is a summary of the handbook entitled ‘Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on
Africa: A Reference Guide for Practitioners’ to be jointly published in late 2016 by the:
•  World Bank Group (WBG),
•  Centre for Exploration Targeting (CET) and
•  International Mining for Development Centre (IM4DC)

2—The Guidebook was co-authored by a group of international tax and mining experts including:
•  Prof. Pietro Guj, CET—University of Western Australia (corresponding author),
•  Ms. Stephanie Martin—Tax Consultant,
•  Dr. Bryan Maybee, CET—Curtin University,
•  Prof. Frederick Cawood—University of Witwatersrand,
•  Mr. Boubacar Bocoum—World Bank Group,
•  Ms. Nishana Gosai—South African Revenue Services and
•  Mr. Steef Huibregtse—(Transfer Pricing Associates (Global)), The Netherlands

3—This summary was compiled by Prof. Pietro Guj, Ms. Stephanie Martin and Ms. Alexandra Readhead.

4—The drafting of this briefing note was facilitated by The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit GmbH (GIZ).
Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus
on Africa: A Briefing Note


Summarised by Pietro Guj1, Stephanie Martin2, and Alexandra Readhead3


Executive Summary
This briefing note summarises the results of research on transfer pricing (TP) in the specific
context of the mining industry in Africa. The study was commissioned in 2015–16 by the World
Bank Group (WBG) in cooperation with the International Mining for Development Centre
(IM4DC)4 and conducted by an international team of taxation and mining experts5 directed
by the Centre for Exploration Targeting (CET).6 The results of this study, to be published as
a handbook entitled ‘Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa: A Reference Guide for
Practitioners, together with practical training material, currently being developed, will support
a series of specialised TP workshops to be delivered to African tax officials starting early in
2017. This reference guide also represents a mining-specific complement to a general TP toolkit
entitled ‘Transfer Pricing and Developing Economies’ compiled by the WBG Global Tax Team.

Importance of mining to Africa

The contribution of mining to the economy of many African countries has grown in recent
years ahead of other sectors, increasing their dependency on this industry as a mechanism for
development and growth. Africa’s mineral endowment has become a magnet for foreign direct
investment (FDI) in mineral exploration and mine development. In 2013,7 it attracted USD2.9
billion or 17% of worldwide mineral exploration and was the dominant world producer of
cobalt, platinum, diamond and chromium and a significant producer of gold, uranium and
copper.

Although investment in mining declined over the last two years because of falls in commodity
prices, it will inevitably resume over the longer term. The 301 producing mines, 333 projects
at conceptual or feasibility stage, and the 9388 exploration prospects in Africa may be levers to


1
 Research Professor (corresponding author), The Centre for Exploration Targeting (CET), E-mail: pietro.guj@
uwa.edu.au
2
  Consultant, previously Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, Australian Tax Office.
3
  Natural resources governance consultant, GIZ/NRGI.
4
  Funded by the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
5
  Including besides P. Guj and S. Martin: B. Maybee (CET), F. Cawood (University of Witwatersrand), B. Bocoum
(WBG), N. Gosai (South African Revenue Services) and S. Huibregtse (Transfer Pricing Associates).
6
  CET is a joint venture between the University of Western Australia, Curtin University and the mining industry.
7
  SNL 2014, Mining and Metals 2014.
8
  Numbers sourced from RIU, 2014.


                                                       iii
iv	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


further boost domestic revenue mobilisation in a continent with several countries struggling to
achieve a tax to GDP ratio of 15% against an average of over 33.6% for OECD countries since
2000. It is thus critical that African jurisdictions continue to develop mining regulatory and fis-
cal regimes that, while attracting FDI, are capable of being administratively enforced, ensuring
that mining is safe, environmentally and socially responsible and also pays a fair amount of
taxes on the profits generated in their country.

Corporate structures used by mining multinationals and their potential fiscal consequences

Most African countries require that individual mining projects be ring-fenced, i.e., owned and
operated by a mining subsidiary of the controlling multinational enterprise (MNE), registered
and taxable in the host country. MNEs have tended to structure their businesses by consolidat-
ing high-value functions and related intangible assets in hubs that provide goods and services
to their global operations, and locating them in low-tax jurisdictions or in jurisdictions allow-
ing the establishment of preferentially taxed special purpose entities (SPEs).

MNEs contend that consolidating the provision of services in these hubs is driven primarily by
the objective of maximising shareholder’s value by achieving critical mass through pooling of
specialised resources, proximity to customers, trading and shipping centres and/or research
facilities. However, the extreme complexity and artificiality of some of these multilayered
structures and evidence that some conduit companies are effectively just ‘mailboxes’ with no
clear business purpose, adding little or no value, indicates that they may be primarily designed
to minimise MNEs’ tax at the consolidated level. Use of ‘treaty shopping’9 and the speed with
which some MNEs change their structures to counteract the closure of fiscal loopholes by gov-
ernment corroborate this view. While these tax practices may be technically legal, it may be
argued they are ethically questionable.

The consequences of the global corporate structures used by mining MNEs in Africa are that:

      ■■   the tax base of the country hosting the mining may be eroded as profit is shifted abroad;
      ■■   the functions of MNEs’ mining subsidiaries are often stripped down to mostly routine
           activities utilising primarily less skilled personnel and tangible assets;
      ■■   few mining companies are fully vertically integrated and frequently export crushed
           and screened ore (as for instance iron ore and coal), or base metals and other concen-
           trates or intermediate products after limited processing to related smelters or market-
           ing hubs;
      ■■   mining companies have increasingly entered into a significant number of cross-border
           transactions for the provision of high-value, specialised services and assets, and/or
           financing, many of which are conducted with related entities or part of the same MNE
           group.

Tax authorities need to question whether the profits of mining subsidiaries and of overseas
related customers and/or service providers match the value actually added by each of them



9
 Complex networks of related conduit companies resident in jurisdictions carefully selected to derive tax mini-
misation advantages, otherwise may be inhibited by the limited network of double taxation agreements (DTAs)
in Africa.
	                                                   Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   v


along the mining value chain. A tax adjustment may be warranted where the economic sub-
stance and the form of an arrangement do not match.

Extreme cases may warrant re-characterisation of related-party transactions to reflect the con-
ditions that would have been agreed between unrelated parties in uncontrolled transactions.
Logically, mining companies, acting independently, would not enter into arrangements involv-
ing conditions that could reasonably be expected to lead to them trading at an unacceptable
rate of return or even at a long-term loss. They would not accept excessive discounts on min-
eral products sales and/or pay grossly above-market prices for marketing, finance, technical/
R&D, corporate and other goods and services. Nor would they divest assets, at times well
below their market values, to an entity and subsequently pay premium fees and/or royal-
ties for their use. Taxpayers’ objections to re-characterisation because it may result in double-
taxation may be exaggerated because most jurisdictions provide foreign taxation credits or
exemptions. The UK has introduced, and recently Australia announced, a ‘diverted profits tax’
to more effectively address these issues.

Transfer pricing and application of the arm’s-length principle

The arm’s-length principle (ALP) is the cornerstone of the international rules to set transfer
pricing (TP) between controlled or related-party dealings. It requires transfer prices to be as if
the parties were independent, operating at arm’s length and engaging in comparable transac-
tions under similar conditions and economic circumstances. Although MNEs are expected to
set their TP applying the ALP, where this is not the case, tax adjustments may be needed. Five
methods are presented for application of the ALP in the OECD’s TP Guidelines,10 (to be updated
in line with the recommendations of the G20/OECD’s BEPS (2015) Final Reports). The study
confirmed that transfer mispricing represents a major taxation risk in the context of MNEs’
mining subsidiaries in Africa, because this sector often represents a major source of revenue
and individual transactions may involve very significant cash flows and complexities. This
was confirmed by a detailed analysis of the revenue and costs compositions of current mining
operations (categorised by commodity, size and type of mining, whether underground or open
pit) for the main minerals mined in Africa. Profit shifting through mispricing may arise from:

     ■■   Undercharging for mineral products exported and transferred to related parties, and
     ■■   Overpayment for routine (e.g., most corporate services) and specialised (e.g., market-
          ing, treasury/financing, insurance, logistics and technical/R&D) goods and services,

reducing the profit of the mining subsidiary and therefore the tax collected in the host coun-
try. UNECA11 estimated illicit financial outflows from Africa due to mispricing at USD50 bil-
lion a year, with the ADB identifying “. . . inefficient taxation of extractive activities and the
inability to fight abuses of TP by multinational enterprises . . .”12 as a significant cause of tax
base erosion in developing countries. Abuse of TP is not limited to developing countries, as
indicated by recent multimillion dollar adjustments to the income tax and royalty payable by


10
   OECD’s Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations, 2012.
11
  United Nations’ High Level Panel of the Economic Commission for Africa, 2014, Progress Report on Illicit
Financial Flows entitled “Track it! Stop it! Get it!”
12
   African Development Bank Group, Domestic Resource Mobilization across Africa: Trends, Challenges and
Policy Options, Washington DC, 2010.
vi	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


an Australian mining company selling its mineral products through a related marketing hub
resident in Singapore.

Given the risk to revenue, it is vital that tax administrations in Africa have the powers and the
capacity to ascertain whether TPs are actually at arm’s length through systematic TP compli-
ance risk management processes. Discussions about TP often revolve around auditing a par-
ticular case, which is just one aspect of an extensive process to effectively deal with TP risk,
including:

      ■■   Phase 1: Case Selection—selecting who should be looked at and in what order;
      ■■   Phase 2: Risk Assessment—selecting what issues to look at within identified MNEs;
      ■■   Phase 3: Audit—identifying and undertaking the actions needed to manage the spe-
           cific taxpayer risks through a possible tax adjustment; and
      ■■   Phase 4: Resolution—of both past issues and future risks.

One should also not undervalue the role of non-government (NGOs) and civil society orga­
nisations (CSOs) in alerting public opinion about potential abuses of TP rules by MNEs. Their
allegations, generally very direct but mostly based on circumstantial evidence, have often the
effect of precipitating government investigations and intervention.

Most African jurisdictions lack the capacity to undertake effective TP audits

With a few exceptions, African jurisdictions, in spite of having generally adequate TP legisla-
tion, have been incapable of effectively enforcing it. As a result, few TP audits are being carried
out, with mining-specific ones a rarity. This is due to a variety of reasons including:

      ■■   Inadequate resourcing of tax administrations in general and TP expertise in particular,
           and inadequate depth of knowledge of the mining industry, its activities and processes.
      ■■   The inherent complexity of some of the mining-related transactions, which creates
           opacity and opportunities for manipulation. This may be due to the fact that:
           •	 most mineral products transferred to related smelters or marketing hubs are inter-
               mediate products for which there are no stringent standard specifications and
               readily available market prices. Even in the case of metals traded in terminal mar-
               kets, the price-determination modalities of off-take agreements can present chal-
               lenges in making comparability adjustments to reference (e.g., LME) prices;
           •	 some transactions, involving hard-to-value specialised marketing, finance,
               technical/R&D, management and legal know-how and related intangible assets
               and IP, are often difficult to audit as tax administrations may be denied access to
               adequate financial information relating to the relevant foreign service providers;
           •	 as some mining services are unavailable domestically, tax authorities do not have
               access to local comparable uncontrolled prices and are forced to adjust foreign
               comparables, in most cases irrelevant to both mining and Africa;
           •	 difficulties in accessing relevant financial information concerning foreign related
               parties to transactions involving TP in spite of the domestic TP legislation requir-
               ing maintenance and disclosure upon request of contemporaneous TP documenta-
               tion; and
           •	 the vast amount of capital imported by mining companies generates complex TP
               issues such as determining appropriate risk premiums for interest on intra-group
               loans and guarantee fees not adequately addressed by thin capitalisation rules.
	                                                      Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	        vii


    ■■   Given a past history of tax avoidance and at times unfavourable deals in their mining
         sector, tax administrations’ tendency for adversarial and litigious attitudes towards
         taxpayers. This is in spite of the fact that, in many cases, it may prove more effec-
         tive to achieve resolution through cooperative approaches and negotiation, avoiding
         resource-intensive and time-consuming court action that can lead to unfavourable
         outcomes.

To overcome some of these complexities, African governments have tended to capture a greater
proportion of profits by applying comparatively high levels of withholding taxes on overseas
remittances for dividends, interest, royalties, service fees, etc.

The way forward—recommendations

African governments must address the strong need for capacity strengthening in the area of
tax administration in general and TP in particular and for enhancing their knowledge of the
structures, value chain characteristics and processes of the mining industry. While most juris-
dictions already have adequate TP legislation, the challenge now is to put in place supporting
regulations, structures and adequate administrative capacity to effectively enforce it.

On the basis of our study we present the following recommendations to be implemented by:

                                        African Tax Administrations

    1     Continue to develop and refine transfer pricing legislation and particularly supporting regulations
          for greater compliance and enforcement, including of appropriate documentation.

    2     In light of the country’s tax base, determine the most appropriate TP institutional structure:

          •	 Either as a currently, much in favour, large taxpayer unit (LTU) with special functional
             (including TP) sections providing benefits, particularly in terms of effectiveness, but
             avoiding as far as possible the risk of cultural isolation from the rest of the organisation, and
             duplication of internal functions and efforts; or
          •	 The valid alternative of a structure along tax types or functions, particularly if specialised
             resources are scarce. TP issues could then be either addressed in the context of general
             audits, or with the support of embedded TP specialists; or
          •	 At the limit, a stand-alone TP specialist unit to carry out specific TP audits. This approach is
             currently rare in Africa, but may be more justifiable in the future.

    3     Consider whether to establish a mining-specific audit team. This will depend on the significance
          of mining to revenue generation. In terms of TP issues, the mining audit team will either interact
          with the stand-alone TP unit, or TP specialists embedded within it.

    4     Develop a better understanding of the industry characteristics and, in particular, of the mining
          value chain for the specific mineral commodities mined in the country and of the revenue
          potential and main cost components for each mining operation.

    5     Negotiate exchange of information (EoI) agreements with key tax jurisdictions in which related
          service providers are residents.

    6     Consider use of the ‘sixth’ method for transfer of mineral products to related marketing hubs.

    7     Consider the relevance of the use of simplification measures such as ‘safe harbours’ for routine
          functions and negotiation of advance pricing agreements (APAs) with major producers, particularly
          for pricing of mineral exports, if necessary with the assistance of specialised external consultants.
viii	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa



                                             African Tax Administrations

         8    Adopt the recommendations of the OECD BEPS 2015 Final Report for Action 4 to cap
              deductible interest to a set percentage of the EBIT (in the range of 10% to 30%) of an individual
              entity (fixed ratio rule) or to attribute interest deductions to various subsidiaries in proportion to
              their contribution to the consolidated MNE’s income (group ratio rule).

                                             International Organisations

         9    Provide a range of training and capacity building opportunities to African tax administrations to
              build an appropriate TP skill inventory involving:

              •	 specialised international workshops on the issue of TP in mining being currently organised by
                 the WBG in cooperation with a number of international institutions including UNECA, GIZ and
                 MEfDA to be rolled out starting early in 2017. These may also be open to CSOs and NGOs;
              •	 possibly bonded, attendance of appropriate award and non-award university courses;
              •	 short- to medium-term secondment to more advanced tax jurisdictions;
              •	 temporary use of external tax specialists from other tax jurisdictions and/or from the private
                 sector to work alongside internal resources with emphasis on transfer of knowledge;
              •	 establishment of effective follow-up mentoring programs and of clear career paths.

        10    Emphasize training to effectively communicate, engage and negotiate with taxpayers, promoting
              better understanding of and voluntary compliance with the tax rules, thus reducing litigation,
              requiring:

              •	 improvement in taxpayer relations through better communication and consultation,
              •	 lessening of the current tendency for assuming adversarial positions, and
              •	 significant strengthening of tax administrators’ communication and negotiation skills.

        11    Establish and support inter-jurisdictional cooperative initiatives as a pragmatic interim solution
              to current TP capacity constraints. These include:

              •	 the establishment of ad hoc or regional specialist Multinational Transfer Pricing Units
                 (MNTPUs) pooling expertise from various countries based on agreed prioritisation and cost-
                 sharing rules;
              •	 supporting implementation of the OECD’s ‘tax inspectors without borders’ initiative;
              •	 jointly funded acquisition and sharing of otherwise unaffordable key comparables databases
                 and establishment of knowledge-sharing e-learning platforms, though a coordinating
                 institution (e.g., African Tax Administration Forum (ATAF));
              •	 broadening the network of bilateral and multilateral international Exchange of Information
                 (EOI) agreements with African countries, aided by improved computer capacity and the
                 implementation of the BEPS country-by-country reporting initiative.

        12    Support and systematize the current push for recognition in the allocation of profits of location
              specific advantages (LSAs) in source countries, which in the context of mining would include the
              value of ‘ready access to mineral resources’ in Africa.


In essence, the significant improvements in effectiveness and efficiency of administration of TP
rules, required to ensure that African countries collect their fair share of the mineral resource
rents from a fast expanding global mining industry, will involve significant time, costs and a
concerted effort at the domestic level supported by continued international assistance.
Table of Contents


Executive Summary  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	 iii

1. Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	 1
2.  The Mining Industry and Transfer Pricing in Africa .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	 4
       2.1  Profiling of the Mining Industry in Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                 4
       2.2  Functional Analysis: The Mining Value Chain and Its Functions, Assets,
            and Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                          8
            2.2.1  The mining value chain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                               9
            2.2.2  Functions performed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                            10
         2.2.3  Assets used in carrying out the functions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 12
         2.2.4  Risks assumed in performing functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 14
    2.3  The Four Phases of TP Compliance and Auditing Processes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 15
3.  Risks to Government Revenues Arising from MNEs Restructuring and Mispricing
    of Transfers Between Related Parties  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	 18
       3.1  Corporate Structures Used by Mining MNEs and Their Fiscal Consequences  . . . . . . 	                                                                                                                                18
       3.2  Centralised Service Centres or Hubs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                             20
       3.3  Revenue Risk Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                  20
       3.4  Marketing Hubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                               22
       3.5  Finance Hubs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                          	   26
            3.5.1  Determination of interest rates appropriate to the mining industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                                                          	   28
            3.5.2  Issues relating to thin capitalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                                    	   30
            3.5.3  Re-characterisation of borrowing transactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                                                             	   32
4.  TP Legislative Development and Enforcement in Africa  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	                                                                                         34
    4.1  Challenges to Implementation of TP Legislation in Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                                34
    4.2  Access to Comparable Databases and Other Critical Audit Information . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                                             35
    4.3  Need for Improving Communication and Cooperation with Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                                                  35
         4.3.1  Dealing and negotiating effectively with industry taxpayers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                           36
         4.3.2  Dealing with CSOs, NGOs and at the community level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                             37
    4.4  Possible Simplification Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                            38
         4.4.1  Safe harbours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                              38
         4.4.2  Advance Pricing Agreements (APAs)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	                                                                                                 38
    4.5  Issues Arising from Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) and Treaty Shopping . . . . 	                                                                                                                                     40
5.  The Way Forward—Recommendations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	                                                               42
Appendix A.  Key Sources of Guidance for the Four Phases of TP Verification
  	          and Audit .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 	45
                                                                                                                 ix
                                                                                             1
                                                              Introduction


T   he contribution made by mining to the economy of many African countries has grown in
    recent years, well ahead of that of other sectors, increasing their dependency on this indus-
try as a mechanism for economic development and growth. It has been estimated that around
20 percent of Africa’s economic activity is associated with mining.13 This is not surprising given
the richness and variety of mineral endowment and prospectivity of the continent, which, dur-
ing the past mining boom, has become a magnet for foreign direct investment (FDI) focused
on mineral exploration and mine development. It is estimated that in 2013,14 Africa attracted
USD2.9 billion or 17% of worldwide mineral exploration investment, mainly for gold, base
metals and iron ore. At last count15 in 2013 there were 301 operating mines, excluding small
artisanal mines in Africa, dominating world production of cobalt (70.9%), platinum (63.5%),
diamond (53.8%) and chromium (48.2%), and accounting for a significant proportion of gold
(18.9%), uranium (17.2%) and copper (10.5%).

Although investment in mining declined in the last two years because of significant falls in
mineral commodity prices, prices appear to have now stabilized, or, in the case of some com-
modities rallied. Reductions in output and delays in the development of new projects (includ-
ing 333 advanced exploration and feasibility stage projects in Africa) may lead to medium-term
shortfalls in supply which should help prices to recover and FDI in mining resume its upwards
trend. It is thus critical that African jurisdictions continue to develop mining regulatory and
fiscal regimes that are effective in attracting FDI in mineral exploration and mine development
and capable of being administratively enforced, ensuring that their mining industry is safe,
environmentally and socially responsible and pays a fair amount of taxes on the profits gener-
ated in their country.

The global nature of the mining industry, its appetite for development capital and the gen-
eral scarcity of indigenous capital and specialised expertise result in most mining projects in
Africa being owned and operated by mining subsidiaries of vertically integrated multinational
enterprises (MNEs), which span the full range of the mining value chain operating in many
countries often through different group entities. Their mining subsidiaries typically export the
majority of their mineral products and import capital and other goods and services. More often
than not, this takes place through cross-border transactions with associated companies, part of
the same MNE group, frequently residing in jurisdictions which are either low taxing or which



13
   ‘Mining in Africa Towards 2020’ KPMG 2012.
14
   SNL 2014, Mining and Metals 2014.
15
   RIU, 2014, Register of African Mines.


                                                1
2	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


allow the establishment of Special Purpose Entities (SPEs). UNCTAD16 (2015) estimates that
                           border investment is channelled through such offshore hubs which
around 30% of global cross-­
create tax avoidance opportunities on subsequent investment income.

Transfer pricing (TP) is the process of determining the price for goods, services, or property
sold between related parties within an MNE. For example, if a mining subsidiary sells mineral
products to a parent company, the price paid for those goods to the subsidiary is called the
transfer price. TP is a normal business accounting practice. However, some MNEs may use TP
as an opportunity to shift profit to low tax jurisdictions to minimise their tax bill in the country
hosting the mining operations. This is considered abusive and therefore referred to as “transfer
mispricing.” In the mining sector transfer mispricing is generally due to:

     ■■   underpricing of outbound transfer of mineral products to related parties, and
     ■■   overpricing of inbound (and underpricing of outbound) transfer of goods and services
          from related parties including marketing and financial services, corporate and support
          services, tangible and intangible assets, especially proprietary know-how, intellectual
          property (IP) and research and development (R&D).

Under this set of circumstances it is critical for tax authorities to be able to determine whether
the transfer prices used are set in compliance with the ‘arm’s-length principle (ALP)’. The
ALP is the cornerstone of the international rules to address TP in controlled dealings between
associated or related parties.17,18 It requires the price of transactions to be as if the parties were
independent, operating at arm’s length and engaging in comparable transactions under simi-
lar conditions and economic circumstances. To apply the ALP it is necessary to identify a suffi-
ciently similar transaction between unrelated parties from which comparable pricing data may
be derived to benchmark the transfer price applied in the controlled related-party transaction.
Where the transfer price diverges from the benchmark, an adjustment for tax purposes may
be needed.

Difficulties, however, frequently arise in ascertaining whether a transaction was priced at arm’s
length where the characteristics of the mineral product transferred to foreign related parties
may differ significantly from the product that is ultimately sold to an independent third party
or on the open market and where the transaction involves hard-to-value intangibles for which
comparable industry-specific data, knowledge and experience may not be readily available
within tax administrations.

The ALP is used in model tax conventions developed by both the OECD and the UN and is
now found in the domestic legislation of most developing countries. Consistent and appropri-
ate compliance with it supports outcomes aligned with the value-creating activities of the vari-
ous members of an MNE group as well as reducing the risk of double taxation. The OECD’s


16
   United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), World Investment Report, 2015, Reform-
ing International Investment Governance.
17
   See further details on tangible and intangibles mining assets in the publication Transfer Pricing in Mining with
a Focus on Africa: A Reference Guide for Practitioners.
18
   Two enterprises are associated enterprises with respect to each other if one of the enterprises meets the condi-
tions of Article 9 of the OECD Model Tax Convention, i.e., participates directly or indirectly in the management,
control or capital of the other enterprise.
	                                                Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   3


‘Transfer Pricing Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations’, currently being
updated to reflect the BEPS 2015 Final Reports for Actions 8–10, presents five methods which
can be used to apply the ALP, including:

    ■■   the comparable uncontrolled price (CUP) method,
    ■■   the resale price method,
    ■■   the cost plus method,
    ■■   the transactional net margin method (TNMM), and
    ■■   the transactional profit split method.

Some developing nations also make use of the so called ‘sixth method’ involving mandatory
use of publicly quoted prices for commodities on their shipment date to a related party. While
this method has the benefit of providing clear and certain benchmarks it does not require con-
sideration of the specific circumstances of the actual transaction, making it less consistent with
the ALP. The OECD, however, indicated that this method may be considered as an appropriate
anti-avoidance approach for developing countries, due to the difficulties of obtaining compa-
rable data and ease of administration.

Entities of an MNE that follow the approach outlined in the OECD TP Guidelines would be
expected to apply the ALP in pricing their related-party dealings. They would also be expected
to maintain and make available transfer pricing documentation, demonstrating how they chose
the most appropriate method, how the transfer price was calculated and how the outcomes of
the various MNE’s entities involved are aligned with the value-creating activities. However, in
practice this may not be the case as information may not always exist, or be made available to
tax administrations. Without this documentation it is almost impossible for tax administrations
to assess whether subsidiaries have reached a reliable estimate of the arm’s-length transfer
price. Some countries have therefore tightened their legislative requirements for taxpayers to
maintain contemporaneous TP documentation to be made available either automatically or on
request. In the BEPS 2015 Final Report Action 13 on Country-by-Country Reporting (CbCR) the
OECD recommends that tax administrations adopt a multilayered approach to transfer pricing
documentation: a master file containing information on the MNE as a whole, and a local file
that refers specifically to related party transactions taking place in the host country. Negotia-
tion of Exchange of Information (EoI) agreements with the countries of residence of relevant
MNE subsidiaries and, failing that, legislative deeming rules may prove effective in overcom-
ing some of the problems in accessing necessary information.
                                                                                                     2
                            The Mining Industry and
                            Transfer Pricing in Africa

2.1  Profiling of the Mining Industry in Africa
Many mineral-rich African economies are not well diversified and are in many instances signif-
icantly dependent on mining. The UNDP’s ‘Extractives Dependence Index (EDI)’19 (based on
three indicators: (i) share of total export earnings from extractives; (ii) revenue from extractives
as a share of total fiscal revenue; and (iii) value added by extractives as a percentage of total)
clearly indicates how most Sub-Saharan countries (e.g., Namibia, Central African Republic,
DRC, Zambia, Mali, etc.) are highly dependent on mining. This conclusion is supported by a
range of other indicators, which include extractives revenues or exports of at least 20% of total
fiscal revenue and exports (IMF); 5-year average resources revenues more than 20% of govern-
ment revenue; and resource rents greater than 10% of GDP (McKinsey Global Institute).

Tax avoidance by mining companies in resource-rich countries is likely to have an outsized
impact on revenue generation and therefore warrants particular attention from tax adminis-
trations, which should regularly assess the risks posed by TP in the mining sector and review
their compliance strategies and subsequent resource allocation so that they remain dynamic
to changes in industry circumstances. It is critical that the very limited TP expertise available
for auditing needs to be directed to high-risk transactions, while at the same time promoting
general compliance through improved communication and development of simplified proce-
dures in the handling of routine transactions. To do this, tax administrations seek and analyse
relevant business information using risk-based criteria to identify which miners may warrant
further attention.

Tax administrations must, therefore, have an understanding of the industry characteristics
and, in particular, of the role their specific country plays in the global industry and the mining
value chain for particular mineral commodities mined in the country. This involves obtaining
information on the following:

    ■■   MNEs conducting mining operations in-country, including what minerals are mined
         and what is the form and volume of exports, and a comparison of turnover or cash
         flows;



19
   Hailu, D. and Kipgen, C., 2015, The Extractives Dependency Index (EDI), United Nations Development Pro-
gramme (UNDP).

                                                    4
	                                                    Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	    5


     ■■   Market dynamics to determine the price range that could reasonably be expected for
          mineral products sold to an independent third party;
     ■■   The business structure (both legal and operational) used by each MNE to undertake its
          mining operations in the country and how that structure fits within the MNE’s global
          structure;
     ■■   The high-level financial performance of the MNEs globally and the contribution made
          by the mining subsidiaries and other related entities operating in-country;
     ■■   The relative financial performance of MNEs and mining companies operating in-­
          country to gain insights to separate those whose poor performance might be due to
          transfer mispricing or other reasons (e.g., poor management, inadequate administra-
          tive capacity, business factors). However, a history of consistently low returns or even
          losses, while alerting a tax administration to potential transfer mispricing, does not in
          isolation constitute proof of it.

To assess the risk of transfer mispricing it is also necessary to understand the revenue potential
and main cost components for each mining operation. Commodity type will be the main factor
as different commodities have markedly different characteristics in terms of:

     ■■   extraction technology involved;
     ■■   level of ore tonnage throughput;
     ■■   necessary initial capital cost;
     ■■   unit recurrent cost of production;
     ■■   required downstream processing and related energy intensity;
     ■■   reliance on transport and logistics as a major input; and
     ■■   specifications and marketing characteristics.

For example, cost characteristics will be very different between underground and open pit
mines, particularly in the case of bulk commodities (e.g., iron ore and coal). The latter will also
display significantly higher levels of revenue and capital cost as a function of the relatively
large volume of material that must be processed to extract the ore (“throughput”). Bulk com-
modities require significant investment in transportation and port infrastructure capable of
conveying large volumes of ore to export markets. In the African context this may involve
rail facilities crossing national boundaries that require significant negotiation and cooperation
among countries. On the redeeming side, however, they will display generally lower recurrent
unit costs of production due to their economies of scale.

To aid this aspect of the profiling process the study included compilation of a database of the
current mineral resources20 and of all the main mineral commodities currently mined in each
African country,21 as exemplified for copper in Table 1. The database categorises the population
of mines according to:

     ■■   the mineral commodity they produce (e.g., gold, base metals, coal, etc.);
     ■■   the type of mining (whether surface or underground);


20
   Information was extracted from publications by the US Geological Survey (USGS) and the British Geological
Survey (BGS), MinEx Consulting, and from the websites of various companies and industry groups.
21
   Information primarily extracted from the RIU’s Register of African Mines 2014 and from a variety of other
published and unpublished sources. See further details on the database in the publication Transfer Pricing in
Mining with a Focus on Africa: A Reference Guide for Practitioners.
6	         Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


Table 1: Geographical distribution of African copper mining operations (yellow = ‘small’, light
green = ‘medium’ and dark green = ‘large’)

                                                                              Surface and
                             Open Cut              Underground                Underground

                               Medium




                                                        Medium




                                                                                  Medium
                                        Large




                                                                 Large




                                                                                           Large
                     Small




                                                Small




                                                                         Small
                                                                                                   Advanced
     Country                                                                                         Study    Expl.

 Angola              —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —           1       —

 Botswana             1         1       —       —       —        —        1       —        —           3        7

 Burkina Faso        —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         1

 Côte d’Ivoire       —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         1

 DRC                  2         5        1      —       —        —        1        1       —          11       20

 Eritrea             —          1       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         2

 Ethiopia            —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         1

 Guinea              —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         1

 Kenya               —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         2

 Mauritania          —          1       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —        —

 Morocco             —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —           1        3

 Mozambique          —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         2

 Nambia              —          —       —        1      —        —       —        —        —           7       12

 South Africa        —          —       —                1        1      —        —        —          —         2

 Tanzania            —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —           1        5

 Uganda              —          —       —       —       —        —       —        —        —          —         2

 Zambia              —          —        2       1       4        1      —        —        —           5       18

 Totals               3         8        3       2       5        2       2        1       —          29       79



     ■■    their size classified as ‘small’, ‘medium’ and ‘large’ depending on whether they fall
           below, between or above the first and third quartile of daily production throughput
           respectively. A ‘large’ classification generally denotes a major or world-class deposit;
     ■■    the number and significance of current development projects and exploration potential.

Typical, mid-range throughputs were then used to identify a representative ratio of the volume
of waste material to be moved for each tonne of ore extracted (“stripping ratio”) and mining
method for surface and underground operations respectively. On this basis, the order of mag-
nitude of the expected revenue and of the main cost components were assessed for each typi-
cal operation, including specific items of both capital and recurrent expenditures. These cost
breakups, exemplified in Table 2, provide an initial indication of which activities and related
Table 2: Costing for “typical” African surface mining operations

                                                                        Typical Surface Mining Operations

                                                                                                          Coal
                                   Gold                   Copper                 Iron Ore              20.2:1 Strip              Diamonds
                              4:1 Strip Ratio         4:1 Strip Ratio         4:1 Strip Ratio             Ratio                4:1 Strip Ratio

 Total Annual Operating         $72,981,000             $88,099,200            $212,868,006           $204,481,977               $43,315,200
 Expenses

 Supplies and consumables       $29,673,000     41%     $34,029,000     39%      $7,315,200     3%      $23,000,630      11%      $7,315,200     17%

 Labour and equipment           $30,915,000     42%     $38,782,800     44%     $28,080,000     13%     $50,015,923      24%     $28,080,000
 operation                                                                                                                              65%

 Administration                  $5,751,000     8%       $7,284,600     8%       $3,974,400     2%          $7,603,200   4%       $3,974,400     9%

 Transportation                          $—     0%                 $—   0%     $169,552,806     80%   $116,364,605       57%              $—     0%

 Other                           $6,642,000     9%       $8,002,800     9%       $3,945,600     2%          $7,281,619   4%       $3,945,600     9%

 Total Capital Expenditure     $202,717,700            $191,801,100             $96,491,400           $254,699,100               $96,491,400

 Equipment purchases and        $93,576,900     46%     $87,273,200     46%     $45,976,600     48%   $171,682,100       67%     $45,976,600     48%
 installation

 Preproduction and site          $7,239,800     4%       $7,239,800     4%       $7,239,800     8%      $18,079,900      7%       $7,239,800     8%
 preparation

 Facilities and buildings       $35,737,500     18%     $32,777,700     17%     $11,683,700     12%     $13,838,300      5%      $11,683,700     12%

 Engineering & management       $22,387,400     11%     $21,337,400     11%     $12,149,100     13%     $24,414,000      10%     $12,149,100     13%

 Tailings facility              $17,379,000     9%      $17,511,200     9%               $—     0%                $—     0%               $—     0%

 Sustaining and working         $18,692,200     9%      $17,956,900     9%      $11,737,300     12%         $6,493,400   3%      $11,737,300     12%
 capital

 Other                           $7,704,900     4%       $7,704,900     4%       $7,704,900     8%      $20,192,400      8%       $7,704,900     8%
8	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


transactions are of financial importance in different types of mines and should be given prior-
ity when considering their potential susceptibility to TP issues when mapping the main risk
points to government revenue.22

It is important to note that different commodities have markedly different characteristics in
terms of their:

     ■■   extraction technology involved;
     ■■   level of ore tonnage throughput;
     ■■   necessary initial capital cost;
     ■■   unit recurrent cost of production;
     ■■   required downstream processing and related energy intensity;
     ■■   reliance on transport and logistics as a major input; and
     ■■   specifications and marketing characteristics.

As we see in Table 2, contrary to bulk mining, which generally produces and exports crushed
and screened ore after no, or minimum, beneficiation, some metallic commodities, such as cop-
per, and to a lesser degree gold, require significant investment in downstream processing and
waste disposal facilities such as tailing dams, and are often marketed as either concentrates
(e.g., copper (gold) concentrates) and/or crude and refined metals (e.g., blister copper, doré).

As discussed in detail later when dealing with marketing hubs, product specifications vary
from very stringent for refined metals sold on terminal markets (e.g., London Metals Exchange)
to more variable for concentrates and intermediate products, to customer specifications for
specialty metals and industrial minerals, to strictly quality-based specifications for diamonds
and gemstones in general. These market differences and the nature of off-take contracts can
be the source of significant challenges for tax authorities in determining whether the related
transfer prices comply with the ALP.


    Functional Analysis: The Mining Value Chain and Its Functions,
2.2 
    Assets, and Risks
The starting point for TP analysis is identifying the actual conditions of arrangements between
related parties and whether they are an appropriate reflection of the economic substance pro-
vided by each of the parties. To identify the actual conditions a rigorous functional analysis
of the mining value chain occurs during the audit stage of a case. This step analyses the func-
tions  (F) performed, assets (A) used in carrying out those functions as well as the risks (R)
borne by each of the related parties in undertaking those functions. Questions will need to
be asked and documents obtained by auditors to verify whether what is reported is accurate
(detailed questionnaires have been developed for this purpose in the TP guidebook). This is
best done at the miner’s offices with their staff rather than through an intermediary (such as
an accountant or lawyer) as the goal is to establish facts to enable identification of the par-
ties responsible for key value-adding activities. Where mining entities allegedly have limited
value-adding activities, information from other sources including exchanges of information



22
  Cost information was extracted from the CostMine database.
	                                                  Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	       9



    Figure 1: Mining cycle value-adding chain showing nature and timing of possible related-
    party transactions




                                    TRANSFER OF MINERAL PRODUCTS




                                                             Transport                           Trade,
     Acquisition     Construction          Mining                              Smelting
                                                                                                Marketing
         &                &                  &             Trucking/Railing       &
                                                                                                   &
     Exploration     Development        Concentration      Port & Shipping     Refining
                                                                                                 Sales




                                        CORPORATE SERVICES



                                           MARKETING HUB



                                             FINANCE HUB



                             ENGINEERING, SCIENCE AND TECHNICAL HUB



                                           INSURANCE HUB




from other countries may be needed. The process requires a deep knowledge of the mining
industry value chain and of its various mineral products, processes and procedures.

2.2.1  The mining value chain

Figure 1 displays the typical stages in the mining value chain from initial exploration to mar-
keting of refined metals on terminal markets. The degree of vertical integration within a single
taxable entity depends on the nature of the mineral products sold, which is a function of the
degree of downstream processing undertaken, ranging from:

     ■■   Crushed and screened ore with no or minimal beneficiation, e.g., bulk commodities
          such as iron ore, coal, phosphate rock, etc.; to
     ■■   Mineral concentrates and other partially downstream processed, mineral products,
          e.g., base metals and nickel concentrates and various other intermediate products; to
     ■■   Metals after smelting and refining.
10	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


It is at these different points of either sales in a contestable market to unrelated entities, or
transfers to a related entity part of the same MNE group owning the mining company, that
profits taxable in the source country are generated.

Situations where an MNE carries out its mining business in a developing country in its own
right through a local branch are comparatively rare because most African countries require
that mining projects be ring-fenced,23 i.e., individually owned (aside from generally minor-
ity (generally around 10%) government equity) and operated by a mining-specific subsid-
iary of the MNE registered and taxable in the host country. The use of MNE’s branches, even
if allowed, is generally discouraged by highly differential rates of taxation, which may be a
reflection of the limited network of double taxation agreements (DTAs) in Africa.

Even where a mining project is fully vertically integrated from the exploration stage to market-
ing of its refined metals, it is unlikely that all inputs down the value-adding chain would be
supplied by internal functional units. Its production process would often involve customer-
supplier transactions with related suppliers, i.e., entities (either subsidiaries or branches)
owned and controlled by the same MNE which holds the mining project.

2.2.2  Functions performed

Functions can be categorized as:

      ■■   primary, i.e., those associated directly with core activities such as exploration, mining/
           processing and selling of mineral commodities shown in green in Figure 2, and
      ■■   secondary, i.e., support functions not directly related to the discovery, extraction
           and disposal of minerals, including corporate services (accounting, finance, human
           resource management (HR), information technology (IT), insurance, legal, etc.), shown
           in orange. There are also routine and nonroutine functions.

Figure 1 shows how transactions with related parties may occur at any stage along the mining
value chain, subdividing them into the two categories of:

      ■■   Outbound transfers of mineral products to, and
      ■■   Inbound (and outbound) transfers of goods and services from/to a related party.


Functions may be performed by a related party for a variety of reasons, including capacity,
economies of scale and taxation purposes. Some of the more common related-party functions
that occur in the mining sector include:

      ■■   Research and development (R&D) and technical services during the exploration stage;
      ■■   Design, engineering, procurement, transport, logistics, treasury, insurance and legal
           services during the development and construction stage;



23
  It must be pointed out that while ring-fencing is generally applied throughout the world in the context of
mineral royalties, it is not the norm in the context of corporate income tax (CIT) in the developed world where
losses can generally be offset against taxable income produced by a related company.
	                                                                Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	               11



    Figure 2: Diagram showing a fully vertically integrated mining operation, outlined in red,
    and its possible relationship with related service provider hubs (Modified from TPA’s Mining
    Handbook)

                                    HR, accounting, IT, legal and PR services                                 Headquarter
                                                                                                           corporate services


                                                                                     Marketing
                                                                                     shipping &
                                                                                     distribution            Marketing hub
                                                                                     services
               Treasury & financing services, provision of loan and guarantees

                                    Transfer of               Transfer of                                     Finance hub
                                 ore/concentrates         finished product



         Mining            Transportation                                                     Sales of
                                                    Smelting &         Marketing &                                   External
      concentrating,            rail                                                          finished
                                                     refining            sales                                      customers
       some R&D                 port                                                          product




                                                                                                             Insurance hub
                           Insurance brokerage & captive insurance services
           EPC/EPCM


                                                                                                         Engineering, science &
                                                                                                             technical hub
          License for use of intangible IP          Engineering, technical, R&D & lab. services


                                         Entity taxable in source country




     ■■    Development of intellectual property (IP), acquisition or leasing of equipment for
           extraction and transport, logistics, engineering and technical services, treasury, insur-
           ance, legal and public relations (PR) services during the mining and concentration
           stage; and
     ■■    Sales, customer liaison, contractual, warehousing, shipping, insurance, logistics and
           foreign exchange management services during the trading, marketing and sales stage.

The details of some of these functions naturally vary with the mine design and scale and, above
all, the nature of the mineral commodity mined and of the mineral product produced and sold,
involving potentially significant differences in the processing technology used and their mar-
keting characteristics.

TP issues can arise where the return for functions actually undertaken in the host county by the
mining subsidiary is claimed to be performed elsewhere by the MNE, often in low-tax jurisdic-
tions and/or where the pricing of those functions are not at arm’s length.

The financial significance of some of the outbound and inbound transfers and transactions with
related parties can be very high given the scale of the mining industry. This makes appropriate
12	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


estimation of the related transfer prices a critical issue. The degree of risk to revenue arising
from these estimations will range from relatively low for routine transactions where relevant
comparables may be readily available, to very high for more complex transactions involving
the transfer of hard-to-value intermediate mineral products with prices not normally quoted in
terminal markets, and/or intangibles such as R&D and IP, patents and licenses, etc.

2.2.3  Assets used in carrying out the functions

Table 3 lists the typical assets utilised by mining. In the context of mining the majority of tan-
gible assets are used in day-to-day operations and are easily identifiable as they are likely to be
located in the host country and owned by the mining subsidiary. Tangible assets are generally
capitalized and depreciated over their useful lives at rates set by the tax legislation. Some plant
and equipment may be leased from either independent third parties (providing useful infor-
mation in applying the ALP) or from related entities.

Intangible assets (i.e., nonphysical or financial assets capable of being owned and/or con-
trolled) used by the mining sector include the most economically important mining rights,
usually granted by government or acquired. Other intangible assets may be used, usually in
the performance of specialized, nonroutine functions that normally also require unique pro-
fessional skills and expertise. TP issues can arise where assets are transferred between related
parties on other than arm’s-length conditions or where the price paid for use of such assets
held by related parties is not at arm’s length.

Compensation for the use of hard-to-value intangibles in the mining sector (usually for pri-
mary mining functions) is often claimed at a significant margin markup by way of licences
and/or royalty payments for their use. They include:

      ■■   Exploration and mining tenements, and other licenses providing legal access to valu-
           able mining reserves and resources;
      ■■   IP and patents covering inventions, innovative industrial methods, processes and pro-
           totypes, computer programs and databases;
      ■■   Specialised know-how and managerial expertise (e.g., of geosciences, mine design,
           development and construction, mining methods and metallurgical product and pro-
           cess technology, etc.) and R&D capabilities; and
      ■■   Specialised expertise and intelligence skills in identifying and satisfying unique cus-
           tomer requirements and specifications for minerals not commonly traded on terminal
           markets, thus creating value in use and capturing valuable niche markets, and related
           patents and trademarks, etc.

The review of such claims are challenging for tax administrations as the process is often hin-
dered by the paucity of available comparable data. This is particularly pronounced in devel-
oping countries due to the paucity of independent business and uncontrolled transactions.
Importantly the BEPS 2015 Final Report for Actions 8–10 provides updated guidelines for
arm’s-length pricing of intangibles, including that legal ownership does not ‘determine’ the
returns for intangibles.

A special category of intangibles are the so-called Location Specific Advantages (LSA). Unfor-
tunately, the rules of accounting have not yet developed standards for capitalizing individual
LSAs which, in the case of mineral-rich developing countries, would include ready access to
	                                                       Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	         13


Table 3: Typical assets of a mining company

                               Mine                                     Beneficiation,           Trading,
       Exploration          Development             Mining              Smelting and           Marketing and
        Discovery         and Construction        Exploitation            Refining                Sales

    Exploration and       Engineering          Exploitation           Beneficiation          Customer
    mining licenses       design (I)           techniques (I)         processes (I)          lists and
    and rights, (I)                                                                          relationships(I)

    Access and            Engineering          Exploitation plant     Beneficiation plant    Marketing and
    surface rights (I)    machinery (T)        and equipment          and equipment (T)      distribution
                                               and infrastructure                            activities (I+T)
                                               (T)

    Drilling rights (I)   Engineering,         Logistics              Logistics              Logistics
                          procurement          management and         management and         management and
                          and project          infrastructure (I+T)   infrastructure (I+T)   infrastructure (I+T)
                          management
                          know-how (I)

    Exploration           Construction,        Transportation         IP relative to the     Shipping and
    and laboratory        drilling and         plant and              smelting/refining      warehousing (T)
    equipment and         excavation plant     equipment and          processes and
    machinery (T)         and equipment (T)    infrastructure (T)     protocols (I)

    Topographical         Construction         Value of mineral       Smelting and           Product stocks (T)
    surveys (I)           camp and logistic    resources              refining plant and
                          infrastructure (T)   and reserves           equipment (T)
                                               included in price
                                               of acquisition
                                               of mining rights
                                               from a third party
                                               (not by means of
                                               discovery) (I)

    Geological            Mine development     Broken ore             Ore, concentrate       Marketing know-
    surveys (I)           (T)                  stockpiles and         and metal              how (I)
                                               inventory (T)          stockpiles and
                                                                      inventories (T)

    Geochemical                                                                              Trading software/
    surveys (I)                                                                              platforms (I)

    Geophysical                                                                              Specialized
    surveys (I)                                                                              aspects of
                                                                                             supply chain
                                                                                             management (I)

    Transport,                                                                               Product
    communication                                                                            innovation
    and camp                                                                                 processes (I)
    facilities (T)

    Exploration                                                                              Distribution rights
    techniques and                                                                           (I)
    know-how (I)
                                                                                                       (continued)
14	          Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


Table 3: Continued

                                Mine                                   Beneficiation,      Trading,
        Exploration          Development                Mining         Smelting and      Marketing and
         Discovery         and Construction           Exploitation       Refining           Sales

     IP related to                                                                      Pricing
     remote sensing                                                                     negotiations
     and GIS                                                                            know-how
     techniques and                                                                     for unusual
     related databases                                                                  commodities (I)
     (I)

     IP related to         IP related to
     negotiation,          negotiation,
     contract              contract
     structuring and       structuring and
     management of         management of
     joint ventures (I)    joint ventures (I)

I = Intangible asset, T = Tangible asset, I + T = Intangible and tangible assets



mineral resources and lower regulatory and environmental hurdles to mine development and
exploitation, and other “synergies” such as availability of a comparatively cheaper yet com-
petent workforce, etc. As a result their value is only occasionally and partially captured in the
generalised entry of “goodwill.” The LSA debate is ongoing and there remains a difference of
view internationally on the extent to which LSAs could and should be considered as relevant
to profit outcomes at the entity level in a given jurisdiction. The BEPS 2015 Final Report for
Actions 8–10 in updating the OECD TP Guidelines indicates that the existence and allocation of
LSAs among members of an MNE group should be based on functional analysis with compa-
rability adjustments to be made where required.24

2.2.4  Risks assumed in performing functions

A clear understanding is needed of the nature of the risks (R) that mining companies are likely
to confront along the mining value chain and of whom specifically or de facto carries and man-
ages those risks. This is critical in determining which party to a transaction should be entitled
to a larger or smaller share of the economic benefits, to balance risk with return, and to deter-
mine the appropriate TP method to reflect risk in an arm’s-length consideration.

For example, an offshore marketing hub may take legal title of the mineral product from the
subsidiary, on-selling to its own unrelated customers. In this case the hub assumes a number
of risks, including: price risk (i.e., it is responsible for negotiating contracts with third parties),
market risk (i.e., demand for the commodity may fall), and supply risk (i.e., the subsidiary may
be unable to produce the volume that the hub has already sold to customers). The level of risk
taken on by the marketing hub may justify higher remuneration than if it was simply to advise
on market conditions and identify customers.


24
  Page 43–44, BEPS 2015 Final Reports Actions 8–10.
	                                                        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   15


Table 4: Risks typically encountered by a mining company (Source: TPA Global).

                                  Acquisition/
               Risks              Exploration    Mining        Ore Processing        Trade     Marketing/Sales

    Exogeneous

    Market risk                       —              x                 x               X                X

    Currency/foreign                   X             X                 x                x               x
    exchange risk

    Social/political sovereign/        X             X                 x               —               —
    legal risk

    Natural disaster risk              X             X                 x               —               —

    Environmental risk                 X             X                 x               —               —

    Endogenous

    Exploration risk                   X             —                 —               —               —

    Operating risk                     x             x                 x                x               x

    Processing risk                   —              X                 X               —               —

    Capacity underutilization         —              x                 x                x              —
    and availability risk

    Transportation risk               —              X                 X               X                X

    Inventory risk                    —              X                 X               X                X

    Product liability risk            —              X                 X               X                X

    Credit risk                       —              X                 X               X                X

— = Limited risk, x = Moderate risk, X = High risk



Table 4 presents the main risks (R) arising at the various stages of the mining value chain. The
risks are grouped into two main categories of exogenous (i.e., external to the enterprise) and
endogenous risks (i.e., inherent in the nature of the enterprise and its operations/activities).


2.3  The Four Phases of TP Compliance and Auditing Processes
Often discussions about TP are about auditing a particular case—but tax administrations have
to do much more than audit to effectively deal with transfer pricing. Tax administrations have
limited resources and the following practical mechanisms need to be in place if those resources
are to be used in a way to get the best outcome for the mining host country:

       ■■   Phase 1: Case selection—selecting who should be looked at—what are the significant
            risks to address and their relative priority. What industry or business groups and what
            taxpayers may present those risks?
16	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


      ■■   Phase 2: Risk Assessment—selecting what issues to look at within identified MNEs.
      ■■   Phase 3: Audit—identifying and undertaking action needed to manage the specific tax-
           payer risks through to tax adjustment, if required. This includes determining compara-
           bility factors through functional analysis which considers the functions performed, the
           assets utilised and the risk borne by different parties in transactions along the mining
           value chain from exploration, through mining and processing, to transfer of mineral
           products, as well as of the relevant contract terms, business strategies and economic
           circumstances.
      ■■   Phase 4: Resolution—resolving the risks both relating to the past issues and risks into
           the future. Negotiation is a key activity at this phase and it may involve arbitration, lit-
           igation, mechanisms to relieve double taxation and possibly advance pricing arrange-
           ments (APAs).

The main characteristics of these processes are summarised in Table 5 while the key sources of
guidance relating to the four phases of TP verification and audit are schematised in Appendix A.

It is very important for tax administrations to review their risk management and resource allo-
cation decisions in the mining sector at regular intervals as they can get mired in the past and
fail to identify and deal with current risks arising from the frequent changes that mining MNEs
make to their arrangements. Mining TP audits can take many years to resolve and in that
time opportunities may be missed to implement policy, legislative or administrative changes to
lessen the risk of future noncompliance. The right balance needs to be struck between ‘punish-
ing the past’ and ‘fixing the future’.
Table 5: Phases and steps in TP verification and audit

                         Broad Industry
         Phase              Analysis                   Market Analysis               Business Analysis         Profitability Analysis       Functional Analysis

 Phase 1              Analyse the industry      Analyse the market (e.g.,         Analyse the business         Analyse profitability       Analyse functions
 Who Is of Concern    to identify products      Porters Five Forces approach)     against its peers            between MNEs.               performed in the
                      mined and exported        to gain insights about            and against its                                          jurisdiction at a high
                      and who is involved.      prices and costs that might       past performance.            Identify those which        level. Identify those
                      Understand expected       reasonably be expected for the    Understand who has           appear to have low          who have significant
                      tax behaviours and        products mined and exported.      significant amounts          profitability relative to   operations in the
                      outcomes. Identify        Identify those who appear to      of related party             industry peers.             country.
                      features that may         deviate significantly.            transactions.
                      indicate a tax
                      concern.

 Phase 2              Understand the broad      Understand the market and         Understand the               Examine financial           Perform initial
 What Issues Do       industry value chain      how that may impact upon the      business’s economic          accounts over               functional reviews
 They Have            and the associated        likelihood and consequences       and tax performance.         time. Understand            to identify those
                      tax issues and what       of a tax issue being present.                                  the reasons for tax         functions that appear
                      indicators reveal their                                     Understand the reasons       performance that is         to be significant and
                      possible existence.                                         for any divergence in        below reasonable            of concern.
                                                                                  key ratios and balances.     projections.

 Phase 3              A process similar to the following four steps should be used when undertaking an audit of transfer prices:
 Audit the Evidence
                      Step 1: Identify the actual conditions. Gather and review the facts/evidence.
                      Step 2: Analyse—Identify and adjust for comparable circumstances relevant to arm’s-length condition. Select best arm’s-length
                      method
                      Step 3: Apply the transfer pricing rules to achieve consistency with the relevant guidance material. (e.g., OECD, UN, Country Specific),
                      Step 4: Update/amend transfer prices if necessary. Decide on roll back/roll forward aspects. Monitor ongoing compliance.

 Phase 4              Resolve the adjustment with the taxpayer and other relevant tax administrations (MAP).
 Resolve Issues
                      Identify who else in the industry/market may have similar issues and consider whether to provide additional guidance or if compliance
                      action is warranted.

 Links                https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/Large-business/In-detail/Large-business-bulletin/Current-edition/Large-business-bulletin--
                      September-2014/?page=5 (for an example of a broad market analysis and strategy including for the energy and resources sector).
                      https://www.ato.gov.au/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=37943
                                                                                              3
         Risks to Government Revenues
         Arising from Mnes Structuring
             and Mispricing of Transfers
                Between Related Parties

    Corporate Structures Used by Mining MNEs and Their Fiscal
3.1 
    Consequences
The mining supply chain consists of a series of interconnected activities including operations,
logistics and marketing functions. MNEs may introduce complex international structures when
setting up their structure for investment in a mining venture, or following a restructure of pre­
existing arrangements in order optimize their business. The result is a fragmentation of the sup-
ply chain, which may lead to profits being shifted from the host country where mining activities
are undertaken.

This is because business optimization processes tend to consolidate most of an MNE’s special-
ized intangible assets and nonroutine, value-adding capabilities into centralised service cen-
tres or hubs or subsidiaries located abroad, often in low tax jurisdictions. As a consequence the
tax base of the host country is eroded and profits are shifted to the lower tax jurisdictions, thus
reducing the total tax paid by the MNE at the consolidated level.

Economic substance to these arrangements is likely to exist where the chosen countries have
favourable business conditions, for example, where there is:

    ■■   established trade centres close to customers and warehousing/shipping facilities to
         support marketing and distribution activities, or
    ■■   good research infrastructure (universities, research centres, etc.) to support specialised
         engineering, scientific and technical R&D activities.

Where there is economic substance, and the goods and services provided by the hubs actually
add value, then the issue is merely to ascertain whether the transfer prices used for related-
party transactions are arm’s-length prices.

In other cases it may be more difficult to determine the degree to which various MNEs’ entities
add value, especially where they are holding or conduit companies. Despite arguments that


                                                18
	                                                    Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	       19


business considerations prevail, tax exploitation opportunities feature strongly, for example
through:

       ■■   tax rate arbitration between jurisdictions with different tax rates;
       ■■   specific tax concessions provided in certain countries (i.e., The Netherlands, Singapore
            and Luxembourg);
       ■■   availability of tax losses to offset profits;
       ■■   opportunities to reduce the rates of withholding tax (WHT) payable by MNE entities
            taking advantage of DTA networks (i.e., ‘treaty shopping’).

Figure 3 exemplifies the case of a mining MNE headquartered in Australia (HeadCo) that owns
(asides from limited Government equity) and operates mines in two different African coun-
tries (MinCo A and MinCo B) through two separate holding conduit companies registered in a
European country (HoldCo Europe) and in Mauritius (HoldCo Mauritius). Financing services
to the mining companies are also provided through these jurisdictions. As neither of these
holding companies has any permanent staff in their respective countries of residence, a ques-
tion of form versus economic substance arises and one may be justified in assuming that the
MNE has registered the two holding companies for the two separate projects in two separate
countries because:

       ■■   country A has a bilateral DTA with The Netherlands and country B with Mauritius,
            which have the effect of reducing/eliminating WHT payable, and
       ■■   both the European country in which the company is registered and Mauritius are low-
            tax jurisdictions, with treaties with Australia.

The net result is that HeadCo’s tax liability is largely reduced at the consolidated corporate level.


      Figure 3: Diagrammatic representation of a tax-minimising corporate structure


                                                 HeadCo
                                                 Australia




             HoldCo A                                                                      HoldCo B
                                 Low rate of tax payable in these countries
         European country                                                            African island country



    DTA between country                                                                   DTA between country
                                  Government of                Government of
    A and the European                                                                    B and Mauritius
                                African country A            African country B
    country reduces WHT                                                                   reduces WHT



              MinCo A                                                                      MinCo B
         African country A                                                            African country B
20	     Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


3.2  Centralised Service Centres or Hubs
Mining companies use hubs for the provision of a range of services, including marketing,
finance, insurance, technical/engineering, R&D, procurement, and corporate services. The
structure used by MNEs for their hubs varies significantly. In some cases services may be pro-
vided by the parent company in other cases they may be provided by a centralised or inte-
grated group that performs a particular function throughout the MNE group or a particular
region or a combination of both. The trend towards greater use of globalised service centres
or hubs purportedly supplying high value-added services to related mining operations raises
serious TP issues that warrant careful examination and has been one of the factors leading to
the updating of the OECD TP Guidelines under the BEPS 2015 Final Reports for Actions 8–10.

Tax authorities need to question whether the profits allocated to the mining subsidiary in the
host country and the profits allocated to related hub entities match the value actually added
by each of them along the mining value chain. A tax adjustment may be warranted where the
economic substance and the form of an arrangement do not match.

Extreme cases may warrant re-characterisation of related-party transactions to reflect the con-
ditions that would have been agreed between unrelated parties in uncontrolled deals. Logi-
cally, mining companies, acting independently, would not enter into arrangements involving
conditions that could reasonably be expected to lead to them trading at an unacceptable rate of
return or even at a long-term loss. They would not accept excessive discounts on mineral prod-
ucts sales and/or pay grossly above market prices for marketing, finance (including interest
and fees on borrowing and guarantees}, technical/R&D, corporate and other goods and ser-
vices. Nor would they divest assets, at times well below their market values, to an entity and
subsequently pay that entity premium fees and/or royalties for their use. Taxpayers’ claims
that re-characterisation should be avoided because it may result in double taxation may be
exaggerated because most jurisdictions provide foreign taxation credits or exemptions. The UK
has introduced, and more recently Australia has announced, a ‘diverted profits tax’ to more
effectively address these issues.


3.3  Revenue Risk Matrix
Our research, including responses to a TP questionnaire administered to tax officers from
most of the mineral-rich Sub-Saharan tax administrations, indicated that they are particularly
worried about the potential for significant transfer mispricing in the context of the marketing
and financial services hubs of MNEs providing services to their mining subsidiaries. This is
because of the financial significance, and of the very complex nature of the related transactions
due to the unique characteristics of the mineral products exported and of the funding structure
requirements in the mining industry. For these reasons the operations of these hubs are dis-
cussed in more detail below. For the others, which display greater similarities across different
sectors of the economy, the reader is referred to the more comprehensive WBG’s publications:
‘Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa: A Reference Guide for Practitioners’ and ‘Transfer
Pricing and Developing Economies’.

The degree of TP risk to revenue posed by various types of service hubs at various stages of the
mining value chain is summarised in the Risk Matrix of Table 6.
Table 6: Matrix mapping the most common risk point encountered at various stages of the
mining value chain

                                                                                        Smelting
  Value-Chain       Acquisition     Development         Mining and                        and         Marketing
     Stage          Exploration     Construction       Concentration      Transport     Refining      and Sales

 Marketing
 Hub

 Marketing                                                                                                  H
 services

 Shipping and                                                                  H                            H-M
 distribution
 services

 Cargo                                                                         M                            M
 insurance
 services

 Finance Hub

 Treasury                M                 H                M-L                            M-L
 services

 Financing              M-L                H                M-L              M-L           M-L              H
 services

 Insurance
 Hub

 Insurance                L               M-L               M-L
 brokerage
 services

 Captive                M-H                H                  H                H            H               H
 insurance
 services

 Engineering,
 Science and
 Tech. Hub

 EPC/EPCM                                  H                M-L              M-L           M-L
 contracts

 Technical                H                M                  M                             M
 and scientific
 services

 Patents and              H                H                M-H                            M-H              M
 other IP

 Corporate
 Services Hub

 HR,                    M-L              M-H                 M-L             M-L           M-L              M-L
 accounting,
 IT, legal, etc.

Legend: H, M, L refers to level of risk; red color = high flows; green color = high level of intangibles.
22	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


3.4  Marketing Hubs
The functions performed by a marketing service provider may range from marketing support
through to the role of commissionaire or marketing agent to that of a fully-fledged marketer.
Determination of which of the above roles is performed should be based on facts, as to whether
the hub is fully resourced financially and physically to carry out the various functions, assumes
ownership and takes delivery of the minerals, and is in a position to bear and actually bears the
related risks. Accordingly, the functions performed by the hub may or may not include any of
the following:

      ■■   Marketing Services involving:
           •	 Engaging customers
           •	 Handling orders
           •	 Processing of related financial transactions
           •	 Providing support for the product marketed
           •	 Development of innovative marketing systems and strategies, particularly for
              those mineral products that are not commonly traded in terminal markets, requir-
              ing specific customer specifications.
      ■■   Shipping and Distribution Services involving:
           •	 Arranging chartering of ore carriers or other vessels and of possible transhipping
           •	 Warehousing and packaging products for shipping and distribution to customers
           •	 Negotiating address commission,25 dead freight, bunkerage and demurrage26
           •	 Providing for frequently captive freight insurance, as discussed later.


Many of the marketing hubs claim to be adding significant economic value, which in their
view justifies remuneration moving from a cost plus basis, which is typically associated with
the functional profile of a cost centre, to higher forms of remuneration typically associated
with a profit centre. Contracts between the mining company and a related marketing hub may
involve arrangements for change in ownership of the minerals beyond the export point and
covering their subsequent sales to unrelated parties. A question arises as to whether these con-
tractual arrangements amount to the undertaking of a full marketing/distribution function,
especially where the mineral product is shipped directly from the host country to the foreign
purchaser, that is to say sold on the “high seas” in a so-called ‘triangular’ transaction, as shown
in Figure 4. In many cases, irrespective of whether the marketing hub takes title of the minerals
or not, inventory management, warehousing and ship loading, i.e., the physical side of distri-
bution, are generally carried out by the mining company or an associated entity.

The fundamental question from a tax authority’s point of view relates to the extent to which
the marketing hub can and does add value by influencing the price of the underlying com-
modity, the cost of production and transport, and/or the quantities sold. While it is true that



25
   This is a commission typically of the order of a few percentage points charged by the charterer to the owner
of the vessel in addition to any commission charged by a possible shipping broker. The ship owner will tend
to add these commissions to the shipping rate per tonne of cargo to be charged to the charterer. It is in effect a
mechanism whereby charterers can direct moneys toward the cost of running their department, which in some
instances may escape the attention of relevant tax authorities.
26
   Demurrage at the port of export is generally accounted for as part of the operating cost, that is at the port of
destination as part of the marketing/shipping cost.
	                                                        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	    23



      Figure 4: Schematic representation of a ‘triangular’ transfer/sales transaction
         Source country                                                               Other tax jurisdiction


                                    Physical delivery of mineral product
                                                                                             Unrelated
           Mining Co.                                                                    external customer




                                             Low-tax jurisdiction
              Controlled                                                             Uncontrolled
          internal transfer at                                                      external sale at
          TRANSFER PRICE                          Related                           MARKET PRICE
                                                Marketing Co.


                                        SERVICES:
                                        • Marketing and trading
                                        • Shipping
                                        • Insurance




marketing activities may add some value, the degree to which they will do so depends primar-
ily, as shown in Table 7, on the nature of the product sold. The value added will range from
very low for sales of refined base and precious metals into terminal markets, where their strin-
gent specifications are met primarily by the mining company’s operations at source, to high in
the case of some specialty metals and some non-metallic industrial minerals where marketing
entails identifying and satisfying unique and stringent specifications set by potential custom-
ers on the basis of their value-in-use. The value added by marketing may be very high in the
case of certain fancy gemstones (e.g., pink diamonds), the demand for which has been created
by cleverly devised advertising campaigns and by selective, by invitation, tenders through
high fashion houses in New York and Paris.

Very high-value markups, in excess of 2.5% of the value of sales, have been reported27 in the
case of iron ore and coal marketing hubs based in Singapore, which in the case of one of the
main Australian producers, have generated an average of about $1 billion in revenue for the
hub in recent years. This has been the subject of an inquiry resulting in AUD 522 million adjust-
ments to the tax payable by the Australian entity and of AUD 288 million adjustment to its
mineral royalty liability.

Aside from the criteria for establishing marketing fees, including consideration of whether
the services included possible use of specialised IP and other intangibles, the terms of off-take




27
    Australian Financial Review (April 22, 2015) and (April 7, 2015).
Table 7: Specification, marketing modalities and pricing of various commodities, related sources
of information and indicative value of marketing intangibles

                                                       Intermediate Products
                   Refined                                           Metallurgical
                  Base and                                           Products and        Nonmetallic
    Mineral       Precious         Bulk             Physical           Specialty          Industrial
   Products        Metals       Commodities       Concentrates          Metals             Minerals           Gemstones
 Typical          Cu, Pb, Zn,   Iron ore,         Cu(Au), Zn(Ag),   Blister copper,     While there is      Rough
 Mineral          Ni, Co, Sn,   coking and        Pb(Ag), Zn-Pb,    nickel matte,       a vast array of     diamonds, other
 Products         Al, Au, Ag,   steam coal,       Co, Mo,           alumina, doré,      non-metallic        gemstones
                  Pt, Pl        manganese         Ni, heavy         mixed rare          minerals used
                                ore,              minerals (Ti,     earth oxides,       domestically,
                                phosphate         Zr), magnetite,   vanadium            only a minority
                                rock              titano-           pentoxide,          is subject to
                                                  magnetite,        titanium sponge,    cross-border
                                                  chromite,         zirconia and        trading, e.g.,
                                                  cassiterite,      dioxide, alumina,   barite, fluorite,
                                                  tantalite-        ferroalloys,        graphite,
                                                  columbite         U3O8, lithium       industrial
                                                                    carbonate,          diamonds,
                                                                    chromite            beryl, etc.
 Specifications   Standard,     Multiple          Multiple          Multiple            Customer-           Based on
                  stringent     standards,        standards,        standards,          defined and         multiple quality
                  and           flexible, and     flexible, and     flexible, and       based on            attributes and/
                  inflexible    subject to        subject to        subject to          value-in-use        or on trends in
                                discounts and     discounts and     discounts and                           fashion
                                premia for        premia for        premia for
                                quality           quality           quality
 Markets          Terminal      Medium- to        Multi-annual      Sales to            Off-take and/       Sold through
                  commodity     long-term off-    contracts with    individual          or spot sales       tenders on
                  markets       take contracts    individual        smelter/refiners    to individual       specialised
                  and OTC       with prices       smelter/          under less          end users           markets in
                  sales         re-negotiated     refiners under    standardised                            assortments or
                                at frequent       reasonably        contract                                as individual
                                intervals,        standard          formulae                                stones
                                subordinately     contract
                                spot sales        formulae,
                                                  limited spot
                                                  sales
 Prices           Daily         Daily price       Negotiated        Negotiated          Producers’          Producers’
                  quoted        indices for       hybrid prices,    prices              price lists and     price lists and
                  prices        selected          i.e., LME less                        negotiated          tender prices
                                grades            TC/RC                                 prices with
                                                                                        significant
                                                                                        traders
                                                                                        intermediation
 Sources          Easily        Easily            Reported          Specialised         Specialised         Diamond
                  obtainable    obtainable        in industry       trading             trading             Trading
                  from the      from Platts,      journals and      magazines,          magazines,          Corporation
                  LME,          Metal Bulletin,   specialised       World Bureau of     e.g., Industrial    (DTC) (De
                  NYMEX,        Metals and        magazines,        Metal Statistics    Minerals            Beers) Price
                  LBMA,         Minerals,         CRU, AME,                             and Mineral         Book, Rapport
                  LPPM,         globalCOAL,       Reuters,                              PriceWatch          diamond
                  John          etc.              Bloomberg                                                 price list,
                  Mathey                                                                                    Gemmological
                  and Kitco,                                                                                Institute of
                  etc.                                                                                      America (GIA)
 Value of         Low           Low to            Medium            Medium to high      High                Extremely high
 Marketing                      medium
 Services and
 Intangibles
	                                                    Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	          25


Table 8: Example of tendency to settle on days of lowest London pm fix prices for each month

                           August       USD/Oz        October        USD/Oz         December         USD/Oz

                         1/08/2011        1623        3/10/2011        1656         1/12/2011             1752

                         2/08/2011        1638        4/10/2011        1638         2/12/2011             1747

                         3/08/2011        1669        5/10/2011        1617         3/12/2011             1744

                            …….           …….           …….            …….             …….            …….

                         24/08/2011       1770       26/10/2011        1715        29/12/2011             1531

                         25/08/2011       1729       27/10/2011        1718                                 

                         26/08/2011       1788       28/10/2011        1741                                 

                         27/08/2011       1825       29/10/2011        1722                                 

                         28/08/2011       1814                                                              

     Monthly minimum     1/08/2011        1623       5/10/2011         1617        29/12/2011             1531

     Agreed price        1/08/2011        1623       5/10/2011         1617        29/12/2011             1531



agreements can also create complexity in comparability analysis due to a range of issues,
such as:

       ■■   determination of payable grades, precious metals credits, penalties for impurities, etc.,
            in concentrates;
       ■■   the appropriateness and justification for shareholders’ and other price discounts;
       ■■   mode and timing of payment, creating opportunities for free credit; and
       ■■   determining when during the ‘quotation period’, ownership of the mineral is actu-
            ally transferred, which, given the volatility of commodity prices, may influence the
            applicable transfer price28 as exemplified in Table 8 which displays the transfer dates
            selected in transfers of doré from a South American gold mine to a related overseas
            marketing hub. These issues have been ameliorated by the recent revision of Chapter II
            of the OECD TP Guidelines included in the 2015 BEPS Final Reports package on deemed
            pricing dates.

For the sake of transparency, it would be expected that the contract between the marketing
entity and the independent purchaser of the mineral product should be provided by the MNE
and examined by the tax administration. However, MNEs frequently fail to provide it arguing
that they are not the legal holder of the information or that it should be restricted on the basis
of its commercial and in confidence nature. Both arguments are invalid considering that the
MNE is the ultimate controller of the information and tax administrations are bound by secrecy
provisions.



 The recently released OECD’s BEPS publication ‘Aligning Transfer Pricing Outcomes to Value Creation: Actions
28

8–10—2015 Final Reports’ specifically addresses this type of risk.
26	       Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


Under some jurisdictions, the law provides for deeming, i.e., the ability to disregard the actual
conditions agreed and replace them with ‘arm’s-length conditions’ consistent with the terms
and conditions observed in unrelated party dealings, keeping in mind that there may be some
differences if the unrelated sales are at the prevailing spot price. This would include looking at
the hub’s ability to bear the risk and its ability to mitigate or control the related risk factors to
determine whether the risk allocation implied in the contract is grounded in reality.29 Some of
the financial risks that should be considered are:

      1.	 Credit risk, which includes risk of nonpayment. In the context of mining some of the
          factors that would need to be looked at are:
          a.	 the likelihood of the nonpayment given the standing of the purchasers (especially as
              many purchases, as for instance some enterprises from emerging countries, are State
              backed)
          b.	 what is done to mitigate the consequences, for instance by requiring the application
              of advance payment or part payment, security and guarantees.
      2.	 Transport risk, which includes the risk for loss during shipping. In the context of mining
          products this risk is often dealt with by insurance, which may be through a related party
          captive insurer, which in turn, may be covered through reinsurance.
      3.	 Inventory risk, which involves the risk of carrying inventory when either demand slows
          or prices drop or both. This risk will arise only where the marketer is also a true dis-
          tributor and maintains a stockpile.
      4.	 Human resource risk of losing key staff, which in turn may mean the loss of key clients.

For example, in Figure 5 the trading subsidiaries (TradeCos 1 and 2) of a major African iron
ore producer, registered as CFCs in a European and Asian country respectively, were initially
classified as marketing agencies, but later have been reclassified as fully fledged distributors
on account of title to iron ore shipments and related risks being formally transferred to them.
This means that a greater proportion of profit is realized by them in the low-tax jurisdictions of
the European and Asian countries even though a relatively low number of employees is based
there.


3.5  Finance Hubs
Mining is a very capital-intensive business. High-risk activities, such as mineral exploration,
are funded primarily by equity, and the return to investors may be by way of a capital gain
should the project be disposed of, or through future dividends if exploration leads to a profit-
able mining operation. However, significant up-front capital is required through an appropri-
ate mix of equity and debt for the development of a mineral discovery and construction of
the mine. Because of the high risk and of the largely illiquid and location-bound nature of its
assets, on average the debt to equity ratio of the mining industry is much lower than that of
most other sectors.


29
   Page 6, PwC Transfer pricing perspectives, Re-solutions, moving towards certainty, quoting US representative
introducing the topic in Issue Note 1 Discussion Draft —Discussion Draft on Transfer Pricing Aspects of Busi-
ness Restructurings—2-day public consultation, 9 and 10 June 2009.
	                                                      Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   27



    Figure 5: Diagrammatic example of a multilayered ownership structure of a mining MNE
    involving conduit and trading companies feeding profits back to their head office in a
    southern African country through two separate low-tax jurisdictions


                                      HeadCo
                                       Africa


                                 74%

                                                              Physical delivery of iron ore
                                       OpCo
                                       Africa


                        Transfer of                                       HoldCo
                                                1.2%
                         iron ore                                     European country


                                  TradeCo 1
                               European country                 98.8%




          Third party                                                                         Third party
                                  TradeCo 2                       ShipCo
          customers                                                                           customers
                                 Asian country                 Asian country
            Europe                                                                               Asia




While capital may be easily raised at the level of a creditworthy parent MNE, loans at the
project level may not be easily obtainable from third parties in some developing countries, or
may entail much higher rates of interest to compensate for perceived higher risk. In addition,
the majority of loans are drawn down during the period of pre-production that can last for a
significant number of years while no revenue is generated by the project from which interest
expenses could be deducted. Nor could they be deducted from the taxable income of a related
entity on account of the ring-fencing of the project. This issue has been acknowledged by the
BEPS 2015 Final Report for Action 4 which recommends that un-deducted interest may be car-
ried forward. Mining projects also require significant injections of working capital at the initial
stages when mine production hopefully ramps up to planned capacity and during the produc-
tive life of the mine to ‘sustain’ operating capacity and to fund possible expansion and/or
other changes in the design of the mine.

Thus, it is no surprise that many MNEs optimise their overall cost of funding at the con-
solidated level in a globally tax-effective way by carrying out centralized capital raising and
28	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


providing financial services through an in-house financing arm of the MNE group, a so-called
Finance Hub, which may provide:

      ■■   Treasury Services
           •	 Financial advice;
           •	 Capital raising, both equity and debt through:
               —IPOs, share issues and placements, and
               —Loan contracts;
           •	 Management of interest and exchange rate risk;
           •	 Refinancing;
           •	 Debt factoring; and
      ■■   Financing Services
           •	 Provision of internal loans;
           •	 Supervision of cash flows and solvency;
           •	 Cash pooling;
           •	 Collateral and loan guarantees; and
           •	 Hedging.


Financial services are an area of relatively high TP vulnerability, because the deductibility of
interest expenses creates an incentive for businesses to exploit debt leverage in their capital
structure, and because the significant size of financing for a mining business means that even
minor mispricing can have a material impact on profitability. In addition, complexity may be
added through the determination of what constitutes debt and equity and the complex treat-
ment of hybrid instruments that can be used to take advantage of tax arbitrage opportunities
between the tax systems prevailing in different countries.

3.5.1  Determination of interest rates appropriate to the mining industry

The average debt to equity ratio of the mining industry globally (at 0.84 or 45.7% of total funds)
is comparatively low relative to other sectors (CSIMarkets, 2015). Logic also dictates that, given
the generally higher degree of risk in developing countries:

      ■■   the interest rates applicable to mining companies should be higher because of higher
           risk premiums; and
      ■■   their debt to equity ratios should be lower than average, that is to say that more equity
           funds should be utilised in their capital structure. However, because debt is frequently
           provided by related finance hubs that use cross-border lending to related entities as a
           tax-effective means of optimizing the cost of capital at the consolidated MNE level, this
           is not often the case, and as a consequence, mining projects in developing countries are
           often “thinly capitalized” and exposed to considerable financial risk.

Determination of an appropriate risk premium to be included in setting the interest rate
charged to a mining subsidiary in a developing country is a much contested issue. The WBG30


30
  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.LEND/countries
	                                                       Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	     29


provides an up-to-date tabulation of the indicative bank lending interest rates that usually
meet the short- and medium-term financing needs of the private sector in various countries.
The rate of course varies with the economic sector and creditworthiness of the borrower, with
mining being on the upper side of the underlying range.31

To counteract excessive financing service charges being built into interest rate spreads, many
African tax administrations have adopted a range of interim measures in their domestic legis-
lation, including:

    ■■   Capping the maximum interest rate allowable by:
         •	 benchmarking it on observable international rates such as LIBOR plus a margin
             appropriate to their country; or
         •	 requiring the rate of interest charged to the mining subsidiary in their countries to
             be the average, or some other pre-set proportion of the rate of interest incurred by
             the MNE at the consolidated level;
    ■■   Levying relatively high rates of WHT on interest payments remitted to related lenders
         abroad.

Many tax administrations in developing countries contend that, irrespective of how appro-
priately the risk-adjusted interest rates may have been determined using a theoretical basis
for various jurisdictions in which an MNE is conducting its business, the cumulative interest
expense deductions for all of an MNE’s subsidiaries should not aggregate to a figure higher
than the total net borrowing cost incurred by the MNE at the consolidated level. If this position
were to be enforced, there would be a need to legislate to only allow interest expenses deduc-
tions based on the same interest rate as that paid by the holding MNE on external corporate
borrowing at the consolidated level.

A case of particular interest is where a subsidiary borrows money from and pays interest to
a cash-rich related party that has not borrowed and on-lends the relevant amount to another
related entity. Under these circumstances the MNE as a whole has not incurred any interest
expenses relating to an external source. A strict adherence to the principle that the cumulative
interest deductions from all subsidiaries should not exceed the consolidated interest expenses
of the holding MNE would lead to the above interest expenses being disallowed as a deduc-
tion. As the ‘loan’ to the mining subsidiary does not increase indebtedness at the consolidated
MNE level, it is in fact a form of equity contribution rendering the ‘interest’ paid a form of
‘dividend’, and therefore, not deductible for the purpose of assessing taxable income. Some
argue that this would appear unfair, as the lending entity would incur an opportunity cost for
which it would not be compensated.



31
   It is interesting to note that no figures are available for many of the African countries, which is probably an
indication that the relevant financial services are not adequately developed in some of them. This is supported
by the per capita level of access to a commercial bank branch which in Sub-Saharan Africa is 3 per 100,000 peo-
ple as compared to 38 for Europe. Of the African countries for which rates are quoted, some appear very high
by developed world standards (e.g., 20 to 60%), this may be the result of both prevailing high rates of inflation,
country risk premia and very high spreads of around 11% between deposit and lending rates.
30	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


3.5.2  Issues relating to thin capitalisation

The majority of African countries have been dealing with the issue of thin capitalisation by
determining an appropriate level of debt and/or of allowable interest deductions through a
range of approaches including:

      ■■   thin capitalisation rules setting a limit on the ratio of debt to equity, generally of 2:1 or
           3:1, that is to say 66.67% or 75% of total funds respectively, both of which are, however,
           significantly higher than standard debt-to-equity ratios for mining. Any borrowing
           debt in excess of the allowed ratio is to be considered equity and the related interest
           charges dividends, and therefore no longer would they be deductible. Thin capital-
           isation rules generally avoid the need for the application of the ALP on a case-by-
           case basis and act as a ‘safe harbour’ when the allowed ratio of debt to equity is not
           exceeded. This notwithstanding, some countries, as for instance South Africa, apply
           the arm’s-length test, and even in Australia, which has thin capitalisation rules, the
           arm’s-length test is applied if the safe harbor ratio is exceeded.
      ■■   interest capping rules that limit the amount of interest that can be deducted by an
           entity for tax purposes in any one year as a proportion of their gross income or EBIT,
           and/or
      ■■   group-wide rules that allocate interest expense as a function of the subsidiaries indi-
           vidual contributions to the MNE’s consolidated revenue or earnings.32

All the above issues may become less of an administrative challenge in the future if the interest
capping provisions recommended by the OECD in their BEPS 2015 Final Report for Action 4
become widely applied. These include an optional de minimis monetary threshold to filter out
low risk entities and a ceiling based on a fixed ratio rule, allowing deduction of an entity’s
net interest expenses up to a benchmark percentage of its earnings before interest, tax, depre-
ciation and amortization (EBITDA). This ratio should be set within a corridor of 10% to 30%
depending on individual cases. Provision is also made for adoption of an optional group ratio
rule when this is higher than the entity’s fixed ratio, and of applying to it an uplift of up to
10%, should this become necessary to avoid potential double taxation. The ratio may also be
exceeded when borrowing relates specifically to the generation of public benefits. The fixed
ratio rule recommendation need not be inconsistent with application of the arm’s-length prin-
ciple and does not prevent the concomitant use of other best practice options embodied in
individual countries’ tax legislation, such as those relating to thin capitalization and specific
applicable interest rate capping.

Table 9 shows how an independent mining company borrowing from an unrelated bank may
be limited by market constraints to fund only 40% of its capital requirements of $100 million
by means of a loan at a rate of interest of say 5% per annum. Assuming annual revenue of $15
million and costs of $5 million, the mining company would pay $2 million in corporate income
tax and retain $6 million of earnings in a mining jurisdiction with a tax rate of 25%. In effect a
high level of debt would not be accessible to the miner irrespective of the fact that the jurisdic-
tion allows for 3:1 capitalisation.




 See Annex 3 examples in Public Discussion draft BEPS Action 4: Interest deductions and other financial
32

payments.
	                                                   Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   31


Table 9: Calculation of tax payable by an independent mining company borrowing at arm’s
length from an unrelated bank

                                     Independent Mining Company

                             Capital requirements $M                       100

                             Percentage of equity                         60%

                             Percentage of debt                           40%

                                                                      $ Million

                             Operating revenue                              15

                             Operating cost                                   5

                             EBIT                                           10

                             Interest @ 5% p.a.                               2

                             Corporate income tax @ 25%                       2

                             Retained earnings $M                             6



By contrast, Figure 6 shows a situation where the mining company borrowing 40% of the funds
from an unrelated bank, but secured by the MNE’s Head office involving a $1 million guaran-
tee fee, and 35% of the funds from a related finance hub, thus leveraging up to the allowed 3:1
capitalisation ratio.

It will be noted that under this financing structure the earnings retained by the mining com-
pany are lower than in the case portrayed in Table 9 (i.e., $3.94M versus $4.69M) even though
the tax paid by the mining entity (and consequently by the MNE at the consolidated level) is
lower (i.e., $1.31M versus $2.0M). Although an interest rate of 5% has been assumed in both the
above examples, tax administrations are often presented, in addition to the guarantee fee, with
claims for higher interest rates that incorporate a premium to compensate for the additional
financial risk (e.g., credit risk).33

Tax authorities must also question the legitimacy of deducting a guarantee fee if a high risk
premium has been incorporated in the interest rate charged on a non-arm’s-length loan by a
related party to a highly geared mining subsidiary due to the increased financial risk. As for
captive insurance, where in some cases the risk has not in fact been transferred out of the MNE
group in aggregate, it is problematic as to whether a charge for its transfer out of just the min-
ing subsidiary should stand and be deductible.

More broadly risk hedging via derivatives (e.g., interest rate hedging, exchange rate hedg-
ing, etc.) has also become a norm over the last decade and this can further complicate a tax



 These levels of debt will in many cases be accompanied by payments for guarantee fees by the company to a
33

related party to protect the loan and interest in this alleged higher risk scenario.
32	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa



      Figure 6: Calculation of tax payable by a company that borrows 75% of the required funds
      partly (40%) from an unrelated bank but subject to a guarantee by the MNE’s Head office
      and part (35%) from the MNE’s finance hub
                                                                 Debt: $35M

                                            Head Co.                                   Finance hub
                                                               Fees and interest


                                                                 Debt: $35M
                                  Equity: $25M
              Guarantee
                                                   Dividends                       Fees and interest

                                                   Guarantee fees


                           Debt: $40M

            Bank                            Mining Co.
                                                                              Capital requirements $M          100
                                                                              Percentage of equity           25%
                        Fees and interest                                     Percentage of debt             75%
                                                                                                           $Million
                                                                              Operating revenue                  15
                                                                              Operating cost                      5
                                                                              Guarantee fee                       1
                                                                              EBIT                                9
                                                                              Interest @ 5% p.a.             3.75
                                                                              Corporate income tax @ 25%     1.31
                                                                              Retained earnings $M           3.94




administration’s analysis of the actual conditions as the counterparties may not be known,
and this type of transaction may trigger events that may still be within the control of the MNE.

3.5.3  Re-characterisation of borrowing transactions

The power and practice of tax administrations to ignore or reconstruct arrangements that
would not have been entered into between unrelated parties given the circumstances is one
of the most contentious issues between tax administrations and businesses in discussions
about TP. In this regard, the BEPS 2015 Final Reports for Actions 8–10 continue to authorise
arrangements between related parties to be disregarded where exceptional circumstances of
commercial irrationality apply. The mere fact that a transaction may not be seen between inde-
pendent parties is not sufficient; the key question is whether the arrangement entered into
possesses commercial rationality and would have been agreed between unrelated parties in
comparable economic circumstances. For example, when looking at levels of borrowing in
an MNE subsidiary, tax administrations should look at whether the subsidiary can rationally
and commercially sustain that level of debt in terms of its profitability, creditworthiness and
business purpose. If not, it may be that debt has effectively been ‘dumped’ into the subsidiary
to minimise taxation, and the tax administration should consider whether the debt should be
disregarded or treated as equity for tax purposes.
	                                                  Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   33


The interplay between thin capitalization rules and the re-characterisation of a borrowing
transaction under the transfer pricing rules is illustrated by the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) Taxation Ruling TR2014/6.34 The interest rate is worked out on the basis that arm’s-
length conditions operated and that an arm’s-length rate is then applied to the debt principal
actually issued by the entity and permitted under thin capitalisation provisions, instead of
the debt interest that would have been issued had the arm’s-length conditions operated in the
context of determining an appropriate level of debt principal.

In Example 1 (paras 69–76) of the ATO Taxation Ruling 2014/6:

     ■■   Africa Co is a resident of an African country and a subsidiary of Foreign Co, the parent
          company which is resident in another country;
     ■■   The African country has thin capitalization provisions with a debt to equity ratio of 3:1;
     ■■   Africa Co borrows $300m from Foreign Co at 15% interest per annum;
     ■■   For thin capitalization purposes, Africa Co has a ‘safe harbour debt amount of $300m
          (and equity of $100m);
     ■■   This means Africa Co has claimed $45m in debt deductions for the year;
     ■■   Borrowings from independent parties at 10% per annum are possible in the African
          country which may be used as a comparable;
     ■■   In addition, analysis of market reference rates for borrowing of that size and of the
          credit standing that the capital markets would give Africa Co may indicate that a maxi-
          mum $250m loan (not $300m) could realistically be provided by independent lenders
          under the circumstances;
     ■■   The analysis might show that the loan from Foreign Co might not reasonably be
          expected to occur between independent parties dealing at arm’s length because
          it would not make commercial sense for Africa Co (and Foreign Co), for example,
          because of the impacts on Africa Co from the relatively high cost of the loan on the
          profitability, viability or competitiveness of its business. Clearly, there is no rationale
          whereby Africa Co would have entered into similar arrangements if it were dealing
          with an unrelated party;
     ■■   As pointed out above, available information supports a conclusion that the closest
          arm’s-length scenario at which a loan might reasonably be expected to exist between
          independent parties dealing at arm’s length is a loan of $250m at 10% providing a fur-
          ther $50m of equity were to be raised;
     ■■   On this basis, if there was no ‘safe harbour debt amount’ under thin capitalisation
          provisions, an interest deduction of $25m (i.e., 10% interest on an amount of debt of
          $250m) would be allowed applying the arm’s-length principles. If on the other hand
          there were a 3:1 safe harbour debt amount, then in combination with the arm’s-length
          principle an interest deduction of $30m could have been claimed, as the thin capital-
          ization provisions would operate to protect the arm’s-length interest on the $50m of
          debt that in their absence would have been reclassified as equity.




 Taxation Ruling 2014/6 Income tax: transfer pricing—the application of section 815-130 of the Income Tax
34

Assessment Act 1997.
                                                                                                        4
                    TP Legislative Development
                     and Enforcement in Africa

4.1  Challenges to Implementation of TP Legislation in Africa
Development of TP legislation in Africa is a dynamic process of continuous improvement,
and the current status of development is progressively updated and reported by the major
international accounting firms. Analysis of these sources of information complemented by the
results of a comprehensive TP questionnaire,35 administered to a number of senior tax and
mines department officials from some 40 African countries, revealed that, even though most
jurisdictions have reference to the ALP in their tax legislation and/or adequate specific TP leg-
islation in place, only a relatively small number are in a position to enforce it to any appreciable
degree. As a consequence compliance activities such as audits of TP issues are rarely carried
out and mostly as part of general audits that, with a few exceptions, seldom concern mining
companies.

There are several reasons for this:

     ■■   the legislation is, in some cases, not yet complemented by the necessary practical regu-
          lations/guidance and systems for its effective implementation;
     ■■   most tax authorities have inadequate administrative capacity and systems and lack
          TP-specific expertise;
     ■■   there is a lack of or limited access to reliable comparables databases relevant to mining
          in the developing world;
     ■■   only a few jurisdictions have specific TP units within their tax administrations; and
     ■■   there is often inadequate knowledge of the mining industry within some tax authori-
          ties and, as a consequence, TP issues specific to the mining sector may often not be
          fully identified or understood and therefore addressed.

About half of the jurisdictions require taxpayers to compile effective TP contemporaneous doc-
umentation, in some cases with penalty provisions and onus of proof, and to either disclose it
annually or more frequently produce it on request. In spite of this, many jurisdictions report
reluctance on the side of MNEs to provide information in support of audits in a timely manner.




 The questionnaire and its results may be found in the publication Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on
35

Africa: A Reference Guide for Practitioners’.


                                                     34
	                                                     Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   35


Interestingly, many jurisdictions appear to make provisions for advance pricing agreements
(APAs) and other forms of safe harbours, but as discussed later, these have to date not been
widely implemented in Africa.


    Access to Comparable Databases and Other Critical
4.2 
    Audit Information
Once a clear understanding of the functions performed, assets used and risks assumed by the
parties to a transaction under review has been reached, access to key information and com-
parables databases is required. This is fundamental in determining whether the TP method
chosen by the taxpayer is appropriate and to what degree the transfer prices adopted are com-
pliant with the ALP.

Unfortunately, the inherent information asymmetry is not helped by some of the overseas
related service suppliers withholding key elements of information and, as recognised by the
OECD,36 by the paucity of relevant comparables data. While foreign comparables databases are
available (e.g., Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis, Amadeus and others) they are expensive and popu-
lated by European and/or North American data, making them largely irrelevant to Africa and
in particular to its mining sector.

By contrast some databases, such as those from Bloomberg, Platt’s and Metals Bulletin, focus
specifically on mineral commodities and, given the size of the cash flows relating to the trans-
fer of mineral products, are extremely useful in addressing issues relating to pricing and rev-
enues. Useful information relevant to mining companies active in Africa can also be derived
from their financial and other reports to various stock exchanges, i.e., the Australian Stock
Exchange, Toronto Stock Exchange, Alternative Investment Market and some of the regional
exchanges, on which most mining companies with interests in Africa are listed and/or traded.

In essence, with a few exceptions, the complexity of the TP processes and the limited technical
capacity and mining industry knowledge of most tax administrations, coupled with the high
cost of acquiring relevant information and implementing an effective TP compliance program,
are the main reasons for weak implementation of TP rules.


    Need for Improving Communication and Cooperation
4.3 
    with Stakeholders
Effective TP compliance requires engagement and communication with a range of stakehold-
ers at various stages in the process, including:

       ■■   policy developers and other decision makers in government and their advisors;
       ■■   CSOs and NGOs commentating about mining and taxation activities in Africa;
       ■■   the community, especially other taxpayers who want assurance about fairness of the
            tax system;


36
    Transfer Pricing Comparability Data and Developing Countries, 2014.
36	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


      ■■   mining industry bodies operating in Africa; and
      ■■   the taxpayer mining subsidiaries operating in the host country as well as their MNEs.


4.3.1  Dealing and negotiating effectively with industry taxpayers

To be able to comply with the TP policy, legislation and administrative guidelines, taxpayers
(and their MNE group) must be aware of and understand the position of the tax administra-
tion. If taxpayers disagree with that position then they should be able to dispute it in a trans-
parent way. This requires tax administrations to make their position clearly known on key
matters and to have processes in place to negotiate and process disputes (including to courts
where necessary) in a professional and timely way.

Communication and relationships between tax administrations and mining MNEs regarding
TP issues are frequently problematic from the perspective of both parties. While a degree of
professional tension will inevitably arise, the relationship can reach a breakdown point, which
can lead to long protracted processes and undesirable outcomes. Consequently it is important
that efforts be made to avoid this situation where possible.

In an attempt to improve relationships and avoid such problems, many tax administrations have
published best practice codes of conduct to govern the conduct of tax officers (including auditors)
as well as making it clear to taxpayers about what they can expect during audits and other interac-
tions with tax administrations. As the audit stage for TP cases is especially difficult and complex,
it is important that auditors be trained and are well versed in so-called soft skills and the ability to
bring an audit to a successful conclusion consistent with the TP legislation of the host country. Tax
administrations and taxpayers can have different positions during audits, and a range of tactics,
which may be deliberate or instinctive, may come into play by either or both parties.

While many mining MNEs do comply with TP legislation and processes, it is not uncommon
for some to use tactics to disrupt TP audits from being undertaken in an effective and timely
manner. Auditors need to be able to deal with such tactics which can include:

      ■■   Challenges to the validity of the role of tax administrations and, in particular, the role
           of tax auditors. Tax administrations should endeavour to build up with training and
           other means the confidence of auditors to be able to confidently deal with such chal-
           lenges and be unwavering in their role in assuring the community and government
           that the TP legislation is being verified and enforced where necessary, in a profes-
           sional, impartial and transparent way.
      ■■   Defensive and sometimes aggressive responses from the mining subsidiary and MNE.
           Auditors can better deal with this when they know and understand the roles and back-
           ground of the people they are dealing with, in particular, whether they were the initia-
           tors or acting under instruction from others, so that they can to some degree anticipate
           their tactics.
      ■■   Seeking intervention from more senior tax and government officials (including Minis-
           ters). It is not uncommon for some mining MNEs to complain about TP audits and to
           seek to have the audit stopped or for auditors to be removed from the case. This tactic
           can be headed off by best practice briefings to senior officials informing them on a
           regular and preemptive basis about TP compliance activities so that the senior officials
           are in a position to support the activities and to avoid inadvertent responses that may
           undermine the validity of the TP audit.
	                                                   Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   37


     ■■   Problems obtaining necessary information and documentation, and broad claims for
          legal professional privilege. These are perennial problems that are frequently encoun-
          tered in TP audits in the mining sector. TP audits can get bogged down for years in
          trying to get information and, in some cases, respond to collateral litigation. Creativ-
          ity is needed to look for other ways to proceed with the audit in a timely way, e.g.,
          independent arbitration, other sources to get information or proceeding to make a tax
          adjustment based on reasonable assumptions.
     ■■   Compromises may be proposed and it is important that auditors be able to identify
          and be ready to accept (or propose) compromises within the limits of justifiable rea-
          son recognising that TP issues are inherently complex and many issues are arguable.
          Compromises must be made in good faith, subject to good governance and be well
          documented.

4.3.2  Dealing with CSOs, NGOs and at the community level

The mining sector in Africa is seen by some as having failed to deliver the economic transfor-
mation that citizens anticipated including because of, at times, unbalanced deals with min-
ing companies, mal governance, and tax avoidance. Civil society organizations (CSOs) and
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have stepped in to support processes to improve and
enforce mining obligations, or to directly monitor company compliance. This has yielded some
positive results. In many African countries mining contracts are now publically available, there
is greater transparency of mining revenues and scrutiny of mining negotiations.37

Bilateral and multilateral organisations (such as the World Bank Group or the International
Monetary Fund) together with sustained advocacy by CSOs and NGOs, many of which are
internationally based, has sparked greater awareness of the problem amongst governments,
citizens, and development partners.

Advocacy by CSOs and NGOs has been a factor in inquiries into tax avoidance and evasion,
even though their contributions may not always be well informed and credible. Given the sig-
nificant influence that CSOs and NGOs have on public opinion, it is important that their claims
regarding potential transfer mispricing are based on reliable evidence and informed analysis.

As transfer pricing is a relatively new topic and highly technical, it is no surprise that CSOs and
NGOs may be potentially uninformed due to a lack of technical capacity. If CSOs and NGOs are
going to be effective contributors and play their appropriate role in tackling TP issues, efforts
must be made to improve their understanding of TP, and how it is likely to manifest in practice
in the African mining sector. Their capacity has been improved in recent years through a range
of training initiatives including, for example, those by the World Bank Group and the Natural
Resource Governance Institute (NRGI). Capacity building is required in the following areas:

     ■■   basic principles of TP and other tax minimisation measures;
     ■■   specific training on TP as it relates to the mining sector in Africa, institutional arrange-
          ments and specific accountability mechanisms;
     ■■   TP risk assessment; and
     ■■   guidance on how to better use EITI and other public data to monitor TP risks.


 Erin Smith and Peter Rosenblum. Government and Citizen Oversight of Mining: Enforcing the Rules, (Revenue
37

Watch Institute, 2011) p. 4.
38	     Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


The activities of CSOs and NGOs, if properly informed and trained, can be both mutually
reinforcing and beneficial (rather than competing) to governments’ efforts to achieve effective
TP compliance in the African mining sector. They are part of global networks that can be lever-
aged to access information from other tax jurisdictions on the global activities of mining MNEs
that may otherwise not come to light. As NGOs and CSOs are often trusted by the public at
large, if properly trained and informed by relevant authorities, they can become an effective
channel to inform the public about what is being done to address TP issues and to manage
unrealistic expectations while supporting accountability and transparency.

While taxpayer confidentiality is to be respected, more information could be shared by gov-
ernments and tax administrations on TP in the mining sector to improve the quality and level
of public debate. Greater transparency and sharing of information is critical to a more collab-
orative approach with the public, CSOs and NGOs and the overall success of an effective TP
compliance program.



4.4  Possible Simplification Strategies
Compliance with TP rules and the arm’s-length principle can have high costs for both taxpay-
ers and tax administrations. There are, however, some strategies that tax administrations can
potentially use, if and as relevant, to reduce these costs while at the same time potentially
improving compliance.

4.4.1  Safe harbours

Administrative or legislative safe harbours can apply to a defined category of taxpayers (e.g.,
those with turnover below a specific level) or transactions (e.g., low-value corporate support
services) to provide relief from some of the complexities and obligations that arise from the
application of TP rules. Providing a safe harbour for routine low-risk functions can provide cer-
tainty for taxpayers, reduce the need to perform comparability studies under the arm’s-length
principle and free up resources so that both tax administrations and taxpayers can concentrate
on the more important and higher risk TP matters. An example of such a safe harbour might be
to accept a price as arm’s length for low value support services between related parties provid-
ing the profit margin does not exceed 5%. Industry experts can be very useful to help identify
industry norms and thresholds for potential safe harbours (a mechanism used in South Africa).

Safe harbours should be accompanied by stringent disclosure, review and eligibility require-
ments to prevent possible abuse.

4.4.2  Advance Pricing Agreements (APAs)

An APA determines, in advance of the controlled transactions, a set of criteria to determine the
arm’s-length price for those transactions over a fixed period of time. The criteria can include
such matters as the method, specific acceptable comparables and adjustments, as well as criti-
cal assumptions as to future events. APAs can be unilateral, involving one tax administration
and an MNE and its subsidiaries, or multilateral involving two or more tax administrations.

APAs can provide certainty in a more cooperative way than an audit, thereby providing a better
and quicker way to review the evidence and achieve agreement on arm’s-length prices. They
	                                                                   Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	         39


can also roll back to prior years (which might otherwise require auditing) or be extended into
the future. However, they are best suited to larger taxpayers as they are a reasonably resource-­
intensive compliance approach in terms of time, cost and skill intensity requiring both mining
industry and TP expertise. The cooperative processes involved in the negotiation of an APA are
diagrammatically shown in Figure 7. They also require high levels of negotiation skills as well
as resource commitment to undertake the annual review work. The cost of an APA program is



    Figure 7: Transfer pricing cooperative compliance phases

                                       Not approved for APA at this time . . . an APA, like an
          Phase 1:
                                         audit, should only be used when the investment
      Who is of concern?
                                         is warranted (either no significant issues or not
     (Candidate Selection)
                                                   enough capability/capacity).
                   Potential issues
                   identified

     Phase 2: What issues                  Phase 3:                              Phase 4:
                                                                                                               MAP to reduce
        do they have?                 Audit the evidence                    Resolve the issues
                                                                                                                double tax
      (Risk Assessment)                     (Audit)                            (Resolution)




        Initial functional               Step 1: Identify                      Agreement on         Yes
                                                                                                                  Monitor
      review—who does                   actual conditions                    resolution process
                                                                                                                compliance
          what, where                     re: TP issues                      and resulting price?

                                                                                        No


     Examine accounts &                       Step 2:                             Deal with
       transfer pricing                   Comparability                       objection/appeal
       documentation                  analysis & adjustments                   (independent)


                                                                        Reversed        Upheld


                                      Step 3: Apply best TP
     Initial compatibility—
                                       method to get price/                     Court—win?
        industry/market                                                                             Yes
                                           profit range

                                                                                        No


                                                                                  Reverse
       Results realistic               Step 4: Agreement
                                                                                amendment/
       (arm’s length)?        No          on TP price
                                                               No                close case

                 Yes                              Yes                                    Policy implications



      Close TP review—                   Close TP audit                        Consider law
      document into APA                document into APA                     changes if needed




        3 to 6 Months                        ~1 Year                            ~2 to 3 Years                    3+ Years
40	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa


similar to that required for an audit program (but quicker) which suggests they should ideally
be made available to higher risk taxpayers in the mining sector. The resource intensity and
specialised TP skills required to conclude APAs is the main reason why they have not yet been
widely implemented in Africa.


    Issues Arising from Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs)
4.5 
    and Treaty Shopping
African countries do not currently have a large tax treaty network and most of the current
treaties are regional. Despite some claims that a broad tax treaty network is needed to attract
investment, the empirical evidence on the effects of FDI is mixed as most capital exporting
countries have credit or exemption regimes in place to reduce or eliminate double taxation.

The entering into of a DTA usually requires some taxing rights to be given up or shared and
source country withholding taxes to be reduced and this would need to be justified by offset-
ting strategic or economic benefits.

The question of how to structure and negotiate more balanced DTAs between developing and
developed countries is still far from resolved. Both the OECD and the UN have international
tax treaty models with the UN Model retaining a greater share of taxing power to developing
countries. Daurer and Krever (2012)38 compare these two models in a review about DTAs spe-
cifically in the African context.

The decision to enter into tax treaties needs to be based on broad policy and economic reasons
(not just for TP purposes), balancing all the expected benefits and costs. The IMF notes that



      Figure 8: Schematic treaty shopping (Modified from IMF, 2014)

                                                                       No treaty = High WHT
                                                    COUNTRY C                                    COUNTRY A
                                                     Head Co.                                     Mining Co.




                                                          Treaty = Low WHT
                                                                                          Treaty = Low WHT



           Low-tax
                                                   COUNTRY B
         COUNTRY D
                                                   Conduit Co. 1
         Conduit Co. 2
                            Treaty = Low WHT




38
   Veronika Daurer and Richard Krever (2012), Choosing between the UN and OECD Tax Policy Models: An African
Case Study, European University Institute, Florence, Working Paper RSCAS 2012/60.
	                                                    Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	   41


caution39 is needed for any developing country entering into a tax treaty as they may achieve
more through domestic law changes than reciprocal tax treaty benefits.

Even though a DTA may not exist between the country hosting the mining operations (A in Fig-
ure 8) and the country (C) of residence of the MNE, the MNE may reduce its effective tax rate
at the consolidated level by ‘treaty shopping’, i.e., by routing investment indirectly through an
entity in a low tax conduit country that has a treaty with the host country (B). In practice one
often finds foreign investment routed through a favourable low effective tax jurisdiction.

With the ever present risk of treaty shopping, developing countries may wish to be cautious
about creating tax treaty networks and may wish to include a suitable anti-abuse provision
such as a Limitation of Benefit article in any tax treaties they enter into.

One aspect of DTAs that is particularly desirable (in both the OECD and UN models) for admin-
istration of TP issues is the exchange of information article. Despite forthcoming improve-
ments in reporting of information as recommended in the BEPS 2015 Final Report for Action 13,
and the EITI40 initiative, some difficulties will remain in gaining access to sufficient and timely
information for TP compliance activities. Importantly, exchange of information provisions
can be accessed without entering into bilateral treaties—they are available by entering into
Taxation Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs) or by becoming a signatory to the OECD
multilateral treaty41 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters (of which six African
countries are already signatories).




39
   IMF—Spillovers in International Corporate Taxation, 9 May 2014, published 25 June 2014 (paras 24–40).
40
   Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) is a global standard to promote open and accountable
management of natural resources. It seeks to strengthen government and company systems, inform public
debate and enhance trust. https://eiti.org/
41
   Multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters which entered into force 1 June
2011.
                                                                                                           5
                                              The Way Forward—
                                               Recommendations


O     ur research corroborated by the study questionnaire clearly highlighted a strong need for
      capacity strengthening in the area of transfer pricing in general throughout the African
continent and for enhancing the specific knowledge of the structures, value chain characteris-
tics and processes of the mining industry within tax authorities, particularly in fast developing
mineral-rich countries. While significant, this is, of course, just one facet of the broader issue
of having to strengthen the mining taxation administration and collection capacity of African
tax authorities in general and these two priorities should be seen as complementary. The assis-
tance provided by various international institutions is ensuring that most African jurisdictions
will gradually have an adequate legislative basis to address TP issues. The main challenge is
now to put in place supporting regulations, structures and adequate administrative capacity
to effectively enforce it.

The current scarcity of TP experts may be gradually overcome, notwithstanding the resources
constraints, by providing a range of training and capacity building opportunities to build an
appropriate in-house skill inventory. However, these specialised personnel will also be in high
general demand, and the government may experience difficulty in retaining them as their
employment conditions are less competitive than those offered by the private sector. Govern-
ments must do all they can to portray themselves as an ‘employer of choice’ by emphasis-
ing security of employment, opportunities for sponsored external and on-the-job professional
training, mentoring and development, clear career paths within the relevant ministry and/
or across the public service in general. Inter-jurisdictional cooperative initiatives may offer a
pragmatic interim solution to current capacity constraints.

On the basis of our study we present the following recommendations42 for consideration to the
African tax administrations and relevant international organisations:


                                        African Tax Administrations

    1      Continue to develop and refine transfer pricing legislation and particularly supporting regulations
           for greater compliance and enforcement, including of appropriate documentation.




42
   Detailed recommendations may be found in the publication Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa: A
reference Guide for Practitioners.


                                                      42
	                                                    Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa	          43



                                      African Tax Administrations

    2   In light of the country’s tax base, determine the most appropriate TP institutional structural
        arrangements:

        •	 Either as a currently, much in favour, large taxpayer unit (LTU) with special functional
           (including TP) sections providing benefits, particularly in terms of effectiveness, but
           avoiding as far as possible the risk of cultural isolation from the rest of the organisation, and
           duplication of internal functions and efforts; or
        •	 The valid alternative of a structure along tax types or functions, particularly if specialised
           resources are scarce. TP issues could then be either addressed in the context of general
           audits, or with the support of embedded TP specialists; or
        •	 At the limit, a stand-alone TP specialist unit to carry out specific TP audits. This approach is
           currently rare in Africa, but may be more justifiable in the future.

    3   Consider whether to establish a mining-specific audit team. This will depend on the significance
        of mining to revenue generation. In terms of TP issues, the mining audit team will either interact
        with the stand-alone TP unit, or TP specialists embedded within it.

    4   Develop a better understanding of the industry characteristics and, in particular, of the mining
        value chain for the specific mineral commodities mined in the country and of the revenue
        potential and main cost components for each mining operation.

    5   Negotiate exchange of information (EoI) agreements with key tax jurisdictions in which related
        service providers are residents.

    6   Consider the relevance of the use of the ‘sixth’ method for transfer of mineral products to
        related marketing hubs.

    7   Consider the relevance of the use of simplification measures such as ‘safe harbours’ for
        routine functions and negotiation of advance pricing agreements (APAs) with major producers,
        particularly for pricing of mineral exports, if necessary with the assistance of specialised external
        consultants.

    8   Adopt the recommendations of the OECD BEPS 2015 Final Report for Action 4 to cap
        deductible interest to a set percentage of the EBIT (in the range of 10% to 30%) of an individual
        entity (fixed ratio rule) or to attribute interest deductions to various subsidiaries in proportion to
        their contribution to the consolidated MNE’s income (group ratio rule).

                                       International Organisations

    9   Provide a range of training and capacity building opportunities to African tax administrations to
        build an appropriate TP skill inventory involving:

        •	 specialised international workshops on the issue of TP in mining being currently organised by
           the WBG in cooperation with a number of international institutions including UNECA, GIZ and
           MEfDA to be rolled out starting in late 2016. These may also be open to CSOs and NGOs;
        •	 possibly bonded, attendance of appropriate award and non-award university courses;
        •	 short- to medium-term secondment to more advanced tax jurisdictions;
        •	 temporary use of external tax specialists from other tax jurisdictions and/or from the private
           sector to work alongside internal resources with emphasis on transfer of knowledge;
        •	 establishment of effective follow-up mentoring programs and of clear career paths.
44	        Transfer Pricing in Mining with a Focus on Africa



                                           African Tax Administrations

      10    Emphasize training to effectively communicate, engage and negotiate with taxpayers, promoting
            better understanding of and voluntary compliance with the tax rules, thus reducing litigation,
            requiring:

            •	 improvement in taxpayer relations through better communication and consultation;
            •	 lessening of the current tendency for assuming adversarial positions; and
            •	 significant strengthening of tax administrators’ communication and negotiation skills.

      11    Establish and support interjurisdictional cooperative initiatives as a pragmatic interim solution to
            current TP capacity constraints. These include:

            •	 the establishment of ad hoc or regional specialist Multinational Transfer Pricing Units
               (MNTPUs) pooling expertise from various countries based on agreed prioritisation and cost-
               sharing rules;
            •	 supporting implementation of the OECD’s ‘tax inspectors without borders’ initiative;
            •	 jointly funded acquisition and sharing of otherwise unaffordable, key comparable databases
               and establishment of knowledge sharing e-learning platforms, through a coordinating
               institution (e.g., African Tax Administration Forum (ATAF));
            •	 broadening the network of bilateral and multilateral international Exchange of Information
               (EoI) agreements with African countries, aided by improved computer capacity and the
               implementation of the BEPS country-by-country reporting initiative.

      12    Support and sytematise the current push for recognition in the allocation of profits of location
            specific advantages (LSAs) in source countries, which in the context of mining would include the
            value of ‘ready access to mineral resources’ in Africa.



In essence, the significant improvements in effectiveness and efficiency of administration of TP
rules, required to ensure that African countries collect their fair share of the mineral resource
rents from a fast expanding global mining industry, will involve significant time, cost and a
concerted effort at the domestic level supported by continued international assistance.
                                                                                                                    APPENDIX A
                                                Key Sources of Guidance for the
                                        Four Phases of TP Verification and Audit


                                                          UN ‘Practical Manual                                                                     International
                                                         on Transfer Pricing for     IRS ‘Transfer Pricing       ATO ‘Large Business and Tax         Auditing




45
     Phase                OECD Guidance                  Developing Countries’     Audit Roadmap’ Example           Compliance’ Example              Standard

Phase 1          ‘Dealing Effectively with the           8.3. “Selection of        “Pre-examination analysis”   “Case Selection” /Risk Profiling   N/A
Who Is of        Challenges of Transfer Pricing’         Taxpayers for Transfer
Concern          Chapter 2: “Selecting the right         Pricing Examination:
                 cases”                                  Risk Assessment”

                 ‘Draft Handbook’ Chapter 5

Phase 2          Dealing Effectively . . . : Chapter 3   8.5 “Preliminary          “Initial risk analysis”      “Risk Review”                      ISA 200
What Issues Do   “Getting off to a good start”           Examination”                                           (Transfer Pricing Risk Review)
They Have                                                                                                                                          ISA 315
                 ‘Handbook’ Chapter 3
                                                          UN ‘Practical Manual                                                                         International
                                                         on Transfer Pricing for     IRS ‘Transfer Pricing        ATO ‘Large Business and Tax            Auditing
    Phase                    OECD Guidance               Developing Countries’     Audit Roadmap’ Example            Compliance’ Example                 Standard

Phase 3            ‘TP Guidelines for MNE and Tax                                  “Execution”                   “Audit”
Audit the          Administrations’
Evidence
                   Chapter I: ALP                        8.6 “Audit Procedure”     Gather facts                  Gather facts and identify the         ISA 500
Adjust                                                                                                           actual conditions present             ISA 520
Issues if Needed   D.1.2 Factors determining             8.7 “Narrowing of         Perform comparability and                                           ISA 530
                   comparability:                        Issues: Development       functional analysis           Select the most appropriate and       ISA 550
Advise                                                   of Tax Authorities’                                     reliable method
on Future          •	   Characteristics                  Position”                 Perform economic analysis                                           ISA 700
Treatment          •	   Functional analysis                                                                      Application of the transfer pricing
                   •	   Contractual terms                                          Perform legal analysis re     rules
                   •	   Economic circumstances                                     proposed adjustment
                   •	   Business strategies                                                                      Adjust if needed and monitor

                   Chapter III: Comparability Analysis

Phase 4            Dealing effectively . . . :           9 “Dispute Avoidance      Resolution                    Dispute resolution/settlement
Resolve Issues                                           and Resolution”
                   Chapter 6 ‘Reaching a decision
                   point’

                   TP Guidelines: Chapter IV

Links              http://www.oecd.org/site/             http://www.un.org/esa/    http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-   https://www.ato.gov.au/               http://
                   ctpfta/49428070.pdf and see           ffd/documents/UN_         utl/FinalTrfPrcRoadMap        uploadedFiles/Content/                en.wikipedia.
                   http://www.oecd.org/tax/transfer-     Manual_TransferPricing    .pdf                          LB_I/downloads/                       org/wiki/
                   pricing/Draft-Handbook-TP-Risk-       .pdf                                                    BUS16985lrgbustaxcomp.pdf             International_
                   Assessment-ENG.pdf                                                                                                                  Standards_on_
                                                                                                                                                       Auditing
