                    Ghana Youth Employment
                       Program Inventory

                                      August 2016


                       Francis Babongte Avura
                        and Ato Ulzen-Appiah




The study was prepared for the World Bank with the support of the Programme for Sustainable
Economic Development (PSED) in Ghana, implemented by the Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ GmbH) on behalf of the German Federal Ministry for
Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ). The authors wish to thank the various program
staff who contributed to this work by reporting on the details of their programs. The comments
and guidance of Christabel Dadzie and Kathleen Beegle are much appreciated.




                                              1
CONTENTS

Contents................................................................................................................................................................ 2
Acronyms .............................................................................................................................................................. 3
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................................... 4
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................................... 5
2. Key Components of Youth Employment Programs .......................................................................................... 8
3. The Size of Youth Employment Programs....................................................................................................... 11
4. Cost per Participant and Sources of Funding .................................................................................................. 13
5. Duration and Coverage ................................................................................................................................... 15
   Duration .......................................................................................................................................................... 15
   Coverage ......................................................................................................................................................... 15
6. Sectors ............................................................................................................................................................ 16
7. Targeting ......................................................................................................................................................... 17
8. Others ............................................................................................................................................................. 17
9. Findings and Lessons from the Youth Employment Inventory ....................................................................... 21
10. References .................................................................................................................................................... 22
11. Tables ............................................................................................................................................................ 23
12. Annex: Youth Employment Program Descriptions ....................................................................................... 37
   Public Sector ................................................................................................................................................... 37
   Private Sector.................................................................................................................................................. 39




                                                                                    2
ACRONYMS
AEA      African Entrepreneurship Academy
AITI-    Advanced Information Technology Institute–Kofi Annan Center of Excellence in Information
KACE     and Communication Technology
CAMFED   Campaign for Female Education
COTVET   Council for Technical and Vocational Education and Training
CSO      civil society organization
DBC      Diploma in Business Computing
ENGINE   Enhancing Growth in New Enterprise (TecnoServe)
GEBSS    Graduate Entrepreneurial Business Support Scheme
GIZ      Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GSDI     Ghana Skills Development Initiative
ICCES    Integrated Community Centers for Employable Skills
ICT      information and communication technology
LEFY     Livelihood Enhancement for Youth Program
LESDEP   Local Enterprise Skills Development Program
M&E      monitoring and evaluation
MDAs     ministries, departments, agencies
MDPI     Management Development and Productivity Institute
MELR     Ministry of Employment and Labor Relations
MOFA     Ministry of Food and Agriculture
NAP      National Apprenticeship Program
NGO      nongovernmental organization
NVTI     National Vocational Training Institute
OICG     Opportunity Industrialization Centers Ghana
PII      Phinklife Institute Initiative
SDC      Skills Development Center (AEA)
YEA      Youth Employment Agency
YES      Youth Enterprise Support
YIEDIE   Youth Inclusive Entrepreneurial Development Initiative for Employment
YLSTI    Youth Leadership and Skills Training Institute




                                                  3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Youth Employment Inventory has been compiled to improve the evidence base for making decisions about
how to address the problem of youth unemployment or youth who are not in education and not participating in
the labor market in Ghana. 1 Policy makers who are considering measures to help young people make the
transition into the labor market and obtain decent work are hampered by a lack of information on the various
options, the effectiveness of the options in different situations, and options that have been tried and failed among
different youth profiles. To guide public policy and inform private efforts, more evidence is needed about the
effectiveness of different initiatives and approaches in promoting youth employment and fostering a smooth
transition from education and training to work. This study takes a modest step in this direction by mapping youth
employment initiatives in Ghana.

The government of Ghana has undertaken many initiatives to address the youth unemployment challenges. At
the same time, many private sector organizations—some for private entities and others that are nonprofit
efforts—have undertaken training programs to contribute to and improve the labor force in Ghana. The key focus
of youth employment initiatives in Ghana is skills development and training, entrepreneurial training,
apprenticeship, employment services, and direct employment. A total of 40 youth employment programs have
been analyzed for this report. Of these, 18 are in the public sector and are implemented by government ministries,
departments, and agencies (MDAs). The other 22 interventions are implemented by the private sector, which
includes corporate entities, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and civil society organizations (CSOs). The
existing programs are highly concentrated around skills development, training, and entrepreneurship training.
Apprenticeship programs are more common in public sector programs, where over a third of programs offer
apprenticeships.

The largest program by far is the one run by the Youth Employment Agency (YEA), which directly employs
youth, employing 100,000 young people, 10 percent of the 1 million applicants. The private sector programs
tend to be on a smaller scale relative to the public sector programs and are also more expensive. The cost per
participant for wholly government-funded programs is low, at GH₵100–₵150, compared with private sector
programs, for which the average cost per participant is GH₵2,320. This partly reflects the scope of these
respective programs as well as the targeted group of youth.




1
    Youth is not strictly defined in terms of age ranges. Programs self-identified as targeting youth or young people.


                                                             4
1. INTRODUCTION

Africa is the youngest continent. Children and youth ages below 30 years constitute 70 percent of the continent’s
entire population (UNECA 2009). These young and energetic people of Africa have the potential, ability,
creativity, enthusiasm, and energy to achieve Africa’s renaissance. Investments in their education and improving
their transition to employment are critical for the continent and Africa’s global repositioning agenda. The 17th
African Union Summit held in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea from June 28 to July 1, 2011, adopted a declaration
that African Union member states would advance the youth agenda and adopt policies and mechanisms for the
creation of safe, decent, and competitive employment opportunities by accelerating the implementation of the
African Youth Decade Plan of Action (2009–18).

Ghana faces a significant unemployment problem, and youth are being affected the most. In Ghana, young people
ages 15–35 represent about 34 percent of the population. Ashanti Region has the largest share of youth
population (6.8 percent), followed by Greater Accra (6.2 percent), while the Upper West and Upper East regions
have much lower shares, at 1.0 percent and 1.4 percent, respectively, reflecting their smaller overall populations.
Youth often face unique challenges transitioning into the labor market. This is reflected in a range of labor
indicators. Youth ages 15–24 are much less likely to be working than adults ages 25–65. Slightly more than half
of young people are working (52 percent) compared with the majority of other adults (89 percent). This partly
reflects the fact that young people are still in school, but, at the same time, a larger share of young people are
neither in education nor working, compared with other adults. Youth frequently work in temporary low-wage,
low-productivity jobs. This is reflected in the age gap in job satisfaction. Among those working, 23 percent of
youth ages 15–24 report they are dissatisfied with their jobs, compared with 12 percent among the 25–34 age-
group and 9 percent among the 35–65 age-group. Younger workers are also more eager to change their jobs.
Among people working, 47 percent in the 15–24 age-group, 39 percent in the 25–34 age-group, and 30 percent
in the 35–65 age-group report they would like to change jobs (GSS 2014).

The reasons for these employment challenges among young people are varied. They range from deficits in basic
education and job-relevant skills to lack of job search experience to facilitate job acquisition through working
experience and difficulties in obtaining information about career options. Young job-seekers are more likely to
lack the appropriate soft and hard skills, and this makes it difficult for them to secure employment. There is a
skills mismatch. In addition to low skill levels, youth face higher barriers to employment stemming from their
lack of access to finance, land, social networks, and other factors relative to adults.

The government of Ghana has undertaken many initiatives to address the challenges in youth unemployment.
The National Youth Policy, “Towards an Empowered Youth, Impacting Positively on National Development,”
was launched in 2010. It is intended to provide guidelines for all stakeholders involved in the implementation of
policies, programs, and projects for the development of youth. This was followed by the National Youth Policy


                                                         5
Implementation Plan 2014–17. In 2015, the Ministry of Employment and Labor Relations (MELR) launched the
National Employment Policy to address the employment situation and deal with deficits in decent jobs. It
especially targeted vulnerable groups, youth, women, and the disabled. The goal of the policy is to create decent,
gainful employment opportunities so the growing labor force can improve their living conditions and contribute
to economic growth and national development within the framework of equity, fairness, security, and dignity.
Policy efforts to expand employment outcomes among young people cut across the MDAs, including the Council
for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (COTVET), which was established by Act of Parliament
718 in 2006 to coordinate and oversee all aspects of technical and vocational training in the formal and informal
sectors. In 2012, Parliament passed a Legislative Instrument (LI 2195) to give legal backing to COTVET for the
registration and accreditation of training providers in the public and private sectors. The National Apprenticeship
Program (NAP) is implemented by COTVET as well as the Ghana Skills Development Initiative (GSDI), in
collaboration with the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ).

A variety of government programs are focused on youth employment. The government launched the National
Youth Employment Program in 2006 to tackle the challenges of youth unemployment, underemployment, and
food insecurity in the country by providing skills and job opportunities among youth. In 2012, the National
Youth Employment Program was restructured into the Ghana Youth Employment and Entrepreneurial
Development Agency, which was then restructured into the Youth Employment Agency (YEA) under Act 887
in 2015 to empower young people to contribute meaningfully to the sustainable socioeconomic development of
Ghana. The YEA is but 1 of 17 public sector initiatives related to youth employment, albeit the largest in terms
of youth coverage.

Another well-known program in Ghana related to youth employment is the National Service Scheme, whereby
students who have completed all course work at the tertiary level are required to work in a job assigned to them
through the scheme. There is frequent discussion about the mismatch between training and scheme placements
and the implications for converting the experience gained during the service period into job placements. Two-
thirds of the participants complained about a mismatch between their field of study and their job placements
(Sikah 2000). This program is not considered in this inventory.

Interest in promoting the employability of young people is not limited to public sector efforts. Many private
sector organizations, some for profit and other nonprofit efforts, have undertaken training programs to contribute
to and improve the labor force in Ghana. The oldest private sector program is the Fashion Training Program run
by the Joyce Ababio College of Creative Design, started in 1995. Many private sector programs likewise tend to
focus on training youth in the skills and sectors needed in particular industries. Private programs also pay special
attention to addressing the lack of soft skills among many young graduates and out-of-school youth.




                                                         6
While various interventions are being undertaken to address youth employment, systematic information on the
scope of these programs is lacking. Moreover, little is known about what is most effective in promoting youth
employment in Ghana. To guide public policy and inform private efforts, more evidence is needed about the
effectiveness of various initiatives and approaches in fostering youth employment and smooth transitions from
education and training to work. This study takes a modest step in this direction by mapping youth employment
initiatives in Ghana.

The objective of this inventory is to provide inputs and background materials on youth employment initiatives
in Ghana. The inventory of youth employment programs will be supplied to the MELR, as well as other
coordinating ministries, development partners, and stakeholders, to aid in decision making on the development
and implementation of youth employment programs in Ghana and to strengthen existing programs.

This inventory has been developed by listing existing youth employment programs and institutions operating in
the public sector (MDAs), in the private sector (NGOs, private entities, and CSOs), and among development
partners. The list has been updated based on the contact information of focal persons and key respondents. The
list of public programs is considered exhaustive, whereas the list of private programs is likely not exhaustive.

A self-administered survey questionnaire on basic and core program details was distributed among key
respondents in program management during multiple visits and meetings. In the case of some programs, the
paper or digital questionnaires were accurately and completely filled out by key program respondents, while, in
other programs, the information was verbally collected during meetings and face-to-face interviews. The data
collection phase started in January 2016. It was originally envisaged to finish the data collection by the end of
February 2016; however, it proved surprisingly difficult to obtain basic program information, especially from
public sector institutions. The period of data collection was therefore extended another two months, to April.




                                                        7
2. KEY COMPONENTS OF YOUTH EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS

For the purposes of this inventory, youth employment interventions refer to programs designed to improve the
employability and employment prospects of young people ages 15–35 years who are outside the formal
education system. There are numerous types of youth employment programs, including wage subsidies or grants,
public works programs, self-employment programs, cash grants, and entrepreneurial promotion programs (Cho
and Honorati 2014). To classify youth employment programs in Ghana, six categories were defined, as follows:

1. Skills development and training entails the provision of vocational and technical skills through formal
    training institutes and schools (class-based training) or within an organized and structured workplace
    environment such as a registered firm or an informal business (on-the-job training). This is explicitly
    designated as learning (in terms of objectives, time, or resources) and typically leads to validation or learning
    assessments and certification. This includes short- and long-course programs up to, say, two years, such as
    through the National Vocational Training Institute and the Youth Leadership Training Institute.
2. Programs to foster entrepreneurship are focused on building business knowledge, practices, and skills,
    explicitly in preparation for starting a business or improving an existing enterprise. These are often programs
    that focus on both hard and soft skills; they center on the attitudes, knowledge, and other skills associated
    with the practice of entrepreneurship. They may include start-up credit financing (Youth Enterprise Support
    [YES] and the Enablis Business LaunchPad), incubation (the Meltwater Incubator Program), business
    advisory services (YES and the ServLed Accelerator Program), and mentorship (Enhancing Growth in New
    Enterprise [ENGINE]).
3. Youth employment services include the provision of labor market information (on, for example, economic
    sectors, enterprises that are creating jobs, geographical areas where labor demand is higher, education
    streams that teach the skills required in high-demand occupations), general employment counseling,
    including guidance on how to approach employers, the specific identification of appropriate job vacancies,
    and how to write a curriculum vitae and manage job interviews.
4. Direct employment is the provision of employment, usually in the public sector.
5. Apprenticeship is a system by which an employer hires a young person as an apprentice and trains the
    person systematically in a trade, while the apprentice works in the employer’s service. Traditional
    apprenticeship opportunities in Ghana are most often available in the informal sector, are not associated with
    a written contract, and are based on an unwritten agreement between the apprentice and the microenterprise
    owner. They last an average of three years, and the apprentice receives a minimum monthly subsistence
    allowance. In terms of the programs inventoried here, the apprenticeship component is more highly
    structured. The apprentice is often paired with a prescreened master craftsman, who is paid by the
    apprenticeship program to take on the apprentice. The fees paid by the apprentice, the duration of the
    apprenticeship, and the mode of assessment of the apprentice differ across programs.



                                                         8
6. Others is a residual category to capture any remaining components of youth employment programs in Ghana
    not already listed. Specific examples are discussed below. Some of the modules being implemented by the
    YEA include programs whereby university or tertiary students are placed mostly in government MDAs
    during vacation to perform specific jobs, for instance, revenue mobilization. There are also YEA internship
    program modules whereby students in senior high school, tertiary institutions, and technical and vocational
    institutes are placed in public or private organizations as part of their training to acquire knowledge and
    first-job experience to enhance employability.

One program may be mapped to one or more types based on the program components or activities. Tables 1A
and 1B show the range of activities covered by the 40 youth employment programs of public and private
implementing agencies. Of these 40, 18 are in the public sector and are being implemented by government
MDAs. The other 22 interventions are being implemented by the private sector, which includes corporate
organizations, NGOs, and CSOs. (The public and private nature of the programs in this report refers to the nature
of the implementing agency, not the financing.)

Skills development and training dominates the types of programs implemented, with a total of 30 interventions,
14 in the public sector, and 16 in the private sector. Many skill training programs in the public sector focus on
vocational skills and are run similarly to senior high school education. Of the 7 public sector interventions
implemented by the MELR, 5 are skills development and training programs. The second most common type of
youth employment program is entrepreneurial training (24 of 40 programs), which is especially prevalent in the
nonpublic programs, where 17 of 22 private sector programs tackle entrepreneurial training.

Apprenticeship programs are more common in public sector programs, where over a third of programs offer
apprenticeships. Apprenticeships represent an opportunity for youth to become prepared for self-employment—
potentially, also wage employment if the person is hired by a master craftsman—through exposure to the world
of work and through on-the-job learning of job-relevant skills in the specific trade in which they are involved.

Traditional apprenticeship is widespread in the informal sector, where apprentices are the ones learning a trade
or skill from qualified individuals (master craftspersons) for a period of time that has been fixed in advance. The
GSDI, which is implemented by COTVET and funded by GIZ, seeks to improve on traditional apprenticeship
through innovative approaches to the introduction of competency-based training standards and a cooperative
training model combining workplace and school-based training.

While curriculum content and design need to be specific to the sector of focus and the type of youth in the
program, there is nonetheless likely to be considerable overlap among the different types of youth employment
programs. The sense from the data collection effort and discussions with focal persons in programs is that there
is little coordination or communication across programs, not even in programs in the same MDA. For example,



                                                        9
some modules of entrepreneurship training for microenterprises, notably key concepts of general business
training, are not sector- or trade-specific but are common across different training courses. To this end, it may
be efficient to have one core set of materials that pertain to this content and that are available and used
systematically at least by the government programs that carry out entrepreneurship training.




                                                       10
3. THE SIZE OF YOUTH EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS

The size of programs in terms of youth participation is presented in tables 2A and 2B. Among the public
initiatives, the largest program by far is the YEA, which directly employs 100,000 young people (out of 1 million
applicants). The Youth in Agriculture Program under the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) is the
second largest program, with 50,000 youth in training each year. Applications are double the number of those
accepted. In a close third place is the Youth in Cocoa Program, to which 50,000 young people have applied, and
42,000 young people have been trained. Both programs support youth by supplying farm inputs and extension
services. The fourth largest program is the Rural Enterprise Program under the Ministry of Trade and Industry.
It covers 26,980 youth per year and has the lowest acceptance rate, about a third of applicants. The Rural
Enterprise Program primarily targets the entrepreneurial poor. Generally, there is no age restriction. However,
for special youth support interventions, such as the Youth in Agri-business Program that is being implemented
in collaboration with MOFA, the age range is 18–35 years. It is estimated that 38 percent of the participants are
youth ages 18–35 years. The Competency Training for Fresh and Unemployed Graduates Program implemented
by the Management Development and Productivity Institute (MDPI) recorded the lowest number of young
people, at 6. The low intake reflects the fact that the primary target of MDPI is not youth, the initiative does not
have much funding, and the fees are expensive. In general, programs receive many more applicants than they
enroll. Oversubscription is high especially among programs that do not require youth to pay a fee. However,
further investigation is needed to understand if this occurs because of a lack of qualifications among applicants,
the lack of program capacity to accept more applicants, or other reasons.

Private sector programs tend to have smaller geographical coverage relative to the public sector programs, which
are national in character. The application processes that beneficiaries must undergo to join these programs are
intensely competitive. Beneficiaries must also compete for the limited available grants or credits to start their
businesses. Many of these programs spend significant resources on trainees. The biggest private sector program
is the Local Enterprise Skills Development Program (LESDEP), which has a much larger number of
beneficiaries, 35,000, in part because of support and funding supplied by the government.

The private sector programs (22) are not designed to solicit applications from a large number of people and so
tend to have much smaller numbers of applicants (140,000). The intake capacity of these programs is also small.
On average, the take-up rate is 58 percent, compared with 21 percent among the public sector programs.
Combined, the 16 programs that focus on skills development admit more participants than the 17 programs with
a focus on entrepreneur training. Many competitive entrepreneurial programs are able to take fewer than 50
percent of the applicants to ensure high-quality in their services within their restricted budgets. For example, the
Meltwater Entrepreneurial School of Technology accepts only 3 percent of the applicants. Quality certification




                                                        11
programs with high fees have few participants because they focus on providing high-quality training, not the
quantity of applicants.

Overall, the number of youth being covered by the programs inventoried here—approximately 320,000—is a
small fraction (less than 4 percent) of the approximately 9 million youth ages 15–35, some of whom are in school
or successfully employed. From this perspective, it is unlikely that youth employment programs could be scaled
up to affect a significant shift in the statistics on youth employment. Nonetheless, for the participants, these
programs offer an opportunity for young people to change their employment trajectory meaningfully.




                                                      12
4. COST PER PARTICIPANT AND SOURCES OF FUNDING

Reasonably robust unit cost data on the various interventions have been difficult to obtain. Budget data of the
sponsoring ministries or organizations are often not appropriately disaggregated, and precise information on the
target beneficiaries who have been reached may be imprecise. Unit cost data on private initiatives have usually
not been available for this inventory. Some government programs (MDPI, YES, Youth in Cocoa) and private
programs (the Campaign for Female Education [CAMFED], ServLed) declined to provide annual budget
information.

Tables 3A and 3B show that cost differences were considerable even among programs of similar nature and
duration. The cost per participant of wholly government-funded programs is as low as GH₵100 and as high as
GH₵60,000, compared with the private sector, where the cost per participant ranges from GH₵100 to
GH₵500,000. Private programs are more expensive than public programs. The total annual budget for the private
sector programs listed in table 3B is GH₵103 million, and the average cost per participant is GH₵35,090,
compared with the public sector, where the average annual budget among the programs shown in table 3A is
GH₵835,103,398, while the annual average cost per participant is GH₵3,475. The reason for a high average
cost per participant in the private sector is (1) the higher recurrent and overhead costs for similar program
activities; private sector programs rely on legal and financial consultants and more expensive, more highly
skilled training providers, and (2) the more expensive program activities such as the provision of start-up grants
for beneficiaries, but also the provision of complementary training services, such as business advisory services
and coaches, mentorships, and incubation. Analyses have found that the private sector hires legal and business
advisory people to make the training more practical, which is not the case in the public sector. This also
contributes to the higher average cost per participant. The difference in program costs likewise reflects variations
in program priorities, budget allocations, and funding capacity, as well as the ability of youth to pay the fees and
the fact that these programs often run longer.

The majority of the public programs listed in table 3A are funded by the government; few are supported by
development partners or international organizations. Only one program, the Graduate Entrepreneurial Business
Support Scheme (GEBSS), is a public-private partnership, in this case between the Jospong group of companies,
the State Insurance Company, and other private companies and the government through the MELR. Most of the
private sector programs listed in table 3B are funded by corporate organizations as part of their efforts at
corporate social responsibility or by NGOs, international organizations and development partners.

Some of the private programs (such as Enablis LaunchPad) and some public programs (GEBSS, NAP, and Youth
in Agriculture) have been put on hold because of a lack of adequate funding and support.




                                                        13
The fees charged and collected from beneficiaries cover the costs involved in running many training programs
in Ghana. In table 3A, 9 of the 18 public sector programs do not charge any fees to their beneficiaries;
government funding covers the costs. The fees are not always the same for similar interventions across programs.
In the Rural Enterprise Program, participants are charged 20 percent to 100 percent of the costs depending on
the level and type of support and the status of the business of the clients. The fees charged often correspond to
the economic environment within which the program is operated. Beneficiaries are charged GH₵290 for the
Livelihood Enhancement for Youth Program (LEFY) of the Opportunity Industrialization Centers Ghana
(OICG), but many face difficulties paying the fee. For the technical and vocational education and training
program of the Integrated Community Centers for Employable Skills (ICCES), the fees of a few trainees are
subsidized by some NGOs because the parents cannot afford the payments. The Diploma in Business Computing
(DBC) Program of the Advanced Information Technology Institute–Kofi Annan Centre of Excellence in
Information and Communication Technology (AITI-KACE) is the most expensive (GH₵4,200), followed by the
MDPI’s Competency Training for Fresh and Unemployed Graduates, which costs GH₵4,000, but is subsidized
in some cases by various institutions.

In the private sector, 13 of the 22 programs are free (table 3b). Of the free programs, four are focused on
entrepreneurial training: the Meltwater Foundation’s Entrepreneur-in-Training Program, ENGINE by
TechnoServe, the ServLed Accelerator Program, and the Enablis LaunchPad. Others, such as Impact Hub
Accra’s Venture Support, charges membership fees to beneficiaries. The most expensive program is the Cake
Craft Training Program of Stesi Cakes (GH₵1,800).




                                                       14
5. DURATION AND COVERAGE

Most entrepreneurial programs focus on year-round support for the entrepreneurs in training. In skills
development programs, the youth are tested regularly to ensure proper training, and they receive certification
after completion. Program duration varies based on the type of industries and sectors targeted.

Duration

More than half the public sector programs last three or more years (table 4A). These programs offer certification
to graduates. YES runs for two business cycles (at least two years); the duration depends on the entrepreneurs.
The program of the Youth Leadership and Skills Training Institute (YLSTI) is the oldest youth employment
training program in Ghana, started in 1974. ICCES started in 1986 and runs programs that last six months, two
years, and four years. Also, within the public sector, MDPI programs run for 10 days and include intensive
training on competency and productivity.

In the private sector (table 4B), the incubator programs run by Meltwater and by the Reach for Change
Foundation last an average of three to five years, but entrepreneurs exit early if they are able to attain adequate
capacity.

CAMFED training lasts a week. However, follow-up monitoring and coaching lasts another 12 weeks to ensure
the training has taken hold. Many of the skills programs in the private sector involve intensive training over
periods of one week to six months. Graduates continue to benefit from these programs through after-care options
(periodic phone calls and workshops).

Coverage

Most public sector programs are nationwide. The Youth Inclusive Entrepreneurial Development Initiative for
Employment (YIEDIE), a private sector program, is run in Accra and Takoradi, operates on the weekends
(Saturday and Sunday), and targets workers who want to build their soft skills to become more employable in
the construction industry. In Takoradi, the program works with the local government assembly to support the
program and attract applicants.

There are a few regional programs. CAMFED Ghana runs programs in the three northern regions and the Central
Region, which is generally regarded as one of the poorest regions. In contrast, most of the private sector programs
are active in Accra. The entrepreneur-focused programs, while based in Accra, include participants all over the
country. The Teacher Professional Development Program is run in a number of districts, where its activities are
driven by the financial supporters.




                                                        15
6. SECTORS

Employment in Africa is predominantly in the agriculture sector and the informal economy. This is true of Ghana
as well. In Ghana, 43 percent of the employed youth population are active in the service sector, followed by 41
percent in agriculture, forestry, and fishing, while 19 percent are employed in wholesale and retail trade and
automobile and motorcycle repair. Electricity, gas, stream power, and air conditioning account for 0.4 percent
of employed youth, and water supply, sewerage, and waste management engage 0.2 percent. Because the number
of new vacancies in the formal sector is not catching up with the number of new young people looking for jobs,
young people find the informal sector and agriculture as the only options.

Over 90 percent of the programs provide training for work in the informal sector, but only YEA provides some
form of wage employment in the formal sector in collaboration with government MDAs (tables 5A and 5B).
Only a few programs (the Fisheries Commission, YEA, Youth in Agriculture, and Youth in Cocoa) are engaged
in the agricultural sector. The dominant sectors involved in program training activities shown in table 5A are
construction, consumer electronics, hair and beauty, automobile repairs, catering, and dressmaking and tailoring.

The majority of the private sector programs focus on providing skills in information and communication
technology (ICT), entrepreneurship, hospitality, fashion and design, beauty care, and general business. Impact
Hub Accra, ServLed, and Meltwater focus on entrepreneurship; most of their beneficiaries are in the ICT sector
or leverage ICT for their enterprises. The Youth and Farm Market Program trains farmer apprentices who will
eventually own farms, showing the willingness of the private sector to dabble in agriculture, the dominant sector
of the economy.




                                                       16
7. TARGETING

The reviewed programs target different segments of the youth population by age and by background, especially
in terms of educational attainment.

The minimum age requirement of 80 percent of the youth employment training programs, in both the public and
private sectors, is 18, which, in principle, is the age at which a student would finish senior high school.

Public programs are generally targeted at youth who have completed secondary education, while private
programs require higher skills and a tertiary education diploma or certificate. Ten private sector programs
exclusively target youth who have completed tertiary education, while only three public programs do so.
Programs focused on entrepreneurial activities in the private sector generally target youth who have finished
tertiary education and current professionals looking to run their enterprises full time. Many skills development
programs, such as YIEDIE and the African Entrepreneurship Academy (AEA) Skills Development Center
(SDC), target students who have completed secondary education, but who have not continued on in tertiary
education. Public sector programs are nationwide and target rural youth and youth in low-income households
who have, on average, lower educational attainment.

The majority of the private sector programs are concentrated in urban centers, especially Accra, and are therefore
not available to rural youth. Almost all private sector programs (18 of 22) exclusively target 18- to 35-year-old
youth, while only half the public sector programs target youth exclusively. Eight of the private sector programs
accept youth who are in or have completed high school education. CAMFED Ghana and Savana Signatures have
programs that target junior high school students, equipping them for employment in case they do not continue
their education. Of the private sector programs, 12 accept youth who are in or have completed senior high school.
Student-focused programs (run by Enactus and TANOE) work with students throughout the four years of tertiary
education to train entrepreneurs.


8. OTHERS

This section reviews other services, including components, issues, and problems addressed (tables 7A and 7B).

Exit strategies: An exit strategy is the approach a program adopts to aid the transition of a program participant
out of the program. This may include complementary services after the participant has completed the program.
More than half the youth employment programs analyzed do not have clear, coordinated exit strategies for
beneficiaries. For example, only three public sector programs have some form of exit strategy (YEA, Youth in
Agriculture, and Youth in Cocoa). In collaboration with government MDAs, YEA aims to create viable and
sustainable employment opportunities for youth in the formal sector, including in security services (community
policing, prison services, fire and immigration services) and as community teaching assistants or health workers.


                                                        17
The beneficiaries are supposed to work in the various government agencies for two years, after which they are
supposed to be employed as permanent staff. However, this exit strategy is not effectively implemented by the
various government agencies because of financial constraints and a ban on employment in the public sector. As
a result, these beneficiaries do not exit the program as planned. Meanwhile, YEA financial support involves
offering interest-free loans to qualified start-up and existing businesses owned by youth. While the Youth in
Agriculture and Youth in Cocoa programs provide farm inputs, such as fertilizer and seeds, as well as extension
services to beneficiaries. However, private sector and donor-funded programs provide start-up grants or interest-
free loans, mentorship, incubation, and business advisory services to youth. Upon completion of the programs,
private sector programs more frequently offer cash and credit support, while public sector programs offer more
often focus on in-kind support.

Tracer study: Tracer studies are common research tools to track the employment and earning trajectories of
program participants after program completion, especially among educational and training programs. The
institutions analyzed here use the results of tracer studies, as well as other monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
tools, such as beneficiary assessments, process evaluations, employer surveys in case of internships and
apprenticeships, to improve the design and implementation of programs and to enhance the learning experiences
of future learners. However, in Ghana, critical knowledge gaps exist, especially on the effectiveness and impact
of various initiatives. A particular problem is the lack of impact evaluations on the large-scale government-run
youth employment programs given that substantial public funding has been allocated to these programs. For
example, since 2006, when it was launched, no systematic and comprehensive tracer studies have been conducted
on YEA. Only three interventions, ICCES, the National Vocational Training Institute (NVTI), and OICG, have
made tracer studies available that have been funded by development partners and international organizations.
For instance, NVTI followed a group of 2007–10 graduates and found that, by 2012, 53 percent were self-
employed within between six months and one year after completion of their training; 31 percent were in wage
employment; 12 percent were continuing their training; and 4 percent were not working. A study of the LEFY
program of OICG in 2013 assessed the quality of graduates and their competitiveness in the labor market. It
concluded that 95 percent of LEFY graduates were employed full time and applying the skills they had acquired.
Four of the 23 private sector programs carried out tracer studies: the AEA SDC program, the certificate program
of the Joyce Ababio College of Creative Design, LESDEP, and YIEDIE. The study of the AEA SDC program
found that 70 percent of the graduates had started their own businesses.

Challenges: The survey collected insights on the major challenges that program directors felt their efforts face.
All programs seeking to improve employment outcomes face common economy-wide challenges (poor roads,
energy shortages, telephone outages, and a challenging business environment). Public sector programs encounter
a range of challenges driven by an ever-expanding mandate, but insufficient funding and, as a result, obsolete
tools and equipment, difficult infrastructure, inadequate instructional staff, lack of vehicles for monitoring, poor



                                                        18
office accommodations, irregularly paid master craftpersons or trainers, inability to provide graduates with start-
up kits, and incapacity to scale up scale interventions in all regions). For example, the challenges of the
agriculture sector affect the ability of the Youth in Agriculture Program to become a viable source of employment
for youth because of poor access to land, a shortage of seeds and fingerlings, and a lack of access to finance and
savings.

The challenges among private sector programs include not only inadequate funding to scale up interventions,
but also barriers to sustainability. In the case of Impact Hub Accra, translating business models to the local
environment for companies has not been easy. Problems also arise because of the poor quality and high cost of
data and delays in establishing an alumni network to share lessons on best practice given the large numbers of
former participants and the lack of an appropriate communication platform. According to the ENGINE Program
implemented by TechnoServe, the major challenge is beneficiaries who turn the competition for program
participation into opportunities to access funding.

Successes: Many of the private sector programs measure success through the successes of their graduates. They
emphasize the importance of encouraging alumni to share knowledge and experiences with current beneficiaries.
Some programs, such as Enablis, use surveys among beneficiaries to measure their success. ENGINE of
TechnoServe had received an A and an A+ rating (very good and very strong) from its donor, the U.K.
Department for International Development, as of the first quarter of 2016. There has been 174 percent revenue
growth across the enterprises in the ENGINE accelerator program, and 283 new jobs were created in 2015. The
Reach for Change Program had a positive effect on the lives of over 400,000 children in 2015 through the
interventions of social entrepreneurs. The Meltwater Incubator Program has had two highly successful graduate
exits through the creation of new enterprises: ClaimSync (by Genkey), and Saya (by Kirusa). Meqasa received
funding from Frontier Digital Ventures to the tune of $800,000; Kudobuzz + Dropifi were both at the
internationally acclaimed 500 Startups accelerator. There have also been several international competition wins
such as Seedstars by Asoriba, the Launch Business Conference by Nandimobile, Africa Entrepreneur Awards
by Leti Arts, among others.

The public sector programs tend to measure success by the percentages of their beneficiaries who find
employment, though the studies are limited. The Youth in Cocoa Program has been able to augment the number
of farmers, thereby offsetting the loss of cocoa farmers through aging that is a major concern of the government
in terms of potentially declining cocoa yields and the associated exports. The area of cocoa cultivation has been
expanded. Of the graduate trainees of the Apprenticeship Testing and Assessment Program of GRATIS, 53
percent are now self-employed. The Rural Enterprise Program employed about 600 new staff, who eventually
supported the creation of 27,000 small and medium enterprises that employ about 65,000 people.




                                                        19
Future plans: The majority of the private sector programs plan to scale up. Many intend to strengthen their
alumni networks and build better models of sustainability. Some (for example, the Phinklife Institute Initiative
[PII]) intend to launch a youth bank model to raise funds for the program. The Youth and Farm Market Program
will partner with organizations implementing a similar program to build momentum to help target groups
succeed. The program is also expected to launch a web presence for all its interventions. The Venture Support
Program of Impact Hub Accra plans to have four accelerator programs by the end of 2016: agriculture, health
care, culture, and education. Impact Hub Accra is raising an initial $1 million seed fund for these programs and
will be expanding a building next door to accommodate more global start-ups.

The future plans the public sector Youth in Cocoa Program include expanding to cover all regions where cocoa
is grown and provide necessary incentives to attract more youth. The Technical Apprentice and Skills Training
Program plans to provide start-up kits for trainees, while seeking funding from donor agencies and development
partners. The LEFY program implemented by OICG plans to seek partnerships with development partners to
scale up to all regions in Ghana. YES has been supporting 1,000 young entrepreneurs a year since 2017 and
obtained a policy directive to facilitate a steady flow of funding. The YLSTI has been expanding its
infrastructural capacity by building more classrooms, dormitories, and workshops to admit more youth.

M&E: M&E is an indispensable learning and management tool for improving current and future program
planning, implementation, and decision making. It forms the basis of evidence-based policy making in which
the focus is on outcomes rather than inputs. A performance evaluation would gauge the input-output relationship
and the immediate outcomes of a program at a point in time. It then assesses the design and implementation of
the intervention against criteria of relevance, effectiveness, and efficiency. A performance monitoring system
supports the evaluation by providing information on trainee completion rates, the share of participants who pass
competency tests, and employment rates and earnings among graduates. An impact evaluation provides evidence
on whether the changes in completion rates and the labor market performance of trainees were caused by the
intervention alone. However, the identification of determinants of program effectiveness is hampered by a lack
of systematic knowledge about results and impact. Most programs, including the large-scale government
sponsored programs, have not been comprehensively evaluated.

One of the major challenges of this inventory is the lack of thorough evaluations and impact assessments of most
of the initiatives. This has limited the study’s ability to gauge the effectiveness of the programs. Of the 40 youth
employment programs or institutions in the public sector and the private sector recorded in this inventory have
not provided M&E reports even though they were asked to provide them. While the majority of the programs
have some monitoring system in place and have done some evaluation, they failed to present reports.




                                                        20
9. FINDINGS AND LESSONS FROM THE YOUTH EMPLOYMENT INVENTORY

1. In Ghana, obtaining data or information from authoritative sources in the public and private sectors is
    extremely difficult.
2. There is substantial duplication in youth employment training programs. As a result, there have been major
    challenges in coordinating responses to youth employment issues in the country.
3. Private sector programs should collaborate and share lessons on best practice with public programs.
4. The majority of government programs do not conduct baseline surveys and impact studies or evaluations
    and do not possess comprehensive or even adequate M&E systems.
5. Strengthening employment in the informal sector is crucial to addressing youth unemployment, which
    requires specific policies and interventions to increase the capacity of the informal sector and the agriculture
    sector to absorb young people.
6. The majority of the programs do not provide support or follow-up services for beneficiaries.
7. Most government programs are underfunded, and some have been put on hold because of financial
    constraints (GEBSS, NAP, Youth in Agriculture).
8. Most private sector programs are located in urban areas (mostly Accra) and are not accessible to rural youth.
9. Most private sector programs are well-funded, good-quality programs and provide competitive start-up
    grants and loans, mentorship, international exposure, and other businesses advisory services to beneficiaries.
10. Most private sector programs are competitive, especially in entrepreneurial programs that require tertiary
    educational attainment among participants.
11. Some private sector programs are run by companies that train youth to be employable in their industries.
    They are not well funded, and the costs are high for the trainees.




                                                        21
10. REFERENCES

Cho, Y., and M. Honorati. 2014. “Entrepreneurship Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta-Regression
Analysis.” Labor Economics 28: 110–13.

GSS (Ghana Statistical Service). 2014. “Ghana Living Standard Survey Round 6 (GLSS6): Labour Force
Report.” August, GSS, Accra, Ghana.

Sikah, V. P. K. 2000. “The Ghana National Service Scheme: Perceptions of Former Educational Personnel,
Students, and Guardians.” Unpublished PhD dissertation, Florida International University, Miami.

UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa). 2009. African Youth Report 2009: Expanding
Opportunities for and with Young People in Africa. Report ECA/ACGS/HSD/AYR/ 2009. Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia: UNECA.




                                                 22
11. TABLES

Table 1A. Key components of youth employment programs, public sector
Program              MDAs                 Skills     Entrepreneurial        Employment   Employment   Apprenticeship   Others     Support to
                                     development &      training              services                                           beneficiaries
                                        training
YEA                  MELR                 ✓                                     ✓            ✓              ✓            ✓      Lump sum after
                                                                                                                                  two years
NVTI                 MELR                 ✓                ✓                                                ✓
GEBSS                MELR                                  ✓
Corporative          MELR                 ✓
Council
ICCES                MELR                 ✓
OICG                 MELR                 ✓                ✓                                                ✓
MDPI                 MELR                                  ✓
Youth in            MOFA                  ✓                                                                                     Farm inputs &
Agric.                                                                                                                            extension
                                                                                                                                   services
Youth in            MOFA                  ✓                                                                                     Farm inputs &
Cocoa                                                                                                                             extension
                                                                                                                                   services
GRATIS         Ministry of Trade          ✓                ✓                                                ✓
Foundation      and Industry
Rural          Ministry of Trade          ✓
Enterprise      and Industry
Program
COTVET-            Ministry of            ✓                                                                 ✓
NAP                Education
COTVET-            Ministry of            ✓                                                                 ✓
GSDI               Education
YLSTI          Ministry of Youth          ✓
                   and Sports
YES            Office of President                         ✓
Microfinance   Office of President                                                                                       ✓           NA
and Small
Loans Center
Fisheries        Ministry of              ✓
Commission      Fisheries and
                 Aquaculture
                Development
DBC, Mobile      Ministry of              ✓                ✓                                                                        None
Applications   Communications
Development

Total                                     14               7                    1            1              6            2




                                                                       23
Table 1B. Key components of youth employment programs, private sector
                      Skills development   Entrepreneurial   Employment                                     Support to
Program                                                                   Employment   Apprenticeship
                          & training          training         services                                    beneficiaries
LESDEP training
                              ✓                                  ✓                                            Loans
programs
                                                                                                        Grants given to 15
YIEDIE                        ✓                  ✓                                           ✓
                                                                                                            graduates
Blazing Trails                ✓                  ✓               ✓            ✓              ✓                None
                                                                                                           Some of the
GCEEI programs                ✓                  ✓               ✓                                       beneficiaries get
                                                                                                             funding
Enterprise and
                                                                                                         Grants and loans
Leadership                    ✓                  ✓
                                                                                                             (KIVA)
development
PII, Ahafo
                              ✓                  ✓               ✓            ✓                                None
Emerging Talent
ENGINE,
Agripreneurship,              ✓                  ✓               ✓                                            Grants
Apprenticeship
Teacher
Professional                  ✓                                                                                None
Development
Certificate/
Diploma/ Degree in            ✓                  ✓                                                             None
Fashion Design
Tech Girls & SGS
Vocational Training           ✓                                                                                None
Initiative
AEA SDC (skills
development and               ✓                  ✓                                                             None
training)
                                                                                                             Winners get
Enablis Business
                                                 ✓               ✓                                       funding, access to
LaunchPad
                                                                                                         loans and support
                                                                                                            Startup-kits,
Youth Farm &
                              ✓                  ✓                                                         funding for top
Market Program
                                                                                                        performing trainees
                                                                                                        Funds from partner
Venture Support                                  ✓               ✓                                        funders through
                                                                                                            competitions
Student
Entrepreneurs                 ✓                  ✓                                                             None
Network
Entrepreneur-in-                                                                                        Win funds through
                                                 ✓
Training Program                                                                                           competitions
Reach for Change                                                                                        Funding (grants) for
                                                 ✓               ✓
Program                                                                                                      winners
ServLed Accelerator
                                                 ✓               ✓                                      Small cash injection
Program
Cake craft training           ✓                                                                                None
DSTC training
programs in Solar             ✓                                                                                None
technology
                                                                                                             Funds for
Incubator Program                                ✓
                                                                                                           entrepreneurs
Student
                              ✓                  ✓                                                             None
Entrepreneurship
Total
                             16                  17              1            2              2




                                                               24
Table 2A. Size of youth employment programs, public sector
Program                                # of youth apply per year   # of youth allow in a   Percentages %
                                                                    program per year

YEA                                             1,000,000                100,000                10

NVTI                                              5,000                   4,000                 80

GEBSS                                             3,000                   2,000                 67

Corporative Council                               1,500                   1,000                 67

ICCES                                             3,500                   3,000                 85

OICG                                              1,200                    350                  29

MDPI                                                15                      6                   40

Youth in Agric.                                  100,000                  50,000                50

Youth in Cocoa                                    50,000                  42,882                86

GRATIS Foundation                                 5,000                   2,194                 44

Rural Enterprise Program                          80,000                  26,980                34

COTVET-NAP                                        10,000                  5,000                 50

COTVET-GSDI                                       2,400                   1,500                 63

YLSTI                                             3,000                   1,500                 50

YES                                                300                     107                  36

Microfinance and Small Loans Center                NA                      NA                   NA

Fisheries Commission                               300                     100                  33

DBC, Mobile Applications Development                55                      55                  100

Total                                           1,265,270                270,674                19




                                                            25
Table 2B. Size of youth employment programs, private sector
 Program                                          # of youth apply per year   # of youth allow in a program per year   Percentages %

LESDEP training programs                                   129000                             35000                         27

YIEDIE                                                      1800                              1600                          89

Blazing Trails                                              4000                              1500                          38

GCEEI programs                                              1200                              1000                          83

Enterprise and Leadership development                       1010                               610                          60

PII, Ahafo Emerging Talent                                  3000                               335                          11

ENGINE, Agripreneurship, Apprenticeship                     1500                               215                          14

Teacher Professional Development                            300                                200                          67

Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in Fashion Design              200                                171                          86

Tech Girls & SGS Vocational Training Initiative             140                                140                         100

AEA SDC (skills development and training)                   100                                100                         100

Enablis Business LaunchPad                                  100                                75                           75

Youth Farm & Market Program                                  80                                60                           75

Venture Support                                              54                                54                          100

Student Entrepreneurs Network                               500                                50                           10

Entrepreneur-in-Training Program                            1000                               30                            3

Reach for Change Program                                    200                                24                           12

ServLed Accelerator Program                                  30                                20                           67

Cake craft training                                          20                                20                          100

DSTC training programs in Solar technology                   60                                15                           25

Incubator Program                                            30                                 8                           27

Student Entrepreneurship                                    N/A                                N/A                         N/A

 Total                                                    144.324                            41,227                        29%




                                                                     26
Table 3A. Cost, budget, funding sources: public sector
 Program                   # of youth per   Annual Budget     Cost per participants   Sources of funding             Fees
                          year              GH₵               GH₵
 YEA                             100,000       709,245,854              7,092                 Government

 NVTI                           4,000           2,892,492               589                   Government               ✓

 GEBSS                          2,000           2,550,000              12,750         Jospong Group& Government

 Corporative Council            1,000            100,000                100                   Government               ✓

 ICCES                          3,000           5,009,238               686                   Government               ✓

 OICG                            350             569,133                1620            Breed of World, Germany        ✓

 MDPI                              6                                                          Government               ✓

 Youth in Agric.                50,000          10,000,000              200                   Government

 Youth in Cocoa                 42,882                                                        Government

 GRATIS Foundation              2,194           15,013,060             60,005                 Government               ✓

 Rural Enterprise               26,980          84,000,150              3,113          ADB, IFAD & Government          ✓
 Program
 COTVET-NAP                     5,000            750,000                150                   Government

 COTVET-GSDI                    1,500           4,403,288               2,935                     GIZ

 YLSTI                          1,500           1,000,000               800                   Government               ✓

 YES                             107                                                          Government

 Microfinance and Small          NA                NA                    NA                       NA
 Loans Center
 Fisheries Commission            100             570,183                5701                     FAO

 DBC, Mobile                      55             183500                 3336          Fees +IGF, Partners: United      ✓
 Applications                                                                            Nations Educational,
 Development                                                                            Scientific, and Cultural
                                                                                        Organization project &
                                                                                      Ministry of Youth and Sports

 Total                         240,674         835,103,398              3,475                                          9




                                                             27
Table 3B. Cost, budget, funding sources: private sector
Program
                                          # of youth   Budget GH₵    Cost per #              Sources of funding                 Fees

LESDEP training programs                    35000       84000000       2400          Jospong Group and the Government

                                                                                   MasterCard Foundation - Youth Forward
YIEDIE                                      1600         200020         125                                                      ✓
                                                                                                 initiative

Blazing Trails                              1500         600000         400                  Barclays Bank Ghana

                                                                                      Equity Investment & Returns, Fees,
GCEEI programs                              1000         100000         100                                                      ✓
                                                                                                 Sponsorship

Enterprise and Leadership development        610                          0                      Not disclosed

                                                                                      60%- Program Fees 40-Grants and
PII, Ahafo Emerging Talent                   335         60000            0                                                      ✓
                                                                                                 Donations

ENGINE, Agripreneurship,                     215        6000000        27907           DFID, Barclays, Internal funding
Apprenticeship
                                                                                  Plan Ghana, Ministry of Education, Village-
Teacher Professional Development             200         420000        2100
                                                                                                 By-Village

Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in Fashion      171         660000        3860               Fees paid, internal funding            ✓
Design
Tech Girls & SGS Vocational Training                                              Empower Foundation, Internally Generated
                                             140         80000          571
Initiative                                                                                       Funds

                                                                                       IGF, Training contracts for public
AEA SDC (skills development and              100         35,000         350                                                      ✓
training)                                                                                    institutions & NGOs

Enablis Business LaunchPad                   75         1200000        16000      UT Bank, Accra Brewery Limited, and so on

Youth Farm & Market Program                  60                           0         Corporate, Internally Generated Funds        ✓

Venture Support                              54          640000        11852               BBG Grant, sponsorships               ✓

                                                                                   IGF, Sponsorship - IConceptsPR & Trade
Student Entrepreneurs Network                50          45000          900
                                                                                                 Hub Ghana

Entrepreneur-in-Training Program             30         4000000       133333                   Meltwater Group

Reach for Change Program                     24          600,000       25000              Corporates and foundations

ServLed Accelerator Program                  20                           0                Self-funded by founders

Cake craft training                          20          240000        12000                Shareholders, Directors              ✓

                                                                                  GIZ, Australian High Commission, Private
DSTC training programs in Solar              15                           0                                                      ✓
technology                                                                                         clients

Incubator Program                             8         4000000       500000       Meltwater Group, Interswitch, Vodafone

Student Entrepreneurship                     N/A         300000         N/A            Donor and partner organizations

Total                                      41,227      103,180,020    35,090                                                     9




                                                                     28
Table 4A. Start year and duration, public sector
Program                                   Year started                    Duration

YEA                                          2006                          2 years

NVTI                                         1970                          4 years

GEBSS                                        2011                          3 years

Corporative Council                          2013                        3-6 months

ICCES                                        1986                    4& 2 years, 6month

OICG                                         2001                          3 years

MDPI                                         2015                          10 days

Youth in Agric.                              2009                            N/A

Youth in Cocoa                               2014                            N/A

GRATIS Foundation                            1990                      3 years 6 months

Rural Enterprise Program                     1995                          4 years

COTVET-NAP                                   2012                           3years

COTVET-GSDI                                  2012                           3years

YLSTI                                        1974                           4years

YES                                          2014                    Two business cycles

Microfinance and Small Loans Center          2006                            N/A

Fisheries Commission                         2015                           2years

DBC, Mobile Applications Development         2004             6 month, 1 month precursor program

                                             2014                        3-6 months




                                                         29
Table 4B. Start year, duration and location, private sector
 Program                                      Year started                       Duration                                      Locations

LESDEP training programs                          2010                      3 month - 6 months                              All over Ghana

YIEDIE                                            2015             8 weeks- weekends only, 16 training           Accra, Takoradi (run simultaneously)
                                                                   sessions. 5 weeks condensed for year
                                                                   1 project roll-out only (March 2015–
                                                                                   2016).

Blazing Trails                                    2012                 Actual training is for 3 days         Greater Accra, Western, Volta, Ashanti, Upper
                                                                                                                   West, Brong Ahafo and Northern

GCEEI programs                                    2011                   1 day to 1 week programs             Almost nationwide, implemented via tertiary
                                                                                                                              campuses

Enterprise and Leadership Development         IBP: 2011–15;                    IBP: 5 years                  CAMFED operational regions are Upper West,
                                            Financial literacy                                                Upper East, Northern and Central regions.
                                            training: 2011–15       Financial Literacy Training: 5 years

PII, Ahafo Emerging Talent Program                2014                          2-3 months                    Brong Ahafo for the Ahafo Emerging Talent
                                                                                                                     Program; nationwide for PII
                                                  2012                           1 month

ENGINE, Agripreneurship, Apprenticeship   ENGINE – Dec 2013,       ENGINE – 6 months, AGRI – 1 year,        Nationwide participation. Program centers are in
                                           AGRI – Jan 2015,               APPRE – 1 year.                         Accra + Kumasi +          Tamale.
                                          APPRE – April 2015.

Teacher Professional Development                  2013                 1week training with 12 weeks        Wa, Atimpoku, Adawso/Koforidua, Afram Plains,
                                                                       monitoring and coaching at 5                        Cape Coast
                                                                                 locations

Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in Fashion           1995             1 year + 6 months non-paid internship                    School in Accra
Design
                                                  2013                            2 years

                                                  2013                            4 years

Tech Girls & SGS Vocational Training              2013                          1 year each                       Tamale, Tolon, Sagnarigu, Savelugu
Initiative
                                                  2015

AEA SDC (skills development and                   2010                    8 weeks, Saturday only             4 training centers: Christ the King church Hall,
training)                                                                                                   Phronesis Hub (Weija-Kasoa), AEA head office,
                                                                                                                             Legon Campus

Enablis Business LaunchPad                2009 (stopped in 2015)                 9 months                    Accra, but companies are from all over Ghana

Youth Farm & Market Program                    2009 - 2014                       5 weeks

Venture Support                                   2013                          Year round                                       Accra

Student Entrepreneurs Network                     2012                           6 months                                    Greater Accra

Entrepreneur-in-Training Program                  2008                      2 years, now 1 year                                  Accra

Reach for Change Program                          2011                   3-5 years in the program          Based in Accra but with social entrepreneurs across
                                                                                                                              the country

ServLed Accelerator Program                       2013                           6 months                                        Accra

Cake craft training                               2016                         6 -12 months                                      Accra

DSTC training programs in Solar                   2005              5 days to 10 days. Training programs Accra, Nkoranza, Bolgatanga, Kumasi and Tamale
technology                                                         run at any given period with registered
                                                                                 class of 15

Incubator Program                                 2010              Progress measured yearly to review                           Accra
                                                                      stay, some move out because of
                                                                    growth, others go do something else

Student Entrepreneurship                          2000                          Year round                        23 tertiary institutions across Ghana




                                                                         30
Table 5A. Sectors, service providers: public sector
Program                                     Sectors                                                     Service providers

YEA                        Health, education, security services, waste                  Public & private institutions, master craft persons,
                              &sanitation, agriculture, and so on

NVTI                          Constructional artisans, electronics,                         Government officials, master craft persons
                              automobile, dressmaking, catering

GEBSS                                      All sectors                                       Private sectors operatives, entrepreneurs

Corporative Council         Construction, artisans, hairdressing &                     Public & private Institutions, cooperatives members
                           beauticians, catering, small-scale farmers

ICCES                        Construction, artisans, catering, auto            Government officials, master craft persons, private sector operatives
                             mechanics, hairdressing, electronics,
                                       computer skills

OICG                         Construction, artisans, dressmaking,                         Master craft persons, private sector operatives,
                           hairdressing, floral & internal decoration,
                                            and so on

MDPI                              Management & productivity                                            Government officials

Youth in Agric.                     Agricultural value chain                     Farm input dealers, agricultural machinery, government officials

Youth in Cocoa                      Agricultural value chain                     Farm input dealers, agricultural machinery, government officials

GRATIS Foundation             Engineering, industrial machinery,                          Master craft persons, private sector operatives
                                 welding, textile production

Rural Enterprise Program    Agricultural value chain, soap making,                             Private and public sector operatives
                                      domestic products

COTVET-NAP                   Constructional artisans, dressmaking,                           Mastercraft persons, government officials
                                         hairdressing

COTVET-GSDI                 Catering, automobile repairs, consumer                           Trades associations, master craft persons
                            electronics, hair & beauty, tailoring &
                                          dressmaking

YLSTI                         Agriculture, dressmaking, catering,                                      Government officials
                           electrical installation, masonry, carpentry
                           & joinery and metal work, computer skills

YES                        Agricultural value chain, health, clothing    Private sector operators, government institutions, entrepreneurial and management
                                 designing, fashion & beauty                                                institutions

Microfinance and Small             Financial, credit & loans                                                    NA
Loans Center

Fisheries Commission         Aquaculture, agricultural value chain                        Private sector operators & government officials

DBC, Mobile Applications                      ICT                                                              None
Development




                                                                         31
Table 5B. Sectors, service providers: private sector
 Program                                                     Sectors                                       Service providers

LESDEP training programs                          Beauty care, IT hardware, etc.       Trade associations, master craft people. NBSSI for Business
                                                                                                      Advisory. Local food vendors.

YIEDIE                                                    Construction                               Kingdom Books for stationery.

Blazing Trails                                               Several               Event management companies for career fairs, caterers as well and
                                                                                    vendors for printing manuals and other promotional materials for
                                                                                                             the program

GCEEI programs                                               Several                     Management Consultants and established entrepreneurs,
                                                                                              Technology partners and Brand strategists

Enterprise and Leadership development                        Several                                              None

PII, Ahafo Emerging Talent                                   Several                                 Consultants & resource persons

ENGINE, Agripreneurship, Apprenticeship           Entrepreneurship, agribusiness                     PWC, independent consultants

Teacher Professional Development                            Education                 Stationery Shops (Printing, Photocopying, Supply of training
                                                                                                               stationery)

Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in Fashion Design         Fashion and design          Vodafone for internet, designers for business (seminars), restaurant

Tech Girls & SGS Vocational Training Initiative          ICT, vocations                                           None

AEA SDC (skills development and training)              Several: employees                                         None

Enablis Business LaunchPad                            Several: entrepreneurs                                      None

Youth Farm & Market Program                                Agriculture                                            None

Venture Support                                   Several: social entrepreneurs    Spectra Wireless (TV Whitespaces) is the internet service provider
                                                                                    (ISP), utilities companies, general & building contractors, food
                                                                                                                services.

Student Entrepreneurs Network                         Several: entrepreneurs                                      None

Entrepreneur-in-Training Program                               ICT                                              Vodafone

Reach for Change Program                          Several: social entrepreneurs                                   None

ServLed Accelerator Program                           Several: entrepreneurs           Legal firms - company secretarial services, Statutory bodies

Cake craft training                                        Hospitality                                      Guest Instructors

DSTC training programs in Solar technology              Solar technology                                    External trainers.

Incubator Program                                              ICT                   Vodafone for internet, Amazon Web services, In-house caterer.

Student Entrepreneurship                              Several: entrepreneurs       Hotels- provide conference room facilities for Enactus Competitions




                                                                     32
Table 6A. Targeting, public sector
  Program                                Junior high        Senior high   Tertiary   Youth(15–35)   Others
                                           school             school
  YEA                                        √                  √            √            √

  NVTI                                       √                  √                                     √

  GEBSS                                                                      √                        √

  Corporative Council                        √                  √                                     √

  ICCES                                      √                  √                                     √

  OICG                                       √                  √                                     √

  MDPI                                                                       √                        √

  Youth in Agric.                            √                  √                         √

  Youth in Cocoa                             √                  √                         √

  GRATIS Foundation                          √                  √                                     √

  Rural Enterprise Program                                                                            √

  COTVET-NAP                                 √                                            √

  COTVET-GSDI                                √                  √                                     √

  YLSTI                                                                                   √

  YES                                                                        √            √

  Microfinance and Small Loans Center       NA                 NA           NA           NA          NA

  Fisheries Commission                       √                  √                         √

  DBC, Mobile Applications Development                          √                         √

  Total                                      11                 11           4            8           9




                                                       33
Table 6B. Targeting, private sector
  Program                                          Junior high        Senior high   Tertiary   Youth(15–35)   Others
                                                     school             school
 LESDEP training programs                              √                  √            √

 YIEDIE                                                                   √                         √           √

 Blazing Trails                                                                        √            √           √

 GCEEI programs                                        √                  √                         √           √

 Enterprise and Leadership development                 √                  √            √            √           √

 PII, Ahafo Emerging Talent                            √                  √            √            √           √

 ENGINE, Agripreneurship, Apprenticeship                                               √                        √

 Teacher Professional Development                      √                  √            √                        √

 Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in Fashion Design        √                  √                         √

 Tech Girls & SGS Vocational Training Initiative       √                  √                         √

 AEA SDC (skills development and training)                                √            √            √           √

 Enablis Business LaunchPad                                                            √            √

 Youth Farm & Market Program                           √                  √                         √           √

 Venture Support                                                                       √            √

 Student Entrepreneurs Network                                                         √            √

 Entrepreneur-in-Training Program                                                      √            √           √

 Reach for Change Program                                                              √            √           √

 ServLed Accelerator Program                                                           √            √

 Cake craft training                                                      √                         √

 DSTC training programs in Solar technology                               √            √                        √

 Incubator Program                                                                     √            √

 Student Entrepreneurship                                                              √            √

 Total                                                 8                  12          16           18           12




                                                                 34
Table 7A. Other Services, public sector
Program                    MDAs                             Tracer Study   M&E   Exit Strategy   After care
                                                                                                  Support

YEA                        MELR                                             ✓         ✓

NVTI                       MELR                                  ✓          ✓

GEBSS                      MELR                                             ✓

Corporative Council        MELR

ICCES                      MELR                                  ✓          ✓

OICG                       MELR                                  ✓          ✓

MDPI                       MELR                                             ✓

Youth in Agric.            MOFA                                             ✓                        ✓

Youth in Cocoa             Ministry of Finance                              ✓                        ✓

GRATIS Foundation          Ministry of Trade and Industry        ✓          ✓

Rural Enterprise Program   Ministry of Trade and Industry                   ✓

COTVET-NAP                 Ministry of Education

COTVET-GSDI                Ministry of Education                 ✓          ✓

YLSTI                      Ministry of Youth and Sports                     ✓

YES                        Office of President                              ✓                        ✓

Microfinance and Small     Office of President
Loans Center

Fisheries Commission       Ministry of Fisheries and
                           Aquaculture Development

DBC, Mobile Applications                                         √          √         √
Development
Total                                                            6         14         2              3




                                                                 35
         Table 7B. Other Services, private sector
 Program                                            Tracer Study    M&E   Exit Strategies   After-care

LESDEP training programs                                 √          √           √               √

YIEDIE                                                   √          √           √               √

Blazing Trails                                                      √           √               √

GCEEI programs                                                      √           √               √

Enterprise and Leadership development                               √           √               √

PII, Ahafo Emerging Talent                                                      √

ENGINE, Agripreneurship, Apprenticeship                             √           √               √

Teacher Professional Development                                    √           √               √

Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in Fashion Design           √          √           √               √

Tech Girls & SGS Vocational Training Initiative                     √                           √

AEA SDC (skills development and training)                √                      √

Enablis Business LaunchPad                                          √           √               √

Youth Farm & Market Program                                                     √               √

Venture Support                                                     √           √               √

Student Entrepreneurs Network                                       √                           √

Entrepreneur-in-Training Program                                    √           √               √

Reach for Change Program                                            √           √

ServLed Accelerator Program                                         √           √               √

Cake craft training                                                 √           √

DSTC training programs in Solar technology                          √           √               √

Incubator Program                                                   √           √               √

Student Entrepreneurship                                            √

Total                                                    4
                                                                    19          19             17




                                                               36
12. ANNEX: YOUTH EMPLOYMENT PROGRAM DESCRIPTIONS

Public Sector

1. YEA: The YEA was established under the Youth Employment Act 2015 (Act 887) to empower young
   people to contribute meaningfully to the sustainable socioeconomic and development of the nation. Its
   objective is to provide skills training and apprenticeship modules to support youth ages 15–35 years during
   the transition from unemployment to employment. YEA targets all categories of youth and most of the key
   sectors in Ghana (health, education, agricultural, security). It is being implemented through modules that
   include youth in afforestation, health, education, security services, and so on.

2. NVTI: NVTI provides demand-driven employable skills and enhances the income-generating capacities of
   basic and secondary school leavers and others through competency-based apprenticeship, master
   craftsmanship, testing and certification, and career development. Act 351 of 1970 established the institute,
   which is also supported by Apprentice Regulations LI 1151 of 1978, Clerical and Secretarial Training
   Regulations LI 981 of 1974, and Trade Testing LI 715 of 1971. NVTI has 34 training centers across all 10
   regions of Ghana. NVTI targets junior and senior secondary school graduates and focuses on the
   construction and the consumer electronics sectors.

3. GEBSS: GEBSS focuses on supplying training and support services to help unemployed tertiary graduates
   establish their own businesses in all sectors. It assists beneficiaries to develop bankable business plans in all
   sectors and supports them in gaining access to funding, including the possible establishment of a graduate
   credit insurance guarantee scheme through a public-private partnership.

4. Jobs Creation and Development-Ghana Cooperative Council: The program includes four projects
   covering construction artisans, the reorganization of agricultural cooperatives, skills development, and the
   training of cooperative hairdressers and beauticians and cooperative entrepreneurial development. The
   program does not have training centers. They rent out district locations to train beneficiaries. The program
   does not primarily target youth.

5. ICCES: ICCES trains youth in demand-driven employable skills for self- or paid employment in their
   chosen trades through micro- and small enterprise development to combat youth unemployment and thereby
   dampen rural-urban drift. ICCES has 60 training centers in remote communities in the 10 regions of Ghana.
   Unlike NVTI, the training programs target illiterate, semiliterate, and literate youth in rural areas. ICCES
   focuses on the construction, automobiles, electronics, catering, and beauty sectors within local community
   development.

6. The LEFY Program of OICG: LEFY was established in 1971 to provide skills training to illiterate and
   semiliterate youth in Accra, Kumasi, and Takoradi through an improved apprenticeship program. The
   project represents an improvement on traditional apprenticeship that entails hands-on training among
   unskilled youth who are attached to master craftpersons in various trades. LEFY targets junior and senior
   high school leavers, placing them into apprenticeships with master craftpersons on the basis of agreements.
   The construction, food and nutrition, and beauty sectors are the main focus.




                                                        37
7. Competency Training for Fresh and Unemployed Graduates–MDPI: This pilot program aims to equip
   tertiary graduates with entrepreneurial skills for self-employment in all sectors. However, the fees are too
   high for most unemployed graduates.

8. Youth in Agriculture Program: This is an agro-incubator with the objective of motivating youth to accept
   and appreciate farming and food production as commercial ventures. The program provides young farmers
   with tractor services and inputs at subsidized prices on interest-free credit to produce food crops, meat, and
   fish using modern methods thus contributing to national food security and youth employment. The program
   focuses on rural youth in the agricultural sector.

9. Youth in Cocoa: The program targets rural youth in the agricultural sector. It is aimed at producing cocoa
   as a cash crop for export. The beneficiaries are trained by cocoa extension agents and supported through the
   provision of cocoa seedlings, growth-enhancing fertilizers, tree seedlings, and agrochemicals.

10. GRATIS Foundation: The foundation aims to equip men, women, youth, and the elderly with requisite
    technical, vocational, and entrepreneurial skills for self-employment. GRATIS provides technical and
    engineering training in metal-machining, welding and fabrication, woodworking and pattern making, and
    foundry work for manufacturing industries, which are sectors generally not covered by the NVTI.

11. Rural Enterprise Program: The program seeks to improve the livelihoods and incomes of rural poor micro-
    and small entrepreneurs and increase the number of rural small and medium enterprises that generate profits,
    growth, and employment opportunities. The program primarily targets the entrepreneurial poor. However,
    special youth support interventions, such as the Youth in Agri-business Program, are being implemented in
    collaboration with the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, for which the age range is 18–35 years. The
    program focuses on agroprocessing in the development of local economies.

12. COTVET-NAP: The program was established within the informal division of COTVET to ensure that
    junior high school graduates who could not access senior high school education are given employable skills
    through modern apprenticeship. Beneficiaries work in the construction, automotive, electronics, and beauty
    sectors.

13. COTVET-GSDI: Funded by the GIZ, in partnership with COTVET, this program aims at modernizing
    traditional apprenticeships through an innovative approach to competency-based training and by
    strengthening trade associations and training institutions. GSDI associates apprenticeship with competency-
    based training standards and a cooperative training model, combining workplace and school-based training.
    The program targets junior high school, senior high school, and semiliterate youth in the construction,
    consumer electronics, catering, and beauty sectors

14. YLSTI: This initiative prepares youth to assume the responsibilities of adult life and to contribute to national
    development. It provides technical, vocational, and leadership skills training for youth in rural areas. The
    program targets junior and senior secondary graduates and illiterate youth in the construction, agricultural,
    catering, and beauty industries and aims at the development of local economies.




                                                        38
15. YES: Dedicated to growing Ghana’s economy by tapping into the creativity and innovativeness of young
    entrepreneurs, the program provides financial, technical, and expert advisory services to young
    businesspeople. The financial support involves offering interest-free loans to qualified start-ups and existing
    businesses owned by youth. Presently, YES offers a maximum loan amount of GH₵50,000 per beneficiary.
    The beneficiaries operate businesses in agriculture and agribusiness, manufacturing and cottage industries,
    and the services sector.

16. Microfinance and Small Loans Center: This microfinance apex body is responsible for implementing the
    government’s microfinance programs targeted at reducing poverty and creating jobs and wealth. It provides
    loans to beneficiaries in various sectors to support their businesses. It is not focused entirely on youth.

17. Creating agribusiness opportunities for youth through sustainable aquaculture systems and cassava
    value chains in West Africa, the Fisheries Commission: The commission creates decent agribusiness
    employment opportunities for youth by exploring and taking advantage of initiatives with great agriculture
    potential to spur growth and development. The program targets youth in coastal areas in the fisheries
    subsector of the agricultural industry.

18. AITI-KACE programs: These programs target youth for employment in the ICT sector through two
    programs:
    a. The DBC trains in software engineering, database concepts, and Oracle (proprietary database) and
        builds development skills. Students are exposed to the enterprise side technology.
    b. Mobile Applications Development trains youth on Androids exclusively with the Core Java app for
        development training.


Private Sector

1. LESDEP programs: These programs provide skills training and start-up kits. They are not focused entirely
   on youth. They assist people involved in hairdressing and beauty care and artisans (such as mechanics).
   LESDEP works with Union Savings & Loans, which creates accounts so that beneficiaries may access loans.
   The programs offer business advisory training to program graduates.

2. YIEDIE (YES-GHANA): This program provides youth with soft and technical skills training and entry
   into the construction sector. The youth become entrepreneurs or are employed under master craftspeople.
   The goal is to train 23,700 youth over five years.

3. Blazing Trails (British Council–Ghana): This program provides hands-on training focused on key skills
   development in employability and entrepreneurship among participants in all sectors. It targets graduates,
   final-year tertiary students, out-of-school youth, and young entrepreneurs.

4. GCEEI programs: These programs focus on identifying, training, and connecting youth to resource
   providers who will help them start their own businesses, equipping them with the tools to start, scale up, and
   have an impact. They target youth in all sectors.

5. CAMFED-Ghana Enterprise and Leadership Development programs: These programs target young
   women in the Northern, Upper West, Upper East, and Central regions through two programs:


                                                        39
    a. The Innovation Bursary Program provides skills training in agroprocessing, batik, tie & dye, soap
       making, baking, and so on to young women to set up innovative businesses. It also facilitates start-up
       KIVA Microfunds grants and loans for the women.
    b. The Financial Literacy Training Program increases knowledge on and utilization of financial services
       and the establishment of more woman-owned businesses in all sectors by sharing knowledge on
       leadership skills, communication, and so on.

6. Global Alliance for Development Foundation Programs: This targets youth through two programs:
   a. PII develops the next generation of social entrepreneurs through mentorship, fellowships, training, and
      support services, including incubation and start-up funds.
   b. Ahafo Emerging Talent searches for talented high-performing students in tertiary institutions for Ahafo
      companies and foundations.

7. TechnoServe programs: These programs target youth through three programs:
   a. ENGINE provides entrepreneurial training for enterprises in all sectors. The enterprises receive support
      in the form of seed capital, mentoring, and networking aid through market and financial links.
   b. Agripreneurship is an accelerator for existing and new agribusiness entrepreneurs.
   c. Apprenticeship offers training for university graduates to become more employable and placement in
      institutions in all sectors.

8. Teacher Professional Development (NOVAN Education & Training): This program provides training
   among education personnel who have completed formal training. NOVAN helps those in the teaching field
   maintain or increase their competence and learn about new and developing areas in education. It is not
   focused entirely on youth.

9. Joyce Ababio College of Creative Design Certificate, Diploma, and Degree in Fashion Design
   Programs: This for-profit organization trains students as fashion and creative design professionals;
   participants must produce 10 garments to graduate in the certificate course. The organization also runs
   certificate, diploma, and degree programs.

10. Savana Signatures Programs: These programs target youth in the Northern, Upper East, Upper West, and
    Volta regions through two programs:
    a. Tech Girls Program: young girls are trained in basic programming skills for the ICT sector.
    b. Vocational Training Initiative: focuses on training school youth on computer hardware, maintenance,
        and networking for the ICT sector.

11. AEA programs: These target youth through two programs:
    a. AEA LaunchPad Executive Certificate in Entrepreneurship and Business Management: conducts
       entrepreneurship training (includes mentoring).
    b. AEA Skills Development and Training Certificate: trains in bead-making, communication design (web
       and graphic design, video editing), and film production.

12. Business LaunchPad (Enablis Ghana): This program works with innovative and viable business ideas that
    will be groomed into sustainable ventures to create jobs. The competition provides an opportunity for
    entrepreneurs to gain invaluable expert training and advice to take their small businesses and ideas to a
    higher level. Business coaches work with the various companies. It targets youth in all sectors.


                                                     40
13. Youth Farm & Market Program (Africa Youth Network): This program organizes seminars, workshops,
    and training programs on entrepreneurships and agribusiness for youth. It targets youth for employment in
    the agricultural sector.

14. Venture Support (Impact Hub Accra): This program supports budding entrepreneurs through business
    model validation and investment preparedness training. It seeks to enhance the social impact of
    entrepreneurs and assist ventures so these are able to scale across West Africa. There is a strong focus on
    the base of pyramid markets. The program includes training, hyper-accelerator programs, mentoring,
    investor feedback through capital advisors, connections to potential funders and partners, and so on.

15. Student Entrepreneurs Network (African Network of Entrepreneurs): The program is designed to
    empower and transform students to become job creators, to provide relevant resources and support, through
    mentoring, to establish productive networks for student entrepreneurs, and to kick start the creation of
    businesses directly within education.

16. Entrepreneur-In-Training Program (Meltwater Foundation): This program trains technology
    entrepreneurs to run startups through a one-year intensive program. Free tuition is provided for all students
    from Ghana, Kenya, and Nigeria. The program targets youth who have completed tertiary education.
    Beneficiaries run technology start-ups in various sectors.

17. Reach for Change Foundation programs: These programs train young entrepreneurs who run enterprises
    that impact children. These enterprises operate in all sectors, as follows:
    a. Tigo Digital Changemakers (partner: Millicom).
    b. Game Changers (partner: Viasat 1).
    c. IMAGINEGhana (partner: United Nations Children’s Fund Ghana).
    d. Bayport Teacher Innovation Competition (partner: Bayport Financial Services).

18. Accelerator Program (ServLed Africa Limited): This program helps entrepreneurs through idea
    validation, scaling up businesses, mentoring, and cash injection. It targets youth exclusively, many of whom
    have completed tertiary education. These youth-led enterprises are spread across all sectors.

19. Cake craft training (STESI GH): This for-profit organization runs several courses on cake craft. The
    intensive courses train novices and create professionals for the cake industry in 6–12 months. It focuses on
    youth, mostly up to secondary education graduates.

20. Solar Training programs (DSTC Solar Training Centre): This for-profit organization offers various
    courses in the design, installation, and maintenance of stand-alone photovoltaic and grid-connected solar
    systems. The program consists of classroom theory lectures and hands-on practical workshops and trains
    beneficiaries for the renewable energy sector. It is not entirely focused on youth.

21. Incubator Program (Meltwater Foundation): The program provides mentorship, funding, and incubation
    to technology entrepreneurs. It offers a $50,000 investment for 20 percent equity and a 10 percent stake, and
    fully sponsored education via the Meltwater Entrepreneurial School of Technology for a 30 percent stake.
    It targets youth who have completed tertiary education and want to run technology start-ups.




                                                       41
22. Student Entrepreneurship Program (Enactus Ghana): This program trains and works with university
    students to help start enterprises. It targets youth in all sectors. It aims at providing sustainable solutions to
    ensure that the Sustainable Development Goals are met through entrepreneurial action. The program focuses
    on ensuring that students and their communities are equipped with the best skills for their long-term
    advancement.




                                                         42
