 EXPANDING
 THE GLOBAL
 TAX BASE:
 "Taxing To Promote Public
 Goods: Tobacco Taxes"




 Panel Session Held As Part Of
“Winning The Tax Wars: Global
 Solutions For Developing
 Countries Conference”
 World Bank Group
 Washington, D.C.
 May 23-24, 2016




 Summary Report
2
Speakers


Prof. George Akerlof
2001 Nobel Prize Laureate in Economics, and University Professor
at Georgetown University

Prof. Philip Cook
ITT/Terry Sanford Professor of Public Policy Studies, Duke University

Jason Furman
Chairman, President’s Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the
President of the United States

Jeremias Paul
former Under Secretary of Finance of the Philippines and now Coordinator,
Tobacco Economics Program, WHO

Rose Zheng
Economics and Tax Professor, School of International Trade and Economics
(SITE), University of International Business and Economics (UIBE), Beijing,
China, and Director of China’s WHO Tobacco Control Collaboration Center,
Beijing, China

Fernando Serra
Director of the Tax Advisory Unit, Ministry of Economy and Finance of Uruguay

Moderator:
Patricio V. Marquez
Lead Public Health Specialist, and Co-Coordinator, Global Tobacco
Control Program, World Bank Group Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP)
Global Practice




Session organized by:
The World Bank Group Tobacco Control Program with the support of
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Bloomberg Foundation




                                                                                3
Expanding the Global Tax Base




4
                                                          Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                                Expanding the Global Tax Base:
                                “Taxing To Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes”


                                Panel Session Held as Part of
                                “Winning The Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing
                                Countries Conference”

                                World Bank Group
                                Washington, D.C.
                                May 24, 2016

                                Summary Report1




                                Objective of the Session

                                This panel session examined country experiences and discussed the results
                                achieved from the application of tobacco taxation as a policy measure
                                to reduce harmful behavior for health, and prevent ill health, premature
                                mortality and disabilities due to tobacco-related diseases while raising fiscal
                                revenues and reducing health care expenditures. Annex 1 includes the
                                agenda of the session.

                                Introduction to the Session

                                (i) “Making the Public Health Case for Tobacco Taxation”

                                Patricio V. Marquez (Lead Public Health Specialist, Health, Nutrition and
                                Population (HNP) Global Practice, and Co Coordinator of the Global Tobacco
                                Control Program, World Bank Group, and Moderator of the Session)

                                The scientific evidence accumulated over the last five decades is clear and
                                irrefutable: tobacco use kills. Tobacco taxation, along with measures to reduce
1
 Prepared by Patricio           the social acceptability of smoking, is one of the most cost effective public
V. Marquez, Lead Public
Health Specialist, Health,      health measures to prevent people, particularly the youth, from becoming
Nutrition and Population
Global Practice, and Co         addicted to a product that causes ill health, premature mortality and disability,
Coordinator of the Global       as well as high direct and indirect costs for families, communities, and society
Tobacco Control Program,
World Bank Group, who           at large.
organized and moderated the
panel session, as part of the
“WINNING THE TAX WARS:          Tobacco use, and its negative health, social and economic impact, is a global
GLOBAL SOLUTIONS FOR
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES            problem. It is estimated that 1.1 billion people smoke globally. According to
CONFERENCE” organized by
Blanca Moreno-Dodson, Lead      the 2015 World Health Organization (WHO) Report on the Global Tobacco
Economist, Global Taxation      Epidemic, in 2013, 21% of adults globally were current smokers – 950 million
Team, Governance Global
Practice, World Bank Group.     men and 177 million women.
                                                                                                                  5
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       Tobacco use is a leading global disease risk factor and underlying cause of
                       ill health, preventable death, and disability. It is estimated to kill more than 5
                       million people each year across the globe. If current trends persist, tobacco will
                       kill more than 8 million people worldwide each year by 2030, with 80% of these
                       premature deaths taking place in the developing world.

                       The 2015 World Health Organization (WHO) report on tobacco taxation raises a
                       troubling question for policymakers across the world: If, as shown by scientific
                       evidence, tobacco is a leading global disease risk factor, why then are so few
                       governments levying appropriate levels of tax on cigarettes and other tobacco
                       products to raise prices and reduce consumption?

                       The importance of this question is accentuated by the widely accepted fact that
                       raising taxes on tobacco products is one of the most cost-effective measures to
                       reduce consumption of products that kill. Besides the potential health benefits
                       of tobacco taxation, this policy measure could help broaden the tax base of
                       countries and generate additional revenue to support budgetary capacity to
                       finance priority investments and programs that benefit the entire population.
                       Indeed, as recognized in the “Financing for Development Action Agenda”
                       that was approved by the Heads of State and Government and High Level
                       Representatives of countries in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia in mid-July 2015 at the
                       Third International Conference on Financing for Development, and endorsed in
                       September 2015 at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) as part of the
                       Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) to be achieved by 2030, price and tax
                       measures on tobacco can be not only effective and important means to reduce
                       tobacco consumption and health care costs, but represent a revenue stream for
                       financing for development in many countries.

                       Findings in the WHO report show that while only 33 countries impose taxes that
                       constitute more than 75% of the retail price of a pack of cigarettes—the taxation
                       level recommended to have an impact on consumption —most countries that
                       do tax tobacco products have extremely low tax rates. And some countries do
                       not have a special tax on tobacco products at all.

                       Given this situation, what can be done to make the case and encourage
                       governments to look at accumulated evidence worldwide, and not simply the
                       tobacco industry’s arguments, and to use tax policies to increase the retail price
                       of tobacco products as one of the best available public health policy measures?

                       If we do not want to be passive spectators to the unhindered growth of this
                       threat to global health, then political will at the highest levels of government
                       needs to be galvanized, coupled with sustained support from civil society and
                       international organizations. This is required not only to shine a light upon this
                       deadly but entirely preventable health risk, but more importantly, to promote
                       effective and sustained action to deal with it.

6
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




The World Bank Group’s Global Tobacco Control Program supports
governments to look at accumulated country evidence and use tax
measures to increase the retail price of tobacco products as one of the best
available public health policy measures.

Some important lessons from international experience about how to
effectively implement tobacco tax policy to achieve public health objectives
can be adopted and adapted in policy dialogue and operational support to
countries. Such lessons include (World Bank, 1999; Sunley, 2009; WHO Global
Tobacco Report 2015; IMF 2016):

•	   While nearly all countries tax tobacco products, an excise tax is the most
     important type of tobacco tax, since it applies uniquely to tobacco
     products and raises prices relative to those of other goods and services.

•	   Simpler tobacco tax structures are more effective than complex (tiered)
     ones which are difficult to administer and can undermine the health
     and revenue impacts of tobacco excise taxes.

•	   Use of specific and uniform excise taxes enhances the impact of tobacco
     taxation on public health by reducing price gaps between premium and
     lower-priced alternatives, which limits opportunities for users to switch
     to less-expensive brands in response to tax increases. Taxing all tobacco
     products comparably reduces incentives for substitution.

•	   Ad valorem taxes are difficult to implement and weaken tax policy
     impact. Since they are levied as a percentage of price, companies have
     greater opportunities to avoid higher taxes and preserve or grow the
     size of their market by manufacturing and selling lower-priced brands.
     This also makes government tax revenues more dependent on industry
     pricing strategies and increases the uncertainty of the tobacco tax
     revenue stream.

•	   Specific excise taxes need to be adjusted for inflation to remain effective,
     and tax increases should reduce the affordability of tobacco products.
     In many countries, where incomes and purchasing power are growing
     rapidly, large price increases are required to offset growth in real
     incomes.

•	   Strong tax administration is critical to minimize tax avoidance and tax
     evasion, to ensure that tobacco tax increases lead to higher tobacco
     product prices and tax revenues, as well as reductions in tobacco use
     and its negative health consequences.



                                                                                  7
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       •	   Regional agreements on tobacco taxation can be effective in reducing
                            cross-border tax and price differentials and in minimizing opportunities
                            for individual tax avoidance and larger scale illicit trade.

                       Panel Presentations and Discussion

                       The first part of the session included two presentations that provided an overall
                       framework for understanding the nature and characteristics of tobacco use and
                       its negative social impact. The second part of the session focused on country
                       experiences on the adoption of tobacco tax policy measures, the results
                       generated, and lessons learned.

                       A Framework for Discussion

                       (ii) “Phishing for Phools: “The Economics of Manipulation
                       and Deception”

                       George Akerlof (2001 Nobel Prize Laureate in Economics and University
                       Professor at Georgetown University)

                       The challenge posed by tobacco use globally becomes clear by
                       understanding insights from the economics of manipulation and deception.

                       Prof. Akerlof explained that ever since Adam Smith, the central teaching
                       in economics has been that free markets provides us with material well-
                       being, as if by an invisible hand. But this fundamental insight in economics
                       is challenged by the fact that markets harm as well as help us. As long as
                       there is profit to be made, sellers will systematically exploit our psychological
                       weaknesses and our ignorance through manipulation and deception. That
                       is, rather than being essentially benign and always creating the greater good,
                       markets are inherently filled with trick and traps and will “phish” us as “phools.”

                       In regards to human behavior, the job of psychologists is to ferret out our
                       psychological weaknesses or susceptibilities. In a free market equilibrium, if
                       we have some weaknesses, they will be exploited as long as there is a profit
                       to be made. In free competitive markets, we are free to choose, but also “free
                       to phish.”




8
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




The four “we-could-not possibly-wants” are personal financial insecurity,
financial/macroeconomic instability, ill health, and bad government. In
significant ways, sellers play to our weaknesses. They are “phishing for phools.”
“Humans think in terms of stories, and decisions are consequently determined
by the stories we tell ourselves. Advertisers use this to their advantage by
“graph[ing] their story” onto ours, and thereby influencing the decisions we
make—in this case, to get us addicted to tobacco use, particularly teenagers
and low-income people.”

This insight could also be used to promote tobacco control. An example
of this is the 1964 United States Surgeon General’s Report. The story told
was that “smoking is stupid.” This led to free airtime and bans on indoor
smoking in the United States. The arsenal of effective consumer protection
regulations that have contributed to reduce the social acceptability of
smoking also includes advertising bans, smoke-free public spaces, and
restricting sales to minors. In the United States as mandated to the U.S Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) by the 2009, “Family Smoking Prevention
and Tobacco Control Act,” regulatory agencies have authority to regulate
the manufacture, distribution, and marketing of tobacco products, including
e-cigarettes, like any other drug.

Another recent example is Australia’s 2012 legislation that was adopted to
reduce the appeal of smoking by restricting the use of logos, colors, brand
images, or promotional information on packaging other than brand names
and product names displayed in a standard color and small font below hard-
hitting warnings depicting the negative health consequences of smoking.
In the two years following the law, tobacco consumption declined 12.8%,
which some have attributed, in part, to the legislation.

Other countries are starting to follow Australia’s example. Similar
regulations approved in France and the United Kingdom are set to begin
implementation in 2016, and they are under formal consideration in several
other countries across the world. Uruguay and Thailand already mandate
that at least 80% of front and back of the packaging be covered with graphic
health warnings. And Mauritius leads Africa in terms of requirements for
tobacco packaging and labelling.

Cigarette taxes also play an important role in tobacco control. Taxing
tobacco leads to better health, increased revenues, reduction in health costs,
and protection of the lives of loved ones. And, “the role of stories in all of this
is that they legitimate the higher taxes and make them collectible, and as
well as promote political and social acceptance of other regulatory measures
to control tobacco use.”



                                                                                  9
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                                  (iii) “Paying the Tab” The Costs and Benefits of Tobacco and
                                  Alcohol Control”

                                  Philip Cook (Professor of Public Policy and Economics at Duke University
                                  and former Director of Duke University’s Sanford Institute of Public Policy)

                                  High excise taxes on tobacco and alcoholic beverages are not an attractive
                                  source of revenue unless they are effective in reducing use and abuse.
                                  Why? Such taxes could be regressive by the usual standard, and the high
                                  prices that result could constitute a particular burden on the poor and often
                                  disabled heavy users.2

                                  That would be a dubious proposition if usage were completely insensitive
                                  to prices. Hence, high taxes must be justified by evidence that “they are
                                  effective in reducing abuse and improving the public health.”

                                  Making that case persuasively is not easy. In the past, most experts on
                                  smoking and alcohol abuse did not believe that prices mattered, nor did the
                                  public. For alcohol abuse, for example, the dominant school of thought was
                                  that the main problem was alcoholism, and that alcoholism was an addiction
                                  characterized by loss of control. It stood to reason that addicts would find a
                                  way to drink their fill even if prices went up. A tax amounting to, say, an extra
                                  dime a drink, was not going to make any difference to people who were
                                  already suffering great personal losses for the sake of sustaining their habit.
                                  The primary effect of a high tax would be to make their difficult lives even
                                  more so.

                                  This argument has intuitive appeal but is incorrect in important ways. First,
                                  the problem of alcohol abuse is not synonymous with alcoholism. Youths
                                  and other non-alcoholic drinkers who get drunk occasionally can do a lot of
                                  damage, as reflected in statistics on highway safety, injuries, violent crime,
                                  domestic violence, and even death by alcohol poisoning or ethylic coma.

                                  Second, even if the direct effect of prices are on the consumption habits of
                                  relatively moderate drinkers, heavy drinkers can be affected indirectly. There is
                                  good evidence that drinking occurs in a social context, and that drinkers across
                                  the spectrum influence each other. So if alcohol prices can affect the drinking
2
 Of course, it could be argued    patterns at the median, then the upper tail of the distribution will shift inward.
that it is simply “fair” for      That is to say, there will be a reduced prevalence of heavy drinking.
the smoker or drinker to
compensate the public for
negative externalities of their
use. But “fairness” in that       There is no need to just speculate on these matters – the so-called
regard assumes that the bad       “laboratory of the states” in the United States, for example, provides strong
habits are a choice, freely
made..                            evidence. That is, over the past 20 years, there has been scores of cases in



10
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




which states increased their alcohol excise taxes. Those cases could be seen
as trials in a sort of natural experiment, with states that did not change their
tax as the control group. The assessments done utilized administrative data
on alcohol sales and health-related outcomes, so not to rely on survey data
-- which are always suspect when it comes to drinking and smoking.

The assessments found that an increase in the state tax consistently resulted
in a reduction in tax-paid sales per capita. That was a first step, but not
enough, because skeptics could say that some drinkers were avoiding the
higher tax by buying their booze in neighboring states. It is also possible
that only the moderate drinkers were cutting back, so that the reduction had
little effect on the amount of alcohol-related harm.

So, in addition to analyzing sales data, the assessment also analyzed the
effect on the cirrhosis mortality rate. Cirrhosis mortality is a good indicator
of the prevalence of long-term heavy drinking, and in particular alcoholism.
What was found was the same pattern as for sales -- cirrhosis mortality
dropped when taxes went up. In other words, higher prices postponed or
prevented their deaths due to liver disease. That was direct evidence that
the tax reduced the consumption of heavy drinkers and a clear indication
that the tax was effective with one of the target populations.

In the 35 years since the initial period of study, there have been numerous
studies of the effects of alcohol tax changes, for a variety of outcomes –
injury mortality, violent crime, STDs, suicide, domestic violence, and so forth.
The results are consistently positive. One of the recent studies found that
when the United States Congress doubled the federal beer tax in 1991, the
result in just the first year was to save 7,000 lives.

These days, most experts are on board with the idea that higher alcohol
taxes tend to reduce alcohol abuse and dependence, and the costly
consequences thereof. But that conclusion remains a tough sell with the
public and the politicians, especially given the alcohol industry’s lobbying
and disinformation campaign. And since 1991 the United States Congress
and most of the states have little to legislate in this area, letting inflation
gradually erode the value of alcohol excises. In fact, inflation has in effect
repealed the 1991 legislation that doubled the federal beer tax.

Tobacco taxes have been a very different story in the United States in recent
years. The politics changed in 1998 with the Tobacco Master Settlement
Agreement (MSA), originally between the four largest United States tobacco
companies (Philip Morris Inc., R. J. Reynolds, Brown & Williamson and Lorillard
– the "original participating manufacturers", referred to as the "Majors") and
the attorneys general of 46 states, which settled the states’ Medicaid lawsuits


                                                                                   11
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       against the tobacco industry for recovery of their tobacco-related health-care
                       costs. Large increases in federal and state tax rates have generated many
                       billions in extra revenues despite the resulting decline in smoking. It is widely
                       acknowledged that much of that decline has been induced by the increased
                       post-tax tobacco prices.

                       Interestingly, some of the best evidence that higher taxes are effective in
                       curtailing tobacco use is similar to the evidence for alcohol abuse-- it comes
                       from the “laboratory of the states” in the United States, and in particular
                       analysis of data generated by many instances in which state legislatures
                       changed tobacco taxes. While there is no doubt that nicotine addiction
                       plays a powerful role in smoking cigarettes, higher prices appear helpful in
                       discouraging initiation and encouraging cessation.

                       Alcohol and tobacco differ in one important respect, namely the public
                       health goal. For tobacco, the best answer is abstention -- there is no safe
                       level of smoking. But for drinking, it is moderation, where some scientists
                       actually believe, as many people do, that a drink or two a day is good for the
                       health. As a result, one objection to the alcohol excise tax is that even if it is
                       an effective public health measure, it is poorly focused, in effect punishing all
                       drinkers regardless of whether their drinking is problematic.

                       But in fact, the alcohol tax is surprisingly well focused on negative externalities
                       of drinking. Consider a proposed increase of 10 cents per drink, which would
                       amount to an annual payment of US$60/capita on average. But, that average,
                       conceals a huge range. One-third of adults in the United States abstain, and
                       they would obviously pay nothing if the tax were increased. Most drinkers do
                       not drink much, and for them the tax would be just a few extra dollars per year.
                       The bulk of the extra revenue would come from the top 15% of the drinkers
                       (who average 8 or 9 drinks per day); they consume 75% of all the alcohol and
                       hence would pay 75% of new tax. That is also the group that accounts for most
                       of the alcohol-related damage. Hence the claim that it is well targeted.

                       If the extra revenue were returned directly to the public as a sort of uniform
                       dividend, most adults would receive more than they paid in. And most everyone
                       would benefit from reduced drinking and abuse, starting with the financial
                       benefit of reduced insurance rates, and a reduced threat of violent crime.

                       In conclusion, the case for higher excise taxes begins with the evidence that
                       they are effective in controlling excess use. While experts are now in agreement
                       that alcohol and tobacco excises are powerful public health instruments, we
                       are a long way from persuading the public of that truth, especially for alcohol.
                       While we all know much of the context on the rationale for taxing tobacco and
                       alcohol, we also know that the key to change is action at a country level.


12
                          Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




Country Experiences

(iv) “Six lessons from the U.S. Experience with Tobacco Taxes”

Jason Furman (Chairman of the United States President’s Council of
Economic Advisers)

When people think about what the Obama Administration did to improve
public health, they often think immediately of the Affordable Care Act (ACA),
and appropriately so. The ACA is undoubtedly the single most important
health-related legislation of not just the Obama Administration, but of recent
decades. But this Administration has also taken many other steps that are
improving Americans’ health. The legislation that President Obama signed in
his first month in office in 2009, which raised the Federal cigarette tax from
$0.39 per pack to approximately $1.01 per pack, was his most important
public health legislation.

Plausible estimates suggest that this increase in cigarette taxes will reduce
the number of premature deaths due to smoking by between 15,000 and
70,000 for two young population cohorts (12-17 and 18-25). The health
benefits will be progressively distributed, representing a far larger fraction
of income for lower-income families, and even more so when counting the
benefits of the expansion of children’s health insurance coverage that the
increase funded as discussed below.

It is important to understand that these tax measures complement a range of
other steps to reduce the threat to public health posed by tobacco products.
In 2009, President Obama signed legislation providing the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) with authority to regulate tobacco products, and
requiring FDA approval of certain new tobacco products, building on a series
of steps that began with the U.S. Surgeon General’s 1964 report on the harms
of tobacco.

The ACA requires health insurance to cover tobacco counseling and
interventions without cost sharing, and requires that Medicaid programs
cover cessation services for pregnant women. With funding from the
ACA’s Prevention Fund, the United States Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) launched an aggressive, graphic media campaign
highlighting the health and physical impacts of smoking called Tips from
Former Smokers. The FDA finalized in May 2016 a rule extending its regulatory
authority to all tobacco products, including e-cigarettes, cigars, hookah
tobacco, and pipe tobacco.




                                                                                 13
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       Externalities, Internalities and Addictive Goods

                       Before diving into the estimates, it is useful to briefly discuss the underlying
                       theory and motivation, because it affects not only the assessment of past
                       policies but also the analysis and motivation for future ones. Tobacco
                       imposes a number of costs on society that can be understood through the
                       traditional economic concept of “externalities,” including the negative health
                       and amenity effects of second hand smoke, the large costs to children and
                       society more broadly of low birthweight babies that happen when a mother
                       smokes during pregnancy, and the additional health costs borne by all of us
                       to help care for smokers.

                       But smoking has its largest effects on smokers themselves, imposing a
                       cost of about US$25 to US$50 or more on someone in terms of shorter life
                       expectancy and other negative health effects. A “rational” person should have
                       an additional pack of cigarettes if the benefit to him or her exceeds at least
                       $$25 plus the relatively modest cost of producing the pack of cigarettes itself.

                       In most cases it could be assumed that government policy should address
                       externalities, but that rational consumers would fully take into account all
                       of the internal costs and come to the optimal decision with no further need
                       for public policy intervention. However, in the case of tobacco use, there are
                       a number of reasons to believe this simplistic analysis is incorrect. First, and
                       perhaps most importantly, is what economists call the present-bias problem.
                       Across a wide range of domains, we have evidence that people overweight
                       the present at the expense of the future. In the case of tobacco use, which
                       has large costs that appear many years in the future, this leads to smoking at
                       rates above the socially optimal.

                       The highly addictive nature of tobacco greatly exacerbates this problem
                       since, once people have started smoking, it is difficult to stop even if they
                       decide they want to. Evidence suggests that overly optimistic assessments of
                       one’s ability to quit also play a role in smoking initiation. In surveys, far more
                       teenagers who smoke report that they will quit than those who ultimately
                       do. Teenagers may excessively discount the future health costs assuming
                       that they will be able to quit smoking when, in reality, quitting is much more
                       difficult than they think.

                       When individuals do not take into account costs they impose on themselves
                       for whatever reason, economists refer to it as an “internality.” Finally, although
                       we have made major strides in increasing public awareness of the health risks
                       of smoking, traditional informational shortcomings may also play a role in
                       smoking initiation.



14
                                                                     Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                                     Lesson #1: Smoking Plays a Major Role Not Just in
                                     Mortality but in the Inequality of Mortality

                                     There is substantial concern in the United States and around the world about
                                     growing inequality. Recently a number of scholars have advanced the stark
                                     and troubling thesis that the United States is witnessing a dramatic increase
                                     not just in income inequality but also in life expectancy inequality (Chetty et
                                     al. 2016, National Academies 2015). The truth is a little more complicated than
                                     that, however, and smoking plays an important role in the story.

                                     First, the broader public health story. Age-adjusted death rates in the United
                                     States have fallen sharply since the 1950s, with particularly notable declines
                                     in death rates from heart disease and stroke, among others, as shown in
                                     Figure 1 (CDC 2016). Decreasing death rates have led to a substantial increase
                                     in period life expectancies at birth, from 68.2 years in 1950 to 78.8 years
                                     in 2013. But while as all-cause death rates were falling rapidly, death rates
                                     for lung cancer were rising rapidly, tripling from 1950 to 1990. Since 1990,
                                     however, death rates for lung cancer have dropped by nearly one-third.
                                     This result partly reflects the success of the sustained campaign to combat
                                     smoking waged in the United States over the last half century, a phenomenal
                                     public health achievement.

                                     The data on mortality inequality tells a more nuanced tale. Troublingly, for
                                     those who have reached middle-age, the gap in life expectancy between
                                     higher income individuals and lower income individuals has grown
                                     substantially. At the same time, mortality rates early in life are actually falling
                                     more quickly in low-income areas than in high-income areas (Currie and
                                     Schwandt 2016).

                                     Figure 1: Percent that Ever Smoked by poverty Status,
                                     United States, 1991-2014
Percent                        Age 50+                                                         Ages 18-40
 70

                           Above Poverty Line
 60
                                                                           Below Poverty Line
 50
                           Below Poverty Line
 40
                                                                           Above Poverty Line
 30
          1989 	   1994	    1999	    2004	      2009	       2014       1989 	     1994	      1999	      2004	   2009	   2014
                                      Source: NHIS and CEA calculations following Currie and Schwandt (2016).


                                                                                                                           15
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                          Differing trends in smoking rates by income are likely one important factor
                          driving differences in the evolution of mortality rates for the young and old.
                          The share of the population 50 and older “below” the poverty line that has
                          ever smoked has grown over the last twenty-five years while the share of
                          the population 50 and older “above” the poverty line that has ever smoked
                          has decreased. In contrast, smoking rates for the population ages 18-40 have
                          declined substantially regardless of poverty status, and smoking rates for people
                          living in poverty are only slightly higher than for those not living in poverty.

                          Lesson #2: Price Plays an Important Role in Smoking

                          From 1954 to 1983, inflation-adjusted cigarette prices were essentially flat,
                          coinciding with an increase in per capita cigarette consumption. Since 1983,
                          cigarette prices have increased rapidly and, in parallel, consumption has
                          plummeted (Figure 2). Of course, these changes were driven by a variety of
                          factors in addition to price, including public education campaigns, access to
                          approved cessation tools and other factors, many of which have been the
                          subject of extensive research.

                          Research into the relationship between cigarette prices and smoking typically
                          estimates elasticities of demand: the percentage decrease in cigarette demand
                          that would result from a one percent increase in price. However, due to the
                          addictive nature of tobacco products, we are concerned with more than the
                          simple quantity of cigarettes consumed. For example, some research examines
                          the impact of prices on smoking initiation and other studies look at the impact of
                          price on quit attempts or the fraction of the population that smokes.

                          Figure 2: U.S. Cigarette Prices and Consumption,
Thousands of Cigarettes   1954-2014                                                                              Price per Pack,
per Capita                                                                                                       2014 Dollars
3                                                                                                                       7

                                                                                                                        6

                                                                                                                        5
2
                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                        3
1
                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                        1

0                                                                                                                       0
     1954         1964            1974                 1984                1994               2004               2014
                          Source: Orzechowski and Walker (2015); Bureau of Labor Statistics; CEA calculations.

16
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




Meta-analyses of the relationship between tobacco prices and use suggest
that the overall elasticity of demand for adults lies between 0.3 and 0.7 (CBO
2012, IARC 2011, Gallet and List 2003, Chaloupka and Warner 2000), that is to
say that a 10 percent increase in cigarette prices will lead to a 3 to 7 percent
decline in consumption. These meta-analyses find that about half of this
reduction comes from existing users smoking less (the intensive margin) and
about half comes from a decline in the number of smokers (the extensive
margin).

Though subject to some debate, a number of studies suggest the relevant
elasticities for youths and young adults are higher than those for adults, which is
to say that youths and young adults respond relatively more to prices.

Lesson #3: Cigarette Taxes Play an Important Role in
Cigarette Prices

U.S. cigarette taxes fell sharply in inflation-adjusted terms through the 1970s and
early 1980s as inflation eroded their value (Figure 3). Federal cigarette taxes were
increased in 1983, but remained well below their inflation-adjusted value from
decades before. However, around 2000, cigarette taxes took on an increased
role as part of tobacco and health policy, and tax rates increased sharply in the
first decade of this century, driving the substantial increase in cigarette prices
since then. In addition, the Master Settlement Agreement reached in 1998
between the Attorneys General of forty-six States and the District of Columbia
and the four largest tobacco companies included substantial annual payments
to the Government that function like a further tax on tobacco.

Lesson #4: Cigarette Taxes Have Large Aggregate
Benefits for Public Health

By increasing cigarette prices, cigarette taxes substantially reduce smoking
rates and generate large improvements in public health. This finding is borne
out both by the body of existing research on the topic and the experience of
the 2009 tobacco tax increase, which are discussed in some detail below.




                                                                                       17
  Expanding the Global Tax Base




                            Figure 3: Average U.S. Cigarette Taxes and Prices,                                     Price
Tax per Pack,               United States, 1954-2014                                                               per Pack,
2014 Dollars                                                                                                       2014 Dollars
  3.50                                                                                                                    7
                  State
  3.00                                                                                                                    6
                  Federal
  2.50                                                                                                                    5

  2.00                                                                                                                    4

  1.50                                                                                                                    3

  1.00                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                          1
  0.50
                                                                                                                          0
  0.00
      1954        1964                1974                1984                1994                2004             2014
                            Source: Orzechowski and Walker (2015); Bureau of Labor Statistics; CEA calculations.


                            Two studies that examine the impact of the most recent increase in Federal
                            tobacco taxes in 2009 find resulting reductions in smoking among youths. The
                            more recent study (van Hasselt et al. 2015) concluded that smoking initiation
                            for youths age 12-17 fell more than 15 percent and initiation for young adults’
                            18-25 fell by 8 percent (Figure 4). Past-month use likewise fell by about 15
                            percent for youths 12-17 and by about 5 percent for young adults 18-25.
                            While all of these results are economically significant, the estimated effect on
                            smoking initiation for young adults 18-25 is not statistically significant. The
                            other study ((Huang and Chaloupka 2012) found similar decreases, concluding
                            that the percentage of 8th, 10th, and 12th grade students who smoked in the
                            past month fell by between 10 and 13 percent.Two studies that examine the
                            impact of the most recent increase in Federal tobacco taxes in 2009. Both of
                            the studies examining that tax increase find resulting reductions in smoking
                            among youths. The more recent study concluded that smoking initiation for
                            youths age 12-17 fell more than 15 percent and initiation for young adults’
                            18-25 fell 8 percent (Figure 4, van Hasselt et al. 2015). Past-month use likewise
                            fell by about 15 percent for youths 12-17 and fell about 5 percent for young
                            adults 18-25. While all of these results are economically significant, the
                            estimated effect on smoking initiation for young adults 18-25 is not statistically
                            significant. The other study found similar decreases, concluding that the
                            percentage of 8th, 10th, and 12th grade students who smoked in the past
                            month fell by between 10 and 13 percent (Huang and Chaloupka 2012).

                            The findings from these recent studies are broadly consistent with the results
                            from the earlier literature. Adapting the estimates from these two studies,
                            an analysis of cigarette taxes and smoking by the U.S. Congressional Budget
                            Office (CBO 2012), and estimates from a study of youth smoking by Carpenter
                            and Cook (2008), the evidence suggests that the 2009 Federal cigarette tax

 18
                                                                 Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                            increase could have plausibly reduced the number of smokers in a cohort of 18
                            year-olds by between 45,000 and 220,000 people, roughly 3 to 15 percent.

                            We can also apply estimates of the health impacts of smoking, the frequency
                            and success of quit attempts, and so forth, to the estimates presented above on
                            the impact of the cigarette tax increase on smoking rates to obtain an estimate
                            of the health benefits portion associated with the tax increase. For these
                            calculations, we can adopt an assumption that roughly one-third of young
                            smokers die prematurely due to smoking (U.S. Surgeon General 2014). Based
                            on these assumptions, the 2009 cigarette tax increase plausibly reduced the
                            number of premature deaths due to smoking in each cohort (12-17 and 18-25)
                            by between 15,000 and 70,000.


                            Figure 4: Changes in Smoking Behavior Due to 2009 Tax
            Percent         Increase in the United States
            Change
               0
              -3
Age Group
              -6
    12-17
    18-25     -9
             -12
             -15
             -18
                      Smoking             Past-month              Days smoked in      Cigarettes      Cigarettes per
                      initiation           smoking                30 days (current   per day (daily   day (nondaily
                                                                     smokers)          smokers)         smokers)
                            Source: van Hasselt et al. (2015).




                             We are unlikely to have reached the optimal level of tobacco taxation,
                             especially when the average combined Federal and State tax is about
                             US$2.50 per pack and estimates of the harm associated with smoking a pack
                             of cigarettes range from about US$25 to US$50 or more per pack (although
                             consumers take some of the costs of this harm into account in making their
                             decisions). To this end, President Obama has proposed to further raise the
                             Federal cigarette tax from US$1.01 to US$1.95 per pack and to index it to
                             inflation going forward (along with proposing to harmonize tax rates on
                             different tobacco products). This increase in tobacco taxes is part of an effort
                             to fund high-quality early education for all Americans, a policy that itself would
                             have enormous economic benefits (CEA 2016). The proposal would reduce the
                             number of premature deaths due to smoking in a youth cohort by between
                             about 10,000 and 50,000 based on similar assumptions used to analyze the
                             2009 increase.


                                                                                                                 19
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       Lesson #5: Tobacco Taxes Disproportionately Benefit
                       Lower-Income Households

                       Tobacco taxes are sometimes criticized for being regressive, but this criticism
                       is backward. The health benefits of tobacco taxes far exceed the increase in
                       tax liability, and they accrue disproportionately to lower-income households.
                       Moreover, it is important to also evaluate what the additional revenue raised
                       by the tobacco tax may be used for. The most recent increases, enacted
                       in 1997 and 2009, were used to create and expand a very progressive
                       children’s health insurance program. The Administration’s proposal to further
                       increase tobacco taxes would finance a highly progressive high-quality early
                       education proposal.

                       Welfare and Distributional Impact of the 2009 Tobacco Tax Increase

                       Figure 5 provides an illustrative estimate of the distributional impacts of the
                       2009 tobacco tax increase based on a plausible set of assumptions. However,
                       we would not place too much weight on any one number; the point here
                       is to illustrate why applying standard distributional analysis to tobacco tax
                       changes go so badly awry.

                       The illustrative distribution is computed by allocating the burden of tobacco
                       taxes according to the distribution of tobacco taxes reported in Rosenberg
                       (2015), allocating US$37.5 billion in health benefits proportional to the tax
                       burden, allocating a US$9.4 billion utility offset proportional to the health
                       benefits (and thus also proportional to the tax burden), and allocating CHIP
                       benefits equal in value to the tax increase proportional to the distribution of
                       children with CHIP coverage in the March CPS.

                       In particular, the blue bars in Figure 5 portray the traditional finding that tobacco
                       tax increases, by themselves, are regressive—leading to the largest percentage
                       reductions in pre-tax incomes for the lowest-income households.
                       But the picture changes markedly when we count the benefits of reduced
                       mortality and morbidity as shown in the second set of estimates in orange.
                       These benefits are strongly progressive, for two reasons. First, smoking is more
                       prevalent at lower incomes, so the reductions in smoking are larger for those
                       groups (not accounting the fact that they may also be more sensitive to price
                       increases, a factor that is not included here). Second, these estimates assume
                       the dollar value of the health benefit does not vary with income and thus is
                       proportionately more important to lower-income households, although other
                       assumptions on this question are also possible.




20
                                                                     Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                                    Figure 5: Illustrative Distribution of the 2009 Tobacco Tax
                                    Increase in the United States

                                                                        Tax                    Tax + Health + Utility Offset
                                                                        Tax + Health           Tax + Health + Utility Offset + CHIP
                             1.5
Benefits as Percent of the




                             1.0

                             0.5
Pre-Tax Income




                             0.0

                             -0.5




                                     Lowest               Second               Middle               Fourth                Top
                                     quintile             quintile             quintile             quintile             quintile
                                    Note: Lower estimate for van Hasselt et al. (2015) is based on results for 18-25 year-olds; higher
                                    estimate is based on results for 12-17 year-olds. Source: Huang and Chaloupka (2012); van Hasselt
                                    et al. (2015); CBO (2012); Carpenter and Cook (2008); CEA calculations.




                                    The third set of estimates in grey takes into account a “utility offset” reflecting
                                    the fact that people who stop smoking may lose some of the utility they would
                                    otherwise have derived from smoking. If people were fully rational, this utility
                                    offset would roughly match the internal health costs, but, as discussed above,
                                    this is not the case with tobacco, so these estimates assume an illustrative 25
                                    percent offset. The 25 percent offset, reflecting the high end of estimates in
                                    a recent analysis conducted for the U.S. Department of Health and Human
                                    Services (HHS 2015), is merely illustrative and arguably very high for a good with
                                    addictive properties. Moreover, there are good arguments that in the case of
                                    people dissuaded from taking up smoking in the first place, this offset could be
                                    much smaller and possibly zero. The point is to show that even with this large
                                    offset the tobacco tax increase is still highly progressive, albeit slightly less so.

                                    Finally, the last set of estimates incorporates not just the direct effects of the
                                    tax, but also the use of the revenue it generates—in this case expanding health
                                    insurance coverage for low- and moderate-income children. Accounting for this
                                    coverage expansion adds to the progressivity of the overall legislative package.

                                    The bottom line is that these estimates are positive for all groups and large on
                                    average for low-income households.




                                                                                                                                         21
 Expanding the Global Tax Base




                                          Lesson #6: It is Really Important to Tax Similar
                                          Tobacco Products at Similar Rates

                                          One often overlooked aspect of tobacco taxation is the importance of
                                          harmonizing the tax rate on different tobacco products. Currently, there is
                                          a wide disparity in tax rates in the United States between tobacco products
                                          (Figure 6). For example, pipe tobacco is taxed at a rate of less than $3 per
                                          pound while roll-your-own tobacco is taxed at a rate of nearly $25 per
                                          pound. These disparities can lead to substitution between tobacco products
                                          and can mitigate the positive health effects of tobacco tax increases.


                                          Figure 6: Sales of Roll-Your-Own and Pipe Tobacco,
                                          United States, 2002-2016

                        5

                        4
(thousands per month)




                                                                                                                                 Roll-Your-Own
  Pounds of tobacco




                                                                                                                                 Tobacco
                        3                                                                                                        Pipe Tobacco

                                                                                                                                 Tobacco Tax
                        2                                                                                                        Increase
                                                                                                                                 (April 2009)
                        1

                        0
                            2002   2004       2006           2008          2010           2012          2014              2016
                                          Source: Department of the Treasury, Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.



                                          The problem is that if you raise the tax on one product without raising it on
                                          another, consumers can substitute to the cheaper product, potentially undoing
                                          some of the public health benefit the tax was intended to encourage. This is
                                          not just a theoretical possibility but visible in the data. For example, consider
                                          the patterns in the sale of roll-your-own and pipe tobacco and in small and
                                          large cigars following the enactment of the 2009 tobacco tax increase. Prior to
                                          the law’s enactment, the tax rates on roll-your-own tobacco and pipe tobacco
                                          were the same. After the law’s enactment, the tax rate on roll-your-own
                                          tobacco was over US$20 per pound higher than the tax on pipe tobacco. And,
                                          as you can see in the figure below, sales of roll-your-own tobacco plummeted
                                          after the law, and sales of pipe tobacco increased by a factor of ten. Similarly, as
                                          the law disadvantaged modestly priced small cigars relative to modestly priced
                                          large cigars, sales of small cigars plummeted and sales of large cigars rose. In
                                          fact, many manufacturers of small cigars slightly increased the weight of their
                                          product to classify it as a large cigar (GAO 2012).




 22
                          Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




In the extreme case where different tobacco products are perfect substitutes,
a tax increase on one product alone would have no impact on overall
consumption and resultant health harms. In reality, of course, substitution
is imperfect but still larger than one might expect. When President Obama’s
proposal was being developed to increase and harmonize taxes on tobacco,
economists in the Treasury Department estimated that the reduction in
tobacco consumption under a harmonization proposal would be nearly two
and a half times the size it would be under an increase in the cigarette tax
alone that raises comparable revenue. This implies additional health benefits of
more than $100 billion over ten years. This is not just a technical detail.

(v) “China’s 2015 tobacco tax adjustment and initial impact”

Rose Zheng, (Economics and Tax Professor, School of International Trade
and Economics (SITE), University of International Business and Economics
(UIBE), Beijing, China, and Director of China’s WHO Tobacco Control
Collaboration Center)

China is the leading producer and consumer of tobacco in the world, with
44% of the world’s cigarettes consumed in China. About 300 million people, or
30% of the total population of China smoke, with a 53% prevalence of tobacco
smoking among men aged 15–69, among the highest in the world.

Tobacco use is one of the top three health risk factors that have contributed
significantly to the rapid growth of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in
China. Smoking is a major killer. Approximately 1 million deaths every year
are caused by tobacco, despite improved access to medical care thanks to the
expansion in recent years of national health insurance coverage.

In the face of this dire reality, what to do? Wait to treat people when they
develop lung cancer and other tobacco-related diseases, or adopt measures
to prevent the onset of disease in the first place? Governments have an
obligation and the means to protect their population’s wellbeing by adopting
effective fiscal and regulatory measures, in addition to providing medical care
to those persons who fall ill. In that sense, 2015 may prove to be a landmark
year for tobacco control in China, as the Government adopted a national tax
reform on cigarettes as well as a ban on smoking in public places in Beijing and
Shanghai—a ban that is proposed to be expanded across the country.




                                                                                   23
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                        Initial assessments done by a team from WHO’s Collaborating Center for
                        Tobacco and Economics at Beijing’s University of International Business and
                        Economics (UIBE), show that the 2015 tobacco tax reform is proving to be a
                        win-win for both fiscal and public health in China. That is, it is contributing to:

                        •	   Reducing cigarette consumption.
                        •	   Shaping cigarette market share.
                        •	   Influencing tobacco industry profit margin and hence by influencing its
                             producing and marketing strategy.
                        •	   Increasing government’s revenue.
                        •	   Changing smoker’s behavior including quitting, switching up/down


                        2015 Tobacco Tax Reform
                        •	 Exercise tax rate at the wholesale segment was increased from 5% to 11%
                        •	 An additional specific tax of 0.1RMB (0.015USD) per pack (with 20 sticks)
                           was introduced at the wholesale level.
                                    The 2015 cigarette exercise tax adjustment
                                                              Before May 10, 2015        After May 10, 2015
                  At Producer price level
                   Specific exercise tax (per pack)                 0.06 RMB                  0.06 RMB
                   Ad valorem tax
                     >= 7 RMB                                          56%                       56%
                     < 7 RMB                                           36%                       36%
                  At Wholesale price level
                   Specific exercise tax (per pack)                      0                    0.10 RMB
                   Ad valorem tax                                       5%                        11%

                        STMA (State Tobacco Monopoly) price annoucement responding to
                        tax adjustment:
                        •	 Wholesale price has increased 6%
                        •	 STMA provincial brances can set up cigarette retail price in the province
                            based on local market under STMA retail price guidance and at the same
                            time need to meet the required principle that the retailer's profit margin
                            shouldn't be lower than 10%
                        •	 Both new cigarette tax and pricing policy took effective from May 10, 2015


                        On 10 May 2015, 10 years after the ratification, the Chinese Ministry of Finance
                        officially raised the tax on cigarettes, and China’s State Tobacco Monopoly
                        Administration (STMA) passed the tax on to retail price of cigarettes.

                        Using a tobacco tax as an instrument for tobacco control is a significant step for
                        the Chinese government. To understand the significance of the 2015 tobacco tax
                        policy adjustment, it is useful to understand the role of China’s tobacco industry, the
                        cigarette pricing mechanism and the tobacco tax structure in the Chinese economy
                        (Hu, Zhang, and Zheng 2016). The Chinese tobacco industry is a government owned
24
                                                          Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                          national monopoly, the State Tobacco Monopoly Administration (STMA). In 2013,
                          STMA produced more than 2.0 trillion cigarettes, which contributed 816 billion RMB
                          (US$130 billion), or about 6.3% of China’s central government tax revenue. Owing to
                          the importance of the tobacco economy in China, STMA has the advantage of being
                          able to work with the central and local governments. STMA’s goal is to promote the
                          industry, even though the harmful health effects of smoking are now well known
                          in China.

                          STMA is responsible for the centralized management of cigarette factories, cigarette
                          companies and retailers, and it determines the cigarette prices. Cigarette factories
                          decide the cigarette producer prices, cigarette companies decide the cigarette
                          wholesale prices (the producer prices and wholesale prices need to be reported
                          and to be approved by the State Administration of Taxation), and cigarette retailers
                          decide the retail price of cigarettes by adding a regulated market profit margin set
                          by STMA to the wholesale price.

                          The Chinese government collects five different taxes from the tobacco industry:
                          tobacco leaf tax, value added tax (VAT), excise tax and urban construction/
                          educational supplemental tax. The VAT is not tobacco-specific, but has a uniform rate
                          (17%) across all products. Within these five types of taxes, only the excise tax directly
                          influences the magnitude of the retail price of cigarettes.

                          Initial evidence of the impact of the 2015 tobacco tax increase

                          •	     Impact on price and market structure. The weighted average wholesale price
                                 increased by 8.9% from 10.27RMB per pack in 2014 to 11.18RMB per pack in
                                 2015. The average retail price increased by 10.29%, from 11.61RMB per pack to
                                 12.81RMB per pack. However, from a global perspective, the weighted average
                                 cigarette price in China is still relatively cheap: less than US$2 per pack on average.
                                 Also, as the low-end price categories increased more than middle and premium
                                 price categories of cigarettes, the price gaps between tiers have been reduced.
                                 This encourages smokers up-shifting from the low end categories (Class V and
                                 Class IV) to the middle and upper price categories (Class III and Class II).


                                              Impact on Prices
                  Class         Class I     Class I      Class II    Class III    Class IV     Class V      Total in
                               (Premium)   (Average)                                                        average
                  2014          36.00        20.60         11.60        8.30        4.50         2.25         10.27

Wholesale price   2015           38.16       21.84        21.84        12.30         4.77        2.39         11.18
 (RMB/pack)        ∆             2.16         1.24         0.70         0.50        0.27         0.14         0.92
                   ∆%           6.00%        6.00%        6.00%        6.00%        6.00%       6.00%         8.9%
                  2014          43.00        23.00        13.00         9.50        5.00         2.50         11.61

 Retail price     2015          45.00        25.00        14.00        10.00        5.50         3.00       12.81 ($2)
 (RMB/pack)        ∆             2.00         2.00         1.00         0.50        0.50         0.50          1.19
                   ∆%           4.65%        8.70%        7.69%        5.26%       10.00%       20.00%        10.3%
                                                                                                                         25
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                             •	     Impact on tax incidence. The sales weighted tax share as % of retail price
                                    increased from 52% in 2014 to 56% in 2015, which is still lower than WHO
                                    recommended standard of 75%. The sales weighted average excise tax as
                                    % of retail price increased by 4% from 31% in 2014 to 35% in 2015.



                                              Tax as % of Retail Price
                     Class         Class I      Class I    Class II   Class III   Class IV   Class V   Total in
                                  (Premium)    (Average)                                               average
                     2014           52%         55.40%     58.50%     44.82%       47.23%    53.72%      52%
 Total tax as %      2015           55%         58.84%     61.73%     50.37%      52.22%     55.98%      56%
 of retail price
                      ∆              3%          3.44%      3.23%      5.55%       4.99%      2.25%      4%
                     2014           36%         38.86%     40.66%      27.47%      28.91%    33.37%      35%
 Total excise as     2015           39%          42%         45%        33%         34%       36%        39%
 % of retail price
                      ∆              3%          3.48%      4.07%      5.61%       5.19%      2.95%      4%




                             •	     Impact on consumption. For the first time since 2001, as confirmed
                                    by the State Tobacco Monopoly Administration (STMA), the volume of
                                    cigarette sales decreased by 2.36% in 2015 compared to 2014. After the
                                    2015 tax adjustment, sales continued to decrease by 4.61% over May
                                    2015-April 2016 compared with May 2014-April 2015, and by 5.36%
                                    between October 2015-September 2016 compared with October
                                    2014-September 2015.

                             •	     Impact on government tax revenue. The Chinese government profits
                                    financially from the manufacture and sale of tobacco, as well as from
                                    tobacco taxes collected by the government. According to STMA data, the
                                    tobacco industry in China contributed 840.4 billion RMB (about US$129.29
                                    billion) tax revenue from tobacco products in 2015, an increase of 9%
                                    over the 2014 level. As a state-owned enterprise, it also contributed
                                    an additional 190.97 billion RMB (US$29.38 billion) profit to the central
                                    government, plus 63.6 billion RMB (US$9.79 billion) enterprise income tax
                                    to the central government. The 2015 tax increase, which was applied at
                                    the wholesale level rather than at the retail level, generated an additional
                                    57.8 billion RMB (US$8.89 billion) in excise tax at the wholesale level.

                             •	     Impact on public health. A preliminary estimation suggests that within
                                    12 months followed by the 2015 tax increase, the total number of smokers
                                    would decrease by about 5 million.




26
                                                                                        Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                                                      Impact on consumption and market structure

                                                                                                                                APR 2015 - MAR 2016
                                            Million                                                                             APR 2014 - MAR 2016
           Cigarette Consumption Change


                                             60.00

                                             50.00

                                             40.00

                                             30.00

                                             20.00

                                             10.00

                                              0.00
                                                          Class I            Class II         Class III         Class IV        Class V             Total

                                            1.20%

                                            1.00%
           Market Share Change




                                            0.80%
                                                                                   0.99%
                                            0.40%

                                            0.20%

                                            0.00%            -0.14%                                   -0.23%                                 -0.14%
                                                                                                                           -0.40%
                                           -0.20%

                                           -0.40%
                                                          Class I                 Class II          Class III              Class IV         Class V



                                                    Impact on Government Tax Revenue
       Tobacco                            Tobacco Tobacco Tax & Profit Profit Corporate     SOE                                  SOE       Add'l       Add'l
        Tax &                               Tax   Industry Contribution Before Income      Profit                               Profit    Contri-     Excise
        Profit                                      Profit  to Central Income    Tax    Contribution                           Contri-    bution      Contri-
                                                               Gov't     Tax               Rate                                bution                 bution
       BILLION                            BILLION     BILLION       BILLION USD     BILLION   BILLION USD          %           BILLION    BILLION      BILLION
         USD                                USD         USD                           USD                                        USD        USD          USD

2014   161.81                             118.43      43.38           140.16        33.83        8.46             25%           6.34       6.92
2015   175.94                             129.29      46.65           168.46        39.14        9.79             25%           7.34       13.15        8.89
 ∆                                          9%          8%             21%




                                                                                                                                                            27
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       While the impact of the 2015 tobacco tax increase is generating measurable
                       benefits, the price of cigarettes in China continues to be low and increasingly
                       affordable for a population that enjoys rapid wage increases. Indeed,
                       the tobacco tax rate in China is still relatively low compared to the WHO-
                       recommended benchmark, which is 75% of the retail price--the taxation level
                       recommended to have an impact on consumption. It is also below the rates
                       in OECD countries such as Australia (63%), Canada (65%), New Zealand (73%),
                       Germany (75%), France (80%), and in neighboring countries such as Thailand
                       (66%) and Philippines (64%).

                       Cigarette prices in China have also not increased much during the past
                       decade. According to the China National Statistical Yearbook, from 2000
                       to 2012 the price index of cigarettes rose by just 4% (year 2000=100,
                       2012=103.9). In contrast, food prices doubled (2000=100, 2012=195.1), the
                       alcohol price index increased by 40% (2000=100, 2012=140.90), and the price
                       of tea and soft drinks went up by 15% (2000=100, 2012=115.5). Therefore, the
                       rate of increase of cigarette prices in China is way behind that of many food
                       products (Hu, Zhang, and Zheng 2016).

                       Tobacco taxes must be increased regularly in order to reduce tobacco use.
                       Otherwise, if incomes rise more quickly than inflation, the relative cost of
                       tobacco products can actually decrease over time. This has been the case
                       in China over the last decade as the economy has grown, incomes have
                       increased, and tobacco products have become more affordable. China made
                       rapid economic growth between 2000 and 2012, with an annual rate of
                       GDP growth of more than 9%. During this period, the affordability index of
                       cigarette consumption in China increased from 1.00 in 2000 to 1.69 in 2012,
                       an almost 70% increase in purchasing power. As a result, cigarettes in China
                       are now about 70% more affordable than they were in the year 2000.

                       If the ultimate goal is to help smokers quit and prevent the next generation
                       from getting addicted to smoking cigarettes, then additional tobacco tax
                       policy reforms are needed in China, especially for re-orienting the excise
                       tax structure towards specific excise taxes at the retail level in the medium-
                       term and towards a uniform tax system at the retail level in the long-term,
                       because a simple and unified excise tax system that taxes all cigarettes
                       at the same level is more appropriate for reducing smoking while at the
                       same time leading to a more effective tax administration and higher tax
                       revenues. Additional tax increases adjusted for inflation and growing per
                       capita incomes are required to reduce affordability over time, and hence
                       consumption, tobacco-related diseases, and the risk of ill health, premature
                       mortality and disability. Also, the differential mixture of both ad valorem and
                       specific excises provides incentives for price manipulations to the extent that
                       manufacturers can alter their pricing or production behavior to avoid higher
                       tax liabilities.

28
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




If done, as estimated in a recent study, a 50% increase in tobacco price through
excise tax would lead over 10 years to 5.3 million years of life gained, and
reduce expenditures on tobacco-related disease treatment by US$2.4 billion
(Verguet, et al 2015).

Looking into the future, as evidenced in a 2011 World Bank study “Toward
a Healthy and Harmonious Life in China: Stemming the Rising Tide of Non-
Communicable Diseases”, with stronger tobacco control measures including
steeper tobacco tax increases, the rapid rise in China's non-communicable
diseases can be halted, resulting in major gains for people’s health and the
country’s social and economic development.

(vi) Philippines’s “Sin Tax Reform Law”

Jeremias Paul (former Under Secretary of Finance in the Philippines, and
currently Coordinator of the Tobacco Taxation Unit at WHO)

Philippines is among the top smoking countries in Southeast Asia, and tobacco
taxes and prices are among the lowest in the world. Strong tobacco lobby
hindered previous tobacco excise tax reform efforts. President Aquino promised
“no new taxes” during his campaign for office, the Philippines had ratified the
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2005 and the government
faced a one-year deadline for compliance to WTO decision on distilled spirits.
The rationale put forward by the Aquino Administration to enact the “sin tax”
reform was to help finance the expansion of Universal Health Care, address
public health issues relating to alcohol and tobacco consumption, and simplify
the current excise tax system on alcohol and tobacco products. The goals was
also to fix long standing, fiscal structural weaknesses such as removing the price/
brand classification freeze; level the playing field; reducing number of tax tiers;
and making the tax system more buoyant by indexing tax rates to inflation.

The adoption by Congress of the “Republic Act 10351 on Restructuring the
Excise Tax on Alcohol and Tobacco Products (RA 10351)” in December 2012
was a landmark legislation enacted under the Aquino Administration (it was
passed the Senate by only one vote). This law can be seen as a fundamentally
good governance measure with positive impact on both fiscal and public health.




                                                                                  29
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                             Philippine Tobacco Tax Reform Path at a Glance

                                 In Philippine Peso

35.00
                                                                                                       Unitary
                                               Tier 1
30.00   Premium
25.00
20.00                                         Tier 2
15.00
           High
10.00                           341%
        Medium
 5.00
           Low
 0.00
              2012              2013               2014               2015             2016            2017


Key Features                                            In Billion Pesos        2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
•	 Removal of price classification freez/tax            Projected Incremental
                                                                                23.4    29.6   33.5    37.1      40.9
    advantages of legacy brands.                        Revenue (Tobacco)
•	 Unitary tax structure 2017.                          Projected Incremental
                                                                                10.6    13.3   17.1   19.8       23.3
•	 Tax rates indexed to inflation starting 2017.        Revenue (Alcohol)

•	 Health impact/WHO FCTC compliance a                  Projected Incremental
                                                                                34.0    42.9   50.6   56.9       64.2
                                                        Revenue (Total)
    major consideration in rate setting.
                                                        Estimated Earmark for
•	 Bulk of incremental revenues earmarked                                       30.5    38.4   45.6   51.3       58.0
                                                        Health as of 2012
    for UHC.
•	 Safety nets for tobacco farmers /others.



                              Some of the key issues raised by the opponents of the “sin tax” law in regards to
                              raising tobacco taxes were that they will reduce, not increase revenues, adversely
                              affect tobacco farmers, increase smuggling and illicit trade, negatively impact
                              the poor, increase unemployment, and destroy the local tobacco industry.

                              The startup implementation of the “sin tax” law over 2013-2016, however, has
                              shown that in regards to revenues, the actual incremental revenues were higher
                              than projected, reversing the declining trend of tobacco and alcohol excise
                              collections to GDP.




30
                                                                               Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                                 Win for Revenues: Actual incremental revenues higher than projected
                                 Projected vs. Actual Incremental Revenue from RA 10351


                                                                                               50.19
                        80                                                                     8.8                                                       10
                        70                                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                  73.1
                                        50.15                     50.14                                                           64.2
                                                                                                                                                         8
                        60              6.1                       6.0                                                                                    7
Projected                                                                                                         34.9
                        50                                                                                                                               6
                                           31.2                       50.2               50.6
Actual
                        40                                  43.9                                                                                         5
BIR WAT
                        30        34                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                         3
                        20
                                  $0.80B




                                                             $0.97B

                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                  $1.29B




                                                                                                                                  $1.45B
                                                                                                  $1.61B
                                           $1.21B




                                                                      $1.13B




                                                                                         $1.11B
                        10                                                                                                                               1
                        0                                                                                                                                0
                                   2013                       2014                          2015                  2016        2017



                                 Win for Revenues: Sin Tax Law Reversed the Declining Trend of Tobacco
                                 and Alcohol Excise Collections to GDP | Tobacco & Alcohol Excise Collection



1.2%
1.1%                                                                                                                                                     1.1%
1.0%
        0.9%                                                                                                                  0.9%         0.9%
0.9%
                0.8%    0.8%    0.8%                0.8%
0.8%
0.7%                                       0.7%            0.7%       0.7%

0.6%                                                                             0.6%   0.6%      0.6%     0.6%
0.5%                                                                                                              0.5%
                                                                                                                           0.5%
0.4%
        1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015



                                Tobacco taxes accounted for the bulk of collections with share of tobacco excise
                                tax collections to GDP highest in 2015.

                                Win for Revenues: Tobacco Taxes Accounted for Bulk of Collections
                                with Share of Tobacco Excise Tax Collections to GDP Highest in 2015
                                Tobacco Excise Tax Collection
 0.8%
                                                                                                                                                          0.8%
 0.7%
                                                                                                                                  0.6%
 0.6%                                                                                                                                             0.6%
         0.5%            0.5%
                 0.5%            0.5%
 0.5%                                      0.4%     0.5%
                                                           0.4%       0.4%
 0.4%                                                                            0.3%    0.4%              0.4%
                                                                                                   0.3%
                                                                                                                  0.3%     0.3%
 0.3%
 0.2%
         1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       Along with other factors, like low inflation, high international reserves, declining
                       debt to GDP ratios, and good governance, the “sin tax” law also made it possible
                       to achieve Philippine’s first investment grade rating. The rating agencies
                       informed the Ministry of Finance that they were just waiting for this to happen
                       as approved by Congress 2012—the contribution of excise tax revenues from
                       tobacco increased from 0.3% to 0.8% of GDP over 2013-2016. Apart from tax
                       administration measures, this was the only tax policy measure adopted during
                       the Aquino Administration.

                       Win for the Economy: Adoption of Sin Tax Law contributed to
                       Philippines' First Investment Grade Rating.

                        MOODY'S                     Investment Grade Baa3 Positive (Oct. 3, 2013);
                                                    Upgraded to Baa2 Stable (Dec. 11, 2014)

                        FITCH RATINGS               Investment Grade BBB- Stable (March 27, 2013);
                                                    Affirmation (March 25, 2014);
                                                    Upgraded to BBB- Positive (Sept. 24, 2015)
                        STANDARD & POOR'S           Investment Grade BBB-/Stable (May 2, 2013)
                                                    Upgraded to BBB /Stable (May 8, 2014)
                                                    Affirmation (April 24, 2015)
                        JAPAN CREDIT RATING         Investment Grade BBB/Stable (May 7, 2013);
                        AGENCY (JCRA)               Affirmation (May 30, 2014);
                                                    Upgraded to BBB+/Stable (July 6, 2015)
                        RATING & INVESTMENT         Investment Grade BBB/Stable (July 9, 2014);
                        (R&I) INFORMATION, INC.     Affirmation (July 20, 2015)




                       For Public Health, the Health Budget is now almost triple 2012 levels. As
                       mandated by the “sin tax” law, the incremental revenues from the tax collection
                       were earmarked for health following regular budgetary processes. Section 8
                       (C) of the Republic Act 10351 states that after deducting the allocations under
                       Republic Act Nos. 7171 and 8240 (allocations to tobacco farmers), 80% should be
                       allocated to the National Health Insurance Program, and 20% to the Ministry of
                       Health’s health enhancement facilities program.




32
                                                                      Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                                   Win for Public Health: Health Budget Almost Triple 2012 Levels
                                   DOH Budget (In B PhP)


        35.00
                                                                                                                                     122.6
        30.00
        25.00                                                                                                             87.0
                                                                                                               83.7
        20.00
        15.00                                                                                    53.3
                                                                                      42.2
        10.00                                                            31.8
                                               23.7         24.6
                                   18.9
         5.00        11.4

         0.00
                    2007         2008         2009         2010         2011          2012       2013          2014      2015      2016


                                    The tax revenue collected from the application of the “sin tax” law increased the
                                    number of people with free health insurance—from 5.2 million poor primary
                                    members in 2012 to 15.4 million in 2015.

                                    Win for the Poor: National Government Allocation for Health Insurance
                                    Premiums for the Poor


50.0                                                                                                           $0.92B
                                                                                                               43.8
45.0                                                                                                  $0.82B            Sin Tax Law
                                                                                               $0.79B 37.1              increased the
40.0                                                                                           35.3                     number of people
35.0                                                                                                                    with free health
30.0                                                                                                                    insurance -- from
25.0                                                                                                                    5.2 million poor
                                                                                                                        primary members
20.0                                                                              $0.30B                                in 2012 to 15.4
                                                                                  12.5       $0.30B
15.0                                                                                         12.6                       million in 2015.
10.0                                                    $0.10B $0.10B $0.11B $0.08B
                                          $0.06B $0.08B 4.5    5.0    5.0
       $0.01B $0.01B $0.01B $0.01B $0.02B 2.9    3.5                         3.5
 5.0   0.5    0.5    0.5    0.5    0.8
 0.0
       2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016



                                    Additionally, smoking prevalence has declined among the young and poor.
                                    Results of the Smoking Prevalence Study done by Dans et al based on National
                                    Nutrition Health Survey 2013 and 2015 data, showed that:

                                    •	    Prevalence of smoking among adult Filipinos went down from 31.0% in
                                          2008 to 25.4% in 2013, and then to 23.3% in 2015.
                                    •	    There are about 4.0 million less smokers in the country because of the
                                          application of the “sin tax” law. The drop is partly from people who stopped
                                          smoking, but mostly from people who avoid starting to smoke.
                                    •	    At least 70,000 death have been averted since 2013.
                                                                                                                                      33
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       The experience in the Philippines show that raising tobacco taxes is an
                       easy way to raise domestic revenues for health while reducing health risks
                       associated with tobacco-related diseases. Framing the “sin tax” law as a health
                       measure allowed the Philippines to raise tobacco taxes substantially, than
                       otherwise possible if it was framed as a revenue measure. Political support at the
                       highest level was critical for ensuring the approval of the law in Congress. The
                       collaboration established between the ministries of finance, health, and other
                       ministries was important as the government agencies need to collaborate and
                       adopt a systems and whole of government/society approach. It is also important
                       to be vigilant and systematically monitor progress and outcomes.
                        
                       (vii) Uruguay’s Experience

                       Fernando Serra (Director of the Tax Advisory Unit at the Ministry of Economy
                       and Finance of Uruguay)

                       Uruguay became a Party to the World Health Organization (WHO) Framework
                       Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) on September 9, 2004, and has adopted
                       some of the most comprehensive tobacco control laws in the world, including
                       Latin America’s first ban on smoking in enclosed public places in 2006, the
                       world’s largest pictorial warnings on 80% of the front and back of the pack in
                       2009, and the first ever ban on differentiated branding (i.e., applying the same
                       brand to a family of tobacco products) in February 2009. Additionally, Uruguay
                       has legislation to counter illegal trade of tobacco products, where contraband
                       is viewed as a customs infringement that is dealt with in civil and criminal law,
                       and ratified the FCTC’s Protocol on Illicit Trade on Tobacco in 2014.

                       Uruguay has also imposed several tax increases on tobacco products since
                       2005, with tax increases adopted in 2007 and 2010, including excise taxes
                       (impuestos especificos internos or IMESI) and VAT, as well as increases in the
                       "precios fictos" (("precios fictos" are ex factory and/or whole sale prices of
                       cigarettes multiplied by a Government-determined coeficient):




34
                                                   Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




                        Tobacco Tax Policy Measures adopted over 2005-2016

2005                     2007                         2009 | 2010                   2014 | 2015 | 2016


Decree 164/005:          Tax Reform Law 18.083        Decree 268/009:               Decree 375/014:
Increases the excise     of 2007: Introduces          Increases the "precios        Increases "precios
tax rate (IMESI) on      value added taxes            fictos" for taxing            fictos" for taxing
cigarettes to 68.5%      (VAT) on tobacco             cigarettes and                cigarettes and other
and hand roll tobacco    products, which              smoking supplies by           tobacco products by
to 28%                   were except from             30%                           8.7%
                         VAT before
                                                      Decree 09/010:                Decree 164/015:
                         Law 18.083:                  Increases "precios            Increases "precios
                         Establishes "precios         fictos" for taxing            fictos" for taxing
                         fictos" for taxing           cigarettes and other          cigarettes and other
                         cigarettes and other         tobacco products              tobacco products
                         tobacco products             by 35%                        by 10%
                         ("precios fictos" are
                         ex factory and/or            Decree 09/010:                Decree 11/016:
                         whole sale prices of         Increases the tax rate        Increases "precios
                         cigarettes multiplied        on duty free cigarettes       fictos" for taxing
                         by a Government-             and other tobacco             cigarettes and other
                         determined                   products to 70%               tobacco products
                         coeficient)                                                by 15.5%



                        In 2016, IMESI and VAT taxes accounted for 66% of the retail price for the most
                        popular brand. The increase in tobacco taxes has resulted in higher prices and
                        tax revenue collected, in spite of lower volume of sales. The public health impact
                        has been significant as well: prevalence among the adult population dropped
                        from 33.5% in 2005 to 22% 2016, and among the youth from in 22.8% 2005 to
                        8.2% 2016. In addition, over the 2005-2016 period, the contamination of air in
                        public spaces due to smoking was reduced by 90%.




                                                                                                           35
    Expanding the Global Tax Base




                              Results

                              Beginning in July 2007, a VAT tax of 22% is imposed on cigarettes* on top of the
                              IMESI excise tax. In subsequent years, the base price for taxing cigarettes and other
                              tobacco products was increased.

                              Tobacco Tax Increases, 2007-2016

                                                           EXCISE TAX       VAT /        COFIS /       TOTAL
        PERIOD                      MEASURE                 / RETAIL       RETAIL        RETAIL       TAX BUR-
                                                              PRICE        PRICE          PRICE         DEN
        Until July 2007             Tax Exempt                62%            0%             3%            64%
        After July 2007          22% VAT adopted              48%            18%            0%            66%
                              Increase in the base price
        After June 2009                                       47%            18%            0%            65%
                                  for taxing tobacco
                              Increase in the base price
        After February 2010                                   54%            18%            0%            72%
                                  for taxing tobacco
                              Increase in the base price
        After December 2014                                   48%            18%            0%            66%
                                  for taxing tobacco
                              Increase in the base price
        After June 2015                                       48%            18%            0%            66%
                                  for taxing tobacco
                              Increase in the base price
        After January 2016                                    47%            18%            0%            66%
                                  for taxing tobacco
                              *Pack of 20 cigarettes

                              As shown in the graph below, the tax policy measures adopted over the 2007-
                              2016 period have led to significant tax revenue collected from excise taxes + VAT
                              in real terms.

                              Impact on the Tax Revenue Collected (IMESI Excise Tax and VAT)
                              Sales and Tax Revenue Collected, by year, base year Dec 1999 = 100



150.0
140.0
130.0
120.0
110.0
100.0
 90.0
 80.0
 70.0
 60.0
 50.0
         DEC
         1999
        JUNE
         2000
         DEC
         2000
        JUNE
         2001
         DEC
         2001
        JUNE
         2002
         DEC
         2002
        JUNE
         2003
         DEC
         2003
        JUNE
         2004
         DEC
         2004
        JUNE
         2005
         DEC
         2005
        JUNE
         2006
         DEC
         2006
        JUNE
         2007
         DEC
         2007
        JUNE
         2008
         DEC
         2008
        JUNE
         2009
         DEC
         2009
        JUNE
         2010
         DEC
         2010
        JUNE
         2011
         DEC
         2011
        JUNE
         2012
         DEC
         2012
        JUNE
         2013
         DEC
         2013
        JUNE
         2014
         DEC
         2014
        JUNE
         2015
         DEC
         2015




                                  Total Sales       Tax Revenue collected from      Tax Revenue collected from
                                                    excise taxes in real terms      excise taxes + VAT in real terms
    36
                          Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




Litigation Experience with the Tobacco Industry

Uruguay, a small country in South America, offers a good example of how a
government that is committed to protecting the health and wellbeing of its
people was able to withstand for more than 6 years the pressure of litigation
from a giant multinational tobacco company, whose annual revenues of
more than US$80 billion exceed the country’s gross domestic product of
close to US$50 billion. As discussed in detail below, Philip Morris started legal
proceedings against the Government of Uruguay in February 2010 claiming
that the comprehensive tobacco control measures adopted by the Government
since 2003 violated obligations under international trade and investment
arrangements.

At its core, the lawsuit opposed provisions in two tobacco control measures
adopted by the Government of Uruguay for protecting public health from the
adverse effects of tobacco promotion, including “false” marketing that certain
brand variants are safer than others, even after misleading descriptors such as
“light,”“mild,”“ultra-light” were banned, and to increase consumer awareness of
the health risks of tobacco consumption and encourage people, particularly the
youth, to quit or not to take up smoking.

Ordinance 514 issued by the Ministry of Public Health in 2008 requires each
cigarette brand to have a “single presentation” and prohibits different packaging
or “variants” for cigarettes sold under a given brand. Presidential Decree 287
of 2009 mandates an increase in the size of prescribed health warnings of the
surface of the front and back of the cigarette packages from 50% to 80%, leaving
only 20% of the cigarette pack for trademarks, logos and other information.
The application of these provisions forced Philip Morris to withdraw most of its
brands (such as Marlboro Red, Marlboro Gold, or Marlboro Green) from retail
stores in Uruguay.

On July 8, 2016, however, the International Center of Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), an independent arm of the World Bank Group, dismissed the
lawsuit in its entirety and ruled that Uruguay should be awarded compensation
for all the expenses and costs associated with defending against these claims.
In essence, the ruling accepted the claim made by the Government of Uruguay
that its anti-tobacco measures were “about protection of public health, not
interference with foreign investment.”




                                                                                  37
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       As Uruguay’s President, Dr. Tabaré Vázquez, an oncologist, stated in a televised
                       address to the country after the ruling, the ICSID award reinforces that “it is not
                       acceptable to prioritize commercial considerations over the fundamental
                       right to health and life.” Indeed, as observed by former New York City Mayor
                       Michael Bloomberg, an international public health champion, who provided
                       financial support to help Uruguay deal with the litigation: “No country should
                       be ever be intimidated by the threat of a tobacco company lawsuit, and this
                       case will help embolden more nations to take actions that will save lives.”
                       Now, countries across the world have an important legal precedent to follow in
                       adopting tobacco control policies for the benefit of their population.



                       Conclusions

                       If development is lifting up lives, and new and innovative approaches for funding
                       development are seen as “game changers,” then it could be argued that the
                       development community needs to redouble its commitment to advocate with
                       national governments and society at large for raising taxes on tobacco products.
                       As shown by the different country experiences, taxing tobacco is one of the most
                       cost-effective measures to reduce consumption of products that kill prematurely,
                       make people ill with all kinds of tobacco-related diseases (e.g., cancer, heart disease,
                       respiratory illnesses), and cost health systems enormous amounts of money for
                       treating often preventable diseases.

                       In addition, hiking tobacco taxes can help expand a country’s tax base to mobilize
                       needed public revenue to fund vital investments and essential public services
                       that benefit the entire population and help build the human capital base of
                       countries, such as financing the progressive realization of universal health coverage
                       and mental health scale-up as well as education for all and early childhood
                       development initiatives.

                       The experience of the United States, China, Philippines, and Uruguay offers lessons
                       that are applicable to a broad range of countries in both the developed and
                       developing world. Indeed, for a number of years now the World Bank, the World
                       Health Organization (WHO) and others have promoted the use of tobacco taxes
                       as the most effective means of reducing smoking presence on a global level. If
                       anything, the use of taxation as a means of reducing the prevalence of smoking
                       may be even more effective in developing countries going forward.




38
                            Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




While estimates of price elasticities of demand for cigarettes across countries vary
somewhat widely from study to study, studies of low- and middle-income countries
have generally (though not always) found that demand for tobacco is even more
price-responsive than in high-income countries (Chaloupka et al.2000; WHO 2010).
A broad range of studies of population subgroups within low-and middle-income
countries (e.g. Sayginsoy,Yurelki, de Beyer 2002; van Walbeek 2002) have also found
that price-responsiveness is negatively correlated with income, as in developed
countries.

And, just as in the United States, non-harmonization of taxes across different
tobacco products has been shown to lead to substitution of lower-taxed products
for higher-taxed products in developing countries (see, for example, Laxminarayan
and Deolalikar 2004 for evidence from Vietnam), blunting the effectiveness of
taxation as a means to reduce the overall prevalence of tobacco use.

Developing countries may face unique challenges in governance and the efficacy
of taxation that may complicate the use of tobacco taxes as a public health
measure. But to the extent that these research findings hold true broadly, the
lessons laid out regarding the United States, China, Philippines, and Uruguay are a
reason why it is so important to overcome those challenges rather than use them
as an excuse for inaction. Also, it is important to keep in mind that tobacco taxation
is a critical public policy measure that needs to be prioritized and supported
as it would contribute to the achievement of WHO's goal to reduce tobacco
consumption globally by 25% by 2025 and the Sustainable Development Goal
target to reduce premature deaths from noncommunicable diseases by a third by
2030 (Lancet Editorial, Jan. 21 2017).




                                                                                     39
40
40
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




Annex 1
Agenda for Session: Expanding the Global Tax Base: Taxing
to Promote Public Goods, Tobacco Taxes

Tuesday, May 24, 2016
8:15-11:00am
World Bank Group
Preston Auditorium
Washington D.C.

This session examined the use of tobacco taxes to reduce harmful behavior for
health, and prevent ill health, premature mortality and disability while raising
fiscal revenues and reducing health care expenditures, with particular lessons
for developing countries.

Link to the webcast: http://live.worldbank.org/winning-the-tax-wars

8:15 – 9:00: Coffee

Introduction to the topic: Patricio V. Marquez, Lead Public Health Specialist,
WBG HNP Global Practice

9:00 – 10:30: Speakers:

“Phishing for Phools: Smoking and Health”: Prof. George Akerlof, 2001 Nobel Prize
Laureate in Economics, and University Professor at Georgetown University

 “Paying the Tab” The Costs and Benefits of Tobacco and Alcohol Control”: Prof.
Philip Cook, ITT/Terry Sanford Professor of Public Policy Studies, Duke University,
and author of seminal book “Paying the Tab”
 




                                                                                   41
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                       Panelists:

                       “Policy, Politics, and the Tripling of Federal Tobacco Taxes in the United States to
                       Deter People from Smoking, Save Lives, and Mobilize Revenue over the last 30
                       years”: Jason Furman, Chairman, President’s Council of Economic Advisers,
                       Executive Office of the President of the United States

                       “The Impact of the 2013 Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines”: Jeremias Paul,
                       formerly Under Secretary of Finance of the Philippines and now Coordinator,
                       Tobacco Economics Program, WHO.

                       “2015 Tobacco Taxation Reform in China: Results and Challenges”: Rose
                       Zheng, Director, WHO Collaborating Center for Tobacco and Economics
                       Professor, School of International Trade and Economics (SITE), University of
                       International Business and Economics (UIBE), Beijing, China.

                       “Tobacco Taxation and International Litigation: Uruguay’s Experience”:
                       Fernando Serra Director of the Tax Advisory Unit at the Ministry of Economy
                       and Finance of Uruguay.

                       10:30 – 11:00: Coffee Break. Book Signing

                       “Phishing for Phools. The Economics of Manipulation & Deception” by Prof.
                       George A. Akerlof and Prof. Reobert J. Shiller.

                       “Paying the Tab” and Tobacco and Alcohol Taxation” by Prof. Philip Cook, ITT/
                       Terry Sanford Professor of Public Policy Studies, Duke University.




42
                           Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




(from left to right)

Patricio V. Marquez
Lead Public Health Specialist, World Bank Group

Fernando Serra
Director of the Tax Advisory Unit at the Ministry of Economy and Finance
of Uruguay.

Prof. Philip Cook
ITT/Terry Sanford Professor of Public Policy Studies, Duke University.

Prof. George Akerlof
2001 Nobel Prize Laureate in Economics, and University Professor at
Georgetown University.

Jason Furman
Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers, Executive Office of the President
of the United States (appointed by President Barack Obama on June 10, 2013).

Jeremias Paul
formerly Under Secretary of Finance of the Philippines and now Coordinator,
Tobacco Economics Program, WHO.

Rose Zheng
Director, WHO Collaborating Center for Tobacco and Economics Professor,
School of International Trade and Economics (SITE), University of International
Business and Economics (UIBE), Beijing, China.




                                                                                  43
Expanding the Global Tax Base




                                References
                                 Akerloff, G.A. 2016. “Phishing for Phools: The Economics of
                                Manipulation and Deception, Taxing to Promote Public Goods,
                                and Tobacco Taxes.” Presentation at World Bank Conference:
                                “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing
                                Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
                                health/brief/tobacco

                                Akerlof, G.A., Shiller, R.J. 2015. Phishing for Phools: The
                                Economics of Manipulation and Deception. New Jersey:
                                Princeton University Press.

                                Brumby, J. 2014. “The seven salvos of sin (taxes)”. The World
                                Bank Blogs, March 25, 2014. Available at: http://blogs.
                                worldbank.org/health/seven-salvos-sin-taxes

                                Carpenter, C, and Cook, P.J. 2008. “Cigarette Taxes and Youth
                                Smoking: New Evidence from National, State, and Local Youth
                                Risk Behavior Surveys.” Journal of Health Economics 27 (2): 287-299.

                                Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2016. “Table
                                17. Age-Adjusted Death Rates for Selected Causes of Death,
                                by Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin: United States, Selected Years
                                1950-2014.” National Center for Health Statistics.

                                Chaloupka, F.J., Hu, T-w., Warner, K.E., Jacobs, R., and Yurekli, A.
                                2000. “The Taxation of Tobacco Products.” In Jha, Prabhat and
                                Frank J. Chaloupa, eds., Tobacco Control in Developing Countries.

                                Chaloupka, F.J., and Warner, K.E.. 2000. “The Economics of
                                Smoking.” Handbook of Health Economics 1B: 1539–1627.

                                Chetty, R, Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Lin, S., Scuderi, B., Turner,
                                N., Bergeron, A. and Cutler, D. 2016. “The Association Between
                                Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014.”
                                Journal of the American Medical Association 315 (16): 1750-1766

                                Conference of the Parties to the WHO Framework Convention
                                on Tobacco Control (FCTC). 2016. “Delhi Declaration.” Seventh
                                session Delhi, India, 7 12 November 2016. http://www.who.int/
                                fctc/cop/cop7/FCTC_COP7_29_EN.pdf?ua=1

                                Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2012. “Raising the Excise Tax
                                on Cigarettes: Effects on Health and the Federal Budget.” Report.

                                Cook., P.J. 2011. Paying the Tab: The Costs and Benefits of Alcohol
                                Control. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

                                Cook, P. 2016. “Paying the Tab” The Costs and Benefits of
                                Tobacco and Alcohol Control.” Presentation at World Bank

44
                                                                   Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for             Huang, J and Chaloupka, F.J.. 2012. “The Impact of the 2009
Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.          Federal Tobacco Excise Tax Increase on Youth Tobacco Use.”
org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco                                   NBER Working Paper No. 18026.

Council of Economic Advisers (CEA). 2016. “Inequality in Early      International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 2011.
Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions.” 2016          “Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for Tobacco Control.” IARC
Economic Report of the President.                                   Handbooks of Cancer Prevention: Tobacco Control, Vol. 14.

Currie, J and Schwandt, H. 2016. “Mortality Inequality: The         Jha, P. and Chaloupka, F.J. 1999. Curbing the Epidemic:
Good News from a County-Level Approach.” Journal of                 Governments and the Economics of Tobacco Control.
Economic Perspectives 30 (2): 29-52.                                Washington, DC: World Bank.

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). 2015.                Jha, P. and Peto. R. 2014. “Global Effects of Smoking, of
“Valuing Utility Offsets to Regulations Affecting Addictive or      Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco”. N Engl J Med 370:60-
Habitual Goods.” Report.                                            68. Available at: http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
                                                                    NEJMra1308383#t=article
Fuchs, A., and Meneses, F. 2017. “Are tobacco taxes really
regressive? : evidence from Chile.” Washington, D.C. : World        Jha, P., Marquez, P.V., and Dutta, S. 2017. “Tripling Tobacco
Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/                 Taxes: Key for Achieving the UN Sustainable Development
en/389891484567069411/Are-tobacco-taxes-really-regressive-          Goals by 2030.” The World Bank Blogs, January 24, 2017.
evidence-from-Chile                                                 Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/role-excise-
                                                                    tax-meeting-sdg
Furman, J. 2016. “Policy, Politics, and the Tripling of Federal
Tobacco Taxes in the United States to Deter People from             Kaiser, K, Bredenkamp, C., Iglesias, R. 2016. “Sin Tax Reform
Smoking, Save Lives, and Mobilize Revenue over the last 30          in the Philippines: Transforming Public Finance, Health, and
years. Six Lessons from the U.S. Experience with Tobacco            Governance for More Inclusive Development. Directions in
Taxes.” Presentation at World Bank Conference: “Winning the         Development--Countries and Regions”. Washington, DC:
Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” May           World Bank. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.
24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/           org/handle/10986/24617
tobacco
                                                                    Kremer, A. 2016. “Do the right thing: Tax tobacco!” The World
Gallet, C. and List, J.A.. 2003. “Cigarette Demand: A Meta-         Bank Blogs, December 13, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.
Analysis of Elasticities.” Health Economics 12 (10): 821-835.       worldbank.org/europeandcentralasia/do-right-thing-tax-
                                                                    tobacco
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2012. “Tobacco
Taxes: Large Disparities in Rates for Smoking Products Trigger      Laxminarayan, R, and Deolalikar, A. 2004. “Tobacco Initiation,
Significant Market Shifts to Avoid Higher Taxes.” Report No.        Cessation, and Change: Evidence from Vietnam." Health
GAO-12-475.                                                         Economics 13 (12): 1191-1201.

Gruber, J., and B. Koszegi. 2001. “Is Addiction Rational? Theory    Lancet Editorial. 2017. "Tobacco Elimination; Economic and
and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4):1261–          Public Health Imperative." The Lancet: Vol 389: 225. January 21,
1303.                                                               2017.

Gruber, J. 2008. “A Modern Economic View of Tobacco                 Marquez, P. V. 2012. “Tobacco Kills: So what to do in Africa?”
Taxation”. Paris: International Union Against Tuberculosis and      The World Bank Blogs, May 15, 2012. Available at: http://blogs.
Lung Disease.                                                       worldbank.org/nasikiliza/tobacco-kills-so-what-to-do-in-africa

Hu, T-w. (editor). 2016. Economics of Tobacco Control in            Marquez, P.V. 2013. “Back from the Cold: Russia Confronts
China: From Policy Research to Practice. Hackensack, NJ: World      Tobacco.” The World Bank Blogs, April 5, 2013. Available at:
Scientific Publishing.                                              http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/back-from-the-cold-russia-
                                                                    confronts-tobacco


                                                                                                                                      45
Expanding the Global Tax Base




Marquez, P. V. 2014. “The Tobacco Dilemma: Corporate Profits       Marquez, P.V. 2016. “Plain packaging & tobacco taxes: an
or Customers’ Health?.” The World Bank Blogs, March 26, 2014.      antidote for manipulation and deception.” The World Bank
Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/tobacco-           Blogs, May 31, 2016. Available at: https://blogs.worldbank.
dilemma-corporate-profits-or-customers-health                      org/health/plain-packaging-tobacco-taxes-antidote-
                                                                   manipulation-and-deception
Marquez, P.V. 2015. “Good News from the Global War on
Tobacco Use.” The World Bank Blogs, March 26, 2015. Available      Marquez, P.V., and Walker, M. 2016. “Uruguay: A giant leap
at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/good-news-global-war-        to prevent tobacco-assisted suicide.. The World Bank Blogs,
tobacco-use                                                        October 10, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/
                                                                   health/uruguay-giant-leap-prevent-tobacco-assisted-suicide
Marquez, P.V. 2015. “World No Tobacco Day 2015: On illicit
trade and taxes.” The World Bank Blogs, May 29, 2015. Available    Marquez, P.V., and Zheng, R. 2016. “China’s 2015 tobacco
at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/world-no-tobacco-day-        tax adjustment: a step in the right direction.” The World
2015-illicit-trade-and-taxes                                       Bank Blogs, November 9, 2016. Available at: https://blogs.
                                                                   worldbank.org/health/china-s-2015-tobacco-tax-adjustment-
Marquez, P. V. 2015. “Making the public health case for tobacco    step-right-direction
taxation.” The World Bank Blogs, July 7, 2015. Available at:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/making-public-health-case-       Marquez, P.V., and Walker, M. 2017. “Healthy women are
tobacco-taxation                                                   the cornerstone of healthy societies.’ The World Bank Blogs,
                                                                   January 12, 2017. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/
Marquez, P.V. 2015. “Running away from “Tobacco Road”. The         health/healthy-women-are-cornerstone-healthy-societies
World Bank Blogs, December 15, 2015. Available at: http://
blogs.worldbank.org/health/running-away-tobacco-road               National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
                                                                   2015. The Growing Gap in Life Expectancy by Income:
Marquez, PV. 2016. “Time to put “health” into universal health     Implications for Federal Programs and Policy Responses.
coverage.” The World Bank Blogs, January 14, 2016. Available       Washington: National Academies Press.
at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/time-put-health-
universal-health-coverage                                          Orzechowski and Walker. 2015. The Tax Burden on Tobacco:
                                                                   Historical Compilation, Volume 49, 2014. Arlington, VA.
Marquez, P. V., and Moreno-Dodson, B. 2016. “Economic
slowdown and financial shocks: Can tobacco tax increases           Paul, J. 2016. “The Impact of the 2013 Sin Tax Reform in the
help?.” The World Bank Blogs, February 8, 2016. Available at:      Philippines.” Presentation at World Bank Conference: “Winning
http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/economic-slowdown-and-           the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for Developing Countries,” May
financial-shocks-can-tobacco-tax-increases-help                    24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/
                                                                   tobacco
Marquez, P.V. 2016. “Economic slowdown and financial shocks:
can tobacco tax increases help? The World Bank Blogs, Feb          Petit, P., and Nagy, J. 2016. “How to design and enforce
8, 2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/          tobacco excises?” How to notes. Fiscal Affairs Department,
economic-slowdown-and-financial-shocks-can-tobacco-tax             International Monetary Fund, October 2016.
increases-help.
                                                                   Rosenberg, J. 2015. “The Distributional Burden of Federal Excise
Marquez, P.V. 2016. “Taxing tobacco and the new vision for         Taxes.” Tax Policy Center. Report.
financing development.” The World Bank Blogs, April 18,
2016. Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/taxing-      Savedoff, W. and Alwang, A. 2015. "The Single Best Health
tobacco-and-new-vision-financing-development                       Policy in the World: Tobacco Taxes." CGD Policy Paper 062.
                                                                   Washington DC: Center for Global Development. http://
Marquez, P.V. 2016. “Overview of Session.” Presentation at World   www.cgdev.org/publication/single-best-health-policy-world-
Bank Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for       tobacco-taxes
Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.
org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco




46
                                                                   Taxing to Promote Public Goods: Tobacco Taxes




Sayginsoy, O, Yurekli, A.A., and de Beyer, J. 2002. “Cigarette       World Health Organization. “WHO framework convention on
Demand, Taxation, and the Poor: A Case Study of Bulgaria.”           tobacco control.” http://www.who.int/fctc/en/
Health, Nutrition, and Population Discussion Paper, Economics
of Tobacco Control Paper No. 4.                                      World Health Organization (WHO). 2010. “WHO Technical
                                                                     Manual on Tobacco Tax Administration.”
Schelling, T.C. 1986. “Economics and Cigarettes.” Preventive
Medicine 15:549-560.                                                 World Health Organization. 2015. “WHO Report on the Global
                                                                     Tobacco Epidemic, 2015: Raising Taxes on Tobacco.” Report.
Schelling, T.C. 1992. “Addictive drugs: the cigarette
experience.” Science: 255:5043: 430+. Science in Context,            Yach, D., and H. Wipfli. 2006. “A Century of Smoke.” Annals of
link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/A11922197/SCIC?u=duke_                   Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 100(5–6):465–79.
perkins&xid=c8222b07. Accessed 18 Dec. 2016.
                                                                     Zheng, R. 2016. “2015 Tobacco Taxation Reform in China:
Serra, F. 2016. “Tobacco Taxation and International                  Results and Challenges.” Presentation at World Bank
Litigation: Uruguay’s Experience.” Presentation at World             Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for
Bank Conference: “Winning the Tax Wars: Global Solutions for         Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.
Developing Countries,” May 24, 2016. http://www.worldbank.           org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco
org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco

Sunley, E. 2009. “Taxation of cigarettes in the Bloomberg
Initiative Countries: overview of policy issues and proposals
for reform.” http://www.tobaccofreeunion.org/assets/
Technical%20Resources/Economic%20Reports/Sunley%20
White%20paper%2012%2009%2009.pdf

Surgeon General of the United States. 2014. “The Health
Consequences of Smoking—50 Years of Progress.” Report.

U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization.
2016. “The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Control.”
National Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 21. NIH
Publication No. 16-CA-8029A. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Cancer Institute; and Geneva, CH: World Health
Organization; 2016. This monograph and its supplemental
materials may be found electronically at http://cancercontrol.
cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/21/index.html

van Hasselt, M, Kruger, J. Han, B, Caraballo, R.S., Penne, M.A.,
Loomis, B. and Gfroerer, J.C.. 2015. “The Relation Between
Tobacco Taxes and Youth and Young Adult Smoking: What
Happened Following the 2009 U.S. Federal Tax Increase on
Cigarettes?” Addictive Behaviors 45: 104-109.

van Walbeek, C. P. 2002. “The Distributional Impact of Tobacco
Excise Increases” South African Journal of Economics 70 (3):
258-267.

World Bank Group. Global Tobacco Control Progam website:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/brief/tobacco




                                                                                                                                      47
