Systematic Property Registration:
      Risks and Remedies



           May 2016




                                    1
Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 3
Part 1     Design ................................................................................................................. 6
   1. Lack of documents that establish rights ...................................................................... 6
   Box: Basic Design of First Registration Program......................................................... 10
   2. Taxes ......................................................................................................................... 11
   3. Appropriate dispute resolution mechanisms ............................................................. 14
   4. Informal buildings ..................................................................................................... 18
   5. Elite capture .............................................................................................................. 21
   6. Subsequent registration system ................................................................................. 23
Part 2     Implementation ................................................................................................. 25
   7. Communications and engagement ............................................................................ 25
   8. Effective public display ............................................................................................ 28
   9. Corruption and improper influence ........................................................................... 31
   10. Staff instructions and training ................................................................................. 33
Part 3     Owners .............................................................................................................. 37
   11. Failure to capture all rights and right holders ......................................................... 37
   12. State land................................................................................................................. 42
   13. Women, minorities, children................................................................................... 46
   14. Indigenous Peoples with Customary Tenure Systems ............................................ 49
Part 4     Legal Issues ....................................................................................................... 52
   15. Constitutional concerns ........................................................................................... 52
   16. Legislative basis ...................................................................................................... 55
   17. Legal aspects of area ............................................................................................... 58
Conclusions ....................................................................................................................... 60




This paper was prepared by Tony Lamb, with inputs from Victor Endo and under the
supervision of Victoria Stanley. The work was financed by the Government of Japan
through the Policy and Human Resources Development Technical Assistance Program
(PHRD) as part of a broader initiative to disseminate the Voluntary Guidelines on the
Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of
National Food Security.



                                                                                                                                      2
Introduction
This paper looks at a variety of technical issues, challenges and problems that arise during
systematic first registration programs, their causes and what can be done to deal with them.
Its aim is to provide practical advice to those who are designing or engaged in first
registration programs that use the systematic adjudication approach and also those who
supervise such programs so that the issues covered in this paper can be eliminated or their
negative impact reduced. The paper draws primarily from the land registration experience
in the Europe and Central Asia region and uses examples from that region, but as relevant,
examples from elsewhere are included.

The discussion of issues in first registration has been informed by the Voluntary Guidelines
on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of
National Food Security, or VGGT, which was adopted by the Committee on Food Security
in May 2012.1 The following pages seek to expand on several of the provisions in that
document, particularly general principle number 1, which provides that:

           States should recognize and respect all legitimate tenure right holders and their
           rights. They should take reasonable measures to identify, record and respect
           legitimate tenure right holders and their rights, whether formally recorded or
           not ...

And general principle number 3, which provides that:

           States should promote and facilitate the enjoyment of legitimate tenure
           rights. They should take active measures to promote and facilitate the full
           realization of tenure rights or the making of transactions with the rights, such
           as ensuring that services are accessible to all.

The ten principles of implementation, which cover such matters as equity and justice,
gender equality, consultation and participation, transparency and continuous improvements
are also highly relevant to the following discussion. In terms of the specific guidance
included in the VGGT, Part 5 of the Administration of Tenure (particularly section 17 on
recording of tenure rights) is very relevant, as are Part 3 on the legal recognition and
allocation of tenure rights and duties, and the various provisions covering policy and legal
frameworks and delivery of services that appear in Part 2 of the VGGT.

This paper is divided into four parts: 1) Design, 2) Implementation, 3) Owners and 4) Legal
Issues. There are 16 topics, and each is discussed under the following headings:

          What is this issue about?

          Why does this issue matter for first registration?


1
    http://www.fao.org/nr/tenure/voluntary-guidelines/en/


                                                                                               3
       What are the causes of this issue?

       What can be done to deal with this issue?

Except to the extent that they impact on systematic registration programs, this paper does
not consider other types of land programs, such as land allocation, consolidation,
redistribution and legalization of informal rights over land and buildings. These are very
important but separate topics, and they deserve to be addressed in their own right. This is,
perhaps, somewhat of an artificial distinction for many involved in first registration
because land allocation or legalization activities can be rolled into a program, so what
people see is a seamless process of being granted land and having that land recorded by the
government. However, given space limitation, this paper focuses on only the rather
technical issues that are specific to first registration programs.

Nor does this paper deal with matters of general relevance to programs, such as:

       political will and leadership, without which no amount of resources, technical
        assistance or dedication of staff can make a program succeed;
       clear, workable institutional arrangements, without which time and money will be
        wasted while competing institutions fight or fail to cooperate;2
       thorough supervision and quality control, which is essential to any large-scale
        enterprise;
       allocation of adequate resources, without which program timetables will slip,
        existing resources will sit idle, and outcomes will be substandard;
       project management and scheduling of activities, which are fundamental to a
        smooth and efficient roll out of a program;
       monitoring and evaluation, which is essential to the efficiency and improved
        allocation of resources for programs that run over several years; and
       reporting, which aids not only good management but also the transparency and
        public acceptance of a program.

This is not to say that these matters are not relevant, but rather to put a limit on the topics
covered by this paper, otherwise it would run to several hundred pages. However, they
should be kept in mind while reading the following pages because they form the backdrop
to the technical matters being discussed.

Thus, this paper focuses on technical issues that are specific to programs for first
registration of existing rights by means of systematic adjudication, which will be referred
to as “systematic registration”.

It is assumed that the reader has a basic understanding of the steps and overall process of
systematic registration, which involves the investigation and determination of boundaries,
2
 For a discussion of institutional matters, see a review of 14 land administration programs by the World
Bank Group’s Independent Evaluation Group:
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/lessons-land-administration-projects-review-project-
performance-assessments


                                                                                                           4
rights and ownership on a mass scale in selected geographic areas. In summary, the main
stages of the process are as follows:

      Design and preparation: identifying areas to be covered, drafting of
       laws/regulations to support the program, preparing staff instructions, forms and
       publicity strategy and materials, recruiting and training of staff, and collecting
       relevant maps and documents.

      Communications and engagement: creating public awareness of the upcoming
       activity through meetings, advertising, word of mouth, etc. so that the community
       is prepared when the adjudication teams arrive. Communications and engagement
       activities continue through all the subsequent phases.

      Fieldwork and legal investigation: meeting with owners, measuring boundaries,
       collecting documents from owners, assessing documents, preparing reports on
       findings, and making initial decisions on boundaries, ownership and rights.

      Public display of results and objections: publishing results of fieldwork and the
       legal investigation for the entire community, supported by staff who can explain
       the results to the community and who can take down objections, which are
       investigated and incorporated in the results.

      Final determination and declaration of an area as complete: based on finalized
       records of boundaries and ownership, making final determinations on each parcel’s
       boundaries and ownership rights, and issuing of a declaration that the records are
       now legally valid. In some countries, a certificate of ownership is provided to the
       owner of each property. An appeals process is also available to deal with objections
       against the final results.

Two key words that are used throughout this paper need to be defined at the outset. These
are:

      Land, which refers to land, real estate and immovable property, including buildings
       and other permanent constructions; and
      Owner, which covers not only those formally recorded in documents as owners, but
       also other right holders (such as lessees and mortgagees, people holding rights
       under inheritance or matrimonial laws) and occupiers. Where necessary, the
       distinction between documented owners and occupiers whose rights are based on
       long-term possession will appear in the text.




                                                                                         5
Part 1         Design
1. Lack of documents that establish rights

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the problem of a lack of documents to establish a person’s ownership
of land and the related issue of the evidence that is commonly required in systematic
registration programs to conclude that a person without complete legal documents can be
registered as the owner. Commonly, a sizeable number of people encountered during
systematic registration programs do not have all the necessary documents, do not have
documents in the proper form, or do not have any documents at all, which present
significant problems for those programs that are predicated on documentary proof of
ownership.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Registering all the land and its owners is a basic aim of systematic registration, which seeks
to systematically record each and every parcel and right holder in a selected area. Unless
this is achieved, intended beneficiaries will miss out, the cost per parcel registered will
increase, and there will be wasted resources. Further, the value of the data produced during
the program will be less useful if gaps in coverage exist. A failure to register all the owners
can also undermine community confidence and engagement in the program if the
community sees that only some are benefiting. From the viewpoint of individual owners
who cannot be registered, recording everyone is important because they might even be
made worse off by the program if it reveals that they should not be occupying the land and
are, as a result, displaced and suffer losses to their livelihood and wellbeing. Such actions
can also threaten political support for the program.

What are the causes of this issue?

There are a variety of reasons for people to lack a full set of legal documents, such as:

      the documents existed but they have been lost, destroyed or otherwise cannot be
       found by the current owner;
      some documents exist but they are incomplete or informal. For example, a sale
       document, divorce certificate or inheritance certificate might be missing, a sale
       might have been conducted informally by means of a handshake, or a document
       was prepared but was not notarized or the transfer tax was not paid;
      the documents have not been issued because the occupant failed to take up an offer
       for privatization of the property (particularly in Eastern Europe or countries of the
       former Soviet Union);




                                                                                             6
        the documents never existed because the person’s rights are based on lon g-term
         possession.3


Various other cases can be imagined. However, they mostly fall into two main categories:

        ownership through documentary means where the documents are missing or
         incomplete;
        ownership by long-term possession where no formal documents establishing
         ownership ever existed.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

It can be a surprise to officials who are commencing a systematic registration program that
many people do not have a complete set of documents. So, as a first step, those designing
the program need to understand the potential for this problem and undertake to deal with
it. Examples from other country’s programs and study tours can assist in raising awareness
of both the problems and possible solutions, but it might be necessary to wait until the
officials have first-hand experience in their own country for them to believe that there is a
problem at all and to understand that they need to do something about it.

Once it is decided to do something about this issue, the legal framework needs to be
investigated and assessed to see how far the existing legislation can be used to deal with
the problems of incomplete documents and long-term possession. Where existing laws can
be used, clear instructions to staff need to be prepared to explain how the laws should be
applied in each case (see section 10). Where the existing laws do not fully cover the
situation, then appropriate amendments to support the types of solutions discussed below
need to be adopted.

For incomplete documents, possible responses are to:

        Regularize documents using professional services funded under the registration
         program that resolve any anomalies with the documents, so that they can be
         regarded as “legal”. This, however, can be a costly process if private sector notaries
         or lawyers have to be recruited. Therefore, a more cost effective method approach
         might be required, such as using registry officials or others who are specially
         authorized to do the work. Alternatively, the program could fund the fees of
         professional services of notaries and lawyers, and then recover the money (and
         possibly interest) from the owner when the property is subsequently sold, with a
         lien being recorded over the property in the interim.

        Introduce a blanket provision in the law that formalizes informal documents so that
         documents which were not executed strictly in accordance with the law could be

3
  It is also possible that a third party, such as a co-owner or lender, has possession of the documents. This
case illustrates the need to reach out to all right holders. See section 11 on capturing all right holders.


                                                                                                                7
         regarded as acceptable for the purposes of systematic registration. Similarly, the
         law could state that certified or registered copies of documents could be accepted
         as if they were originals.

        Waive or provide an amnesty for unpaid taxes (or at least defer payment of taxes),
         as discussed in regard to outstanding back taxes (see section 2).

        Accept incomplete sets of documents or copies together with confirmation of the
         facts from the owner and others who have knowledge, such as neighbors and
         community leaders (either by oral evidence or in statutory declaration form). Other
         forms of evidence, such as utility bills and tax receipts could also serve as evidence.
         If it were considered that this approach would not be fully reliable, the ownership
         could be recorded as conditional, and then the record could be subsequently
         formalized after an appropriate waiting period had expired, such as is the case for
         “provisional” or “limited” titles that are used in many countries (see following
         paragraphs).

        Engage with other agencies to issue the necessary documents to establish a person’s
         ownership, such as the privatization agency or land management agency.

An important means to overcome many of the problems with a lack of documents that
establish rights is recognition of long-term occupation as ownership. There generally needs
to be a law covering this situation, and it should state that occupation for longer than the
period specified in the law (sometimes known as the “limitation period”) gives rise to
ownership rights. Where no such law exists, one should be enacted. On that basis, as long
as there is appropriate evidence of the occupation, the long-term occupier could be
recorded as the legal owner.4 This approach can also be used where the owner once had
documents, but they are missing and cannot be re-constituted. This approach can be applied
to cover long-term encroachments and occupation of part of a neighbor’s land, so as to
address boundary disagreements.

Recognition of long-term occupation as the basis of ownership has been used in first
registration programs in many countries, particularly common law countries. It can even
be used when the period of occupation is falls short of the limitation period or the evidence
is doubtful. In such cases, a notice is included in the title records stating that the ownership
is provisional or limited in some way, so that no one is misled into believing that the person
has occupied the property for the full limitation period or has fully proven the ownership.
However, once the person’s occupation exceeds the limitation period, he or she could apply
to have the notice removed, and in this way, the provisional or limited title would “mature”
or be upgraded into a full or ordinary title. Where the occupier applies to have the title
upgraded, it is important for him or her to declare that there are no challenges to the
occupation.



4
 The period of occupation varies from country to country and is to be found in either the civil code or
property legislation. In some places it is 20 years, while in others, it is as low as five or six years.


                                                                                                           8
An alternative approach where a person does not have possession for the full limitation
period is to register that person’s occupation right over the land but to not show the person
as an owner. For example, the section of the title record where the owner’s name is recorded
might be left blank, but the name of the occupier, the fact of his or her occupation and the
date on which it commenced could be recorded as a note elsewhere in the title record. Here,
too, once the full statutory period had passed, the occupier could apply to be recorded as
the owner and the title upgraded.

The note on the title is not only useful for the registry staff but to anyone investigating the
ownership of the property. The note gives warning that extra care should be taken when
dealing with the property.

To address the issue of long-term possession of state land, there should be consideration at
the design stage of a program for formalization of such occupation. It could run in parallel
with the first registration program, as discussed in the issue on state land (see section 12).

Checklist

    Recognize that a sizeable number of owners will not have a complete set of
     documents that are all in order, and that there will also be a sizeable number of
     people occupying land without documents.

    Review the legal framework to see how well the existing laws can deal with such
     situations, and develop solutions and legislation where necessary to deal with the
     problems.

    Consider solutions such as regularizing documents as part of the systematic
     registration process, introducing a blanket formalization of all documents, waiving
     past unpaid taxes, accepting copies and cooperating with other agencies to issue
     missing documents.

    To deal with long-term occupation, recognize people who have occupied land for
     longer than the statutory limitation period as full owners.

    To deal with occupation that is shorter than the statutory limitation period, record
     occupiers and details of their occupation but include a notice or warning on the title.

    Allow occupiers to apply to be full owners without any warning on the title after
     their occupation has passed the statutory limitation period.




                                                                                             9
Box: Basic Design of First Registration Program

When first considering a registration program, the question arises whether it would be
better to invest significant resources and time in a systematic registration program to fully
identify and record the rights and right holders (to the extent that it is possible), or whether
a faster and cheaper approach that captures most rights and right holders is better?

The answer to this question is influenced by the fact that no matter how much time and
money goes into a thorough investigation, some rights and right holders will be missed,
and there needs to be a mechanism for dealing with outstanding rights and right holders,
as briefly discussed immediately above.

Many other factors will need to be considered to answer this question. These include:

- What other options exist and would they be adequate to the country’s needs? A conversion
program can be effective, or a conversion-investigation hybrid could also work. What
existing record (if any) are available for conversion and how accurate are they? If there are
few records or if they are very old, then the existing records might not be suitable as the
basis for conversion.
- What funds and other resources are available? If funds are very limited, then a full
systematic registration program might be beyond what the country can afford, particularly
if the plan is to cover the entire country or large parts of it. Does the country have enough
trained specialists to carry out the fieldwork and is there time to train new ones?
- What are the policy and political forces at play? What has the government committed to
doing?
- When does the work need to be completed? Systematic registration can be slower than a
simple conversion program due to the time involved in preparation, communications and
engagement, fieldwork and investigation, and public display and objections. A conversion
program can be completed relatively quickly in comparison.
- What complicating factors might be involved, such as the percentage of informal or
irregular tenure in the country or the extent of squatting, both of which need to be
regularized through a parallel process that would probably involve fieldwork. There could
be various other complicating factors that would need to be resolved by parallel (or
subsequent) processes while the systematic registration program is underway.

At the design phase, each country needs to consider these questions, bearing in mind the
time, money and other resources that are available, and the objectives set for the registration
authority by the government. For example, in several countries of the Western Balkans, the
decision was taken to adopt a streamlined approach that permitted the first registration
process for the entire country to be completed in a relatively short space of time. This was
possible because there was already an extensive set of records of properties and ownership
that they could use as the basis for the new records. Serbia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, for example, used several measures that permitted a relatively
rapid and cheap completion of the program, and now have in place systems to correct the
errors and omissions. In Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, surveys
were conducted only in a limited number of cases, with the old (relatively reliable) maps


                                                                                             10
being accepted as adequate. Another example comes from some common law countries,
including Australia and New Zealand, which had extensive conversion programs in which
the existing deeds were simply incorporated in the title registration system as “qualified”
or “limited” titles, and after a legally mandated period, they were upgraded to ordinary
titles.

The process of investigating and determining the appropriate design for a country is not a
simple matter, and examples from other countries and study tours could be very
informative. Although the task of designing first registration programs is often left to
surveyors and lawyers, it would be useful to include economists in the process whose input
on the costs and benefits of the various options would permit the government to make a
more informed decision. A good economic analysis would also substantiate the decision
when it is ultimately made, and thus provide a justification for the program if it were ever
to be criticized by politicians, civil society or others.


2. Taxes

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the prior taxes that have not been paid and the existence of which are
revealed during the process of first registration, whether they are inheritance taxes, transfer
taxes, annual land taxes, regularization payments or any other form of duty or due. Once
identified, these past taxes must sometimes be paid before the property can be registered,
creating significant barriers and even disincentives for owners to participate in the
systematic registration program.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

The issue of unpaid back taxes on properties that are undergoing first registration –
particularly by the means of systematic adjudication – is highly relevant to the success of
the program because taxes can act as a barrier to the public’s participation in a process that
is based on mass participation. If people learn that they have to pay some or all of the back
taxes, their interest in participating (even if the longer term benefits of registration are well
explained and understood) can greatly diminish, particularly where they have no means of
paying such back taxes. Nor is it a minor problem that affects only a few properties. In one
Eastern European country, for example, it was estimated that 50 per cent of landholders in
an area where systematic registration was undertaken were liable for back taxes in some
way, and the obligation to pay those taxes stopped many from participating.

Further, people are often suspicious that first registration programs are a means for the
government to gather information on properties for taxation purposes, so if they are obliged
to pay taxes before the property is even registered, their suspicions are likely to be
confirmed. Consequently, their responses can range from passive resistance (not opening
the front door, etc.) to active opposition against the registration program in the local or
national media. Any opposition will have a detrimental effect on the program and its



                                                                                              11
results, and therefore its efficiency, because systematic registration is a process that is built
on community participation, as noted above.

Additionally, the lower the number of people who engage in the program, the lower the
number of properties registered, with the resulting increase in the cost per parcel, waste of
resources and reduction in the value of the data produced.

What are the causes of this issue?

The primary cause of the problem of back taxes is the failure to apply or enforce the tax
laws at the time when the taxes became due. It is not so much that the individual taxes were
inappropriate or excessively burdensome, but rather that a backlog of unpaid taxes has been
created for many individuals because the system of levying such taxes and ensuring their
payment did not operate effectively. Consequently, instead of being paid when they fall
due, the taxes are permitted to build up. It is only when a first registration program reaches
a location that the problem is revealed.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

The simplest solution, but perhaps the most difficult to negotiate with the ministry
responsible for revenue, would be to dispense with or waive all back taxes. The waiver
could be presented as a one-off act, which would be a contribution to the registration
program. It could also be presented as a necessary cost to ensure the success of the
program’s investment, which would soon be recovered due to the more accurate and more
complete information on land ownership that would be available for all ministries, agencies
and the public to use. It could be stressed that the prime beneficiaries of the improved
ownership information would be the agencies responsible for taxes, thus ensuring that the
tax laws would be better administered in the future.

A variation on this approach would be to dispense with all back taxes except the last one
by which the current owner acquired the property (usually either by transfer or inheritance).
This approach would mean that the current owner would only be liable for the tax that he
or she should have paid. In this way, all taxes that should have been paid by previous
owners would be waived, but not all revenue would be lost. It would also avoid claims that
the government was creating a “moral hazard” and that those who ignored their obligations
to pay taxes were now being rewarded, while those who complied with the tax laws get
nothing.

It would also be possible to defer payment until the owner is in a position to pay – either
all the back taxes or, preferably, just the tax that he or she should have paid. Under this
approach, the tax obligations would be recorded on the property’s title as an encumbrance
(a type of lien) and the property could not be traded or mortgaged until the outstanding tax
was paid. When the property was next sold or mortgaged, the owner would have access to
the funds and could then more easily pay the tax. Once the back tax had been paid, the
recording of the encumbrance would be removed by administrative means. The question




                                                                                              12
of interest on the outstanding amount would also have to be negotiated with the ministry
responsible for revenue, but it could be kept at zero or the long-term government bond rate.

A further approach would be for the authority that will receive the proceeds of an annual
property tax, such as the municipality, to pay the back taxes. The amount paid would be
recouped through increased collection of property taxes based on the newly created set of
accurate property records. Such an approach would need to be negotiated on a case by case
basis with each municipality and would require a well researched and presented economic
argument.

A similar approach could be adopted in relation to other amounts that an owner would be
obliged to pay, such as a notary or court fee to resolve inheritance (see section 1). The
systematic registration program or municipality could cover the cost, and recover it when
the property was next sold or mortgaged.

Any change to tax laws would be a challenge to negotiate with the ministry responsible for
revenue, such as a ministry of finance. It would be important therefore to have well justified
economic arguments as to why waiving back taxes or deferring them should be introduced
– for both sporadically incurred taxes (such as inheritance and transfer) and regularly
incurred taxes (such as annual land tax). An economic justification should be prepared and
it should estimate both the loss to income and the benefits from waiving taxes to permit
more properties to be registered. It should compare revenue from all sources using the
current situation and an estimate of the situation if properties were registered. The
justification should also look at wider benefits to society and the economy, such as
improved access to low cost credit that results from registration of properties, and it could
model all of the approaches discussed here.

Checklist

    Negotiate the waiver of all back taxes with the ministry responsible for revenue, or
     all back taxes except the last one.

    Defer payment of back taxes until the owner has funds to pay them, and place a lien
     on the property to protect the state’s claim to taxes.

    Have the taxes paid by another body that would recoup the loss through improved
     land tax collection.

    Prepare a thorough justification for any proposals that considers the full range of
     social and economic benefits resulting from property registration.




                                                                                           13
3. Appropriate dispute resolution mechanisms

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the mechanisms for dealing with objections and appeals against the
results of systematic registration. Specifically, it concerns the often inadequate,
inaccessible or excessively complex approaches to dealing with such objections and
appeals, as well as the practical implications for finalizing systematic registration when
appeals are still under consideration.

The following covers both objections presented during the public display phase of the
process and appeals against final determinations. It does not concern other types of
complaints concerning the process, such as complaints about the conduct of the systematic
registration teams, which would be addressed through a grievance redress mechanism or
in an administrative court, nor does it concern fundamental challenges to the nature of the
process, which would be addressed in the country’s constitutional court (see section 15).
The subject of the objection or appeal itself is therefore limited to decisions of the
adjudication officials, but these could concern any of the matters being investigated and
determined in the systematic registration process, such as ownership and shares, boundaries
and area, and subsidiary rights (easements/servitudes, leases, mortgages, etc.). Dealing
with the objections and appeals will be referred to as “dispute resolution” or “DR” here.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

The possibility of objecting or appealing is a key aspect of the systematic registration
process because both measures provide a means to ensure that people can protect their
rights and that the community can have confidence in the process and its results. The
mechanism for objecting is a type of quality control and a safeguard because it allows
owners and third parties who know the situation to have input to the results of fieldwork at
the public display stage. It is therefore a basic element of the overall systematic registration
process. The ability to appeal is an essential element in any decision making process, which
includes the systematic registration process. A failure to adequately deal with DR will,
therefore, remove basic safeguards and protections from the process.

It also matters how the mechanisms function, otherwise they will not effectively do their
job. So the methods for objecting or appealing need to be accessible to everyone. Efficiency
and cost effectiveness of DR mechanisms are also important aspects, so as to keep the
program’s costs down, and the mechanisms need to be effectively integrated in the overall
process in a way that does not hold up progress of other cases while individual cases are
being appealed.

What are the causes of this issue?

A failure to have appropriate, practical and effective DR mechanisms as part of the
systematic registration process arises from a number of factors. Lack of recognition of the
importance of DR is a common cause. Often, the resolution of disputes is regarded as an


                                                                                             14
afterthought, once the more important work of surveying and adjudication is addressed,
and without any understanding of the practical implications that a flood of appeals could
have on the program. Further, a lack of awareness of the importance of DR, its role in the
systematic registration process, and how it can adversely impact the process if not
adequately addressed means that this aspect of systematic registration is sometimes poorly
designed, resourced and implemented.

Other reasons for failing to provide suitable DR mechanisms can be a limited
understanding of best practice and an excessively legalistic approach to resolving
objections or appeals. There can also be a lack of understanding of the barriers faced by
the public in appealing (time, money, complexity) and a cultural bias against letting people
object against decisions of officials. Further, laws and regulations on systematic
registration can fail to clearly specify the DR process, leaving it to the existing court system
to resolve, which might not be well suited to the capacity of land owners to use it, the
program’s implementation schedule or the technical issues involved in a systematic
registration program.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Properly addressing DR during systematic registration should be recognized for what it is:
an important part of the process that brings transparency and builds confidence, and that
provides quality control and safeguards. It should not be regarded as an afterthought but
rather as an integral part of the process. Senior management needs to understand why and
how DR plays a fundamental role in the process, so explanations, illustrations from
elsewhere (including examples of poor practice and its consequences) and study tours are
needed.

Thought needs to be put into DR mechanisms at the planning and preparation stage, well
before fieldwork commences. The existing legal framework and system needs to be
reviewed and considered to assess whether the existing laws and DR mechanisms would
be suitable for the systematic registration program. Where an existing law or DR
mechanism can be applied to the specific needs of systematic registration, then that law or
system is a good starting point that might need only minor adjustments. However, where
the existing laws and DR mechanisms are not suitable, then specific approaches to
resolving the disputes that arise during systematic registration must be developed.

Where a law is to be drafted to deal with DR, it should clearly specify the procedures,
deadlines and rights and obligations of all involved. Details of the procedures should be
comprehensively specified in regulations or instructions, with discretion being kept to a
minimum.

In designing DR mechanisms, some basic elements would include:

      Barriers to making an objection or lodging an appeal should be minimized so that
       DR mechanisms are easily accessible to owners and others claiming rights. There
       should be no charge for objections at the public display stage; forms or procedures



                                                                                             15
       should be simple; staff should facilitate the lodging of objections, such as by filling
       in the claim form for the person involved; and the process should be non-legalistic
       and culturally appropriate.

      There should be clear deadlines for making objections and lodging appeals, as well
       as for completing administrative reviews. Reviews of objections should be
       completed promptly so that there are no delays in the making of final
       determinations.

      Those reviewing decisions should have wide powers to investigate as well as
       powers to mediate between the parties, rather than being constrained to narrow
       legalistic issues.

      Objections and appeals should be considered by more senior officials than those
       who made the original decision.

      All decisions should be recorded in writing and presented to the people objecting
       or appealing, and the results should be made public.

There should be a tiered approach, with at least two levels to the DR mechanism. Initially,
there should be a simple, easily accessible, culturally appropriate and relatively fast
administrative review that can address the bulk of objections arising from the public
display. This stage can be regarded as a quality control element of the program. Anyone
should be able to lodge an objection within a specified, limited time, and there should be
no fee. Cases should be reviewed by the original decision-maker’s supervisor or manager.
The results of this process can be incorporated in the final determination.

After the final determination has been issued, anyone aggrieved should be able to appeal.
Commonly, this would be conducted in a more formal judicial setting, such as through a
specially constituted commission or land court, or even through the existing court system.

An appeal should not hold up progress in finalizing the systematic registration program.
Rather, appeals should be referred out of the process, investigated and determined, and
then the results incorporated once the appeal is resolved. All non-appealed cases should
progress to completion without delay while the appeals are being considered. In
Montenegro, for example, the registration process takes a very long time to complete
because one appeal can delay the finalization of hundreds of cases in the local area, causing
unnecessary delays and costs as well as postponing the benefits of registration to those
people whose land is not subject to an appeal.

Training based on the law and instructions should be developed and provided to staff, and
information on objection and appeal options should be published. Information should be
clear and widely available so that people know that they can challenge the results, how
they can do it, and how much time they have to lodge their appeal or objection. The
materials should make it clear that the DR mechanisms are integral parts of the process and




                                                                                           16
that systems are in place to facilitate people lodging an objection or making an appeal,
together with clear instructions on how to do so and contact details.

As part of its wider quality control function, the results of objections and appeals would
inform future systematic registration decision making, so key results should be
incorporated in the practical guidelines and publicized among fieldwork staff to guide them
in their work (see section 10).

It might also be necessary to develop a grievance redress mechanism to deal with matters
outside the focus of decisions made by the adjudication officials, such as failing to give
adequate notice, provide materials, deal with the public politely, etc. Here, too, the basic
principles discussed above would apply.

Checklist

    Understand the need for and integral role of DR in systematic registration.

    Design the DR mechanisms at the planning stage.

    Review the existing legal framework and use existing DR mechanisms where they
     work well and would be suitable for dealing with objections and appeals.

    Clearly specify basic procedures, deadlines, rights and obligations in the law, and
     then provide details in the regulations or instructions, and minimize officials’
     discretion.

    Ensure that the DR mechanisms are accessible to all, that those reviewing have
     adequate powers (including powers to mediate), and record all outcomes in writing,
     which are provided to those objecting or appealing.

    Adopt a two tier approach to deal quickly with objections so that a final
     determination can be reached, and then deal with appeals through a more formal
     judicial or quasi-judicial process.

    Provide training to staff in dealing with objections.

    Prepare and widely publish information on DR mechanisms.

    Incorporate results of key decisions in practical guidelines and inform field staff.

    Consider introducing a grievance redress mechanism to deal with procedural
     matters.




                                                                                         17
4. Informal buildings

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the problems arising during first registration programs when it is
revealed that owners of the land being registered do not have permits for the buildings, or
parts of buildings, constructed on the land. Consequently, the building or even the land
itself might not be registered. This issue is largely restricted to those countries where
buildings are recorded in the land registration system.5

The issue of informal buildings constructed on state land adds the further element of
squatting and the need to regularize rights, either before or while the informal buildings
issue is being resolved and (ideally) prior to registration of the property. See section 12 on
state land.6

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

The consequences of this problem for first registration are various. A failure to register all
properties and their buildings means that resources used to identify the problem, but not
the solution, are wasted, raising the cost per parcel and reducing the number of properties
registered (thereby undermining one of the main advantages of systematic registration);
landholders do not receive documents for their properties (and they thus miss out on the
various benefits of registration); and the community could lose faith in the program if
sizeable numbers of buildings were not registered, and thus support for the program could
be lost. Multiple gaps in the property records also reduce the value of the maps and other
records for land management and other purposes, such as planning, disaster management,
etc. At worst, identifying informal buildings through first registration could result in
authorities ordering the demolition of the buildings, causing the occupiers distress and
suffering (even if other accommodation were found) and loss of livelihood, and which
could also threaten political support for the program.

What are the causes of this issue?

There are numerous causes of the “illegal buildings” problem,7 which is endemic in many
countries. These include a failure of government to provide an effective permitting scheme

5
  For example, the owner might not have the appropriate construction or occupation permit, or the building
is not constructed in accordance with the permit. This problem can be compounded where the land does not
have the necessary urban planning zoning for construction, which often occurs in fast growing cities that
spread out into adjacent agricultural land.
6
  Squatting on private land can be addressed either as discussed in section 1 above, using long-term
possession provisions of the law, or through a state-sponsored processes of expropriation of such land
followed by its allocation to the squatters. This has occurred, for example, in Albania as part of a program
to regularize ownership of land areas through a specially created agency. The program was based on advice
received from Hernan de Soto.
7
  The “illegal buildings” problem is not a single problem, but rather a multitude of different problems
relating to the status of buildings and even the land on which they are built. Each situation can require a
different response.


                                                                                                         18
or to provide one that is workable for the public, out of date urban planning, poorly drafted
legislation, high permit fees, ineffective housing programs and overwhelming influxes of
people (due to conflict, economic migration or natural disaster). In an environment where
the rule of law is not operating effectively, people can simply ignore construction
obligations and planning restrictions, particularly if they know that there will be a round of
legalization later on that provides approvals more easily and cheaply than under the
construction and planning laws. Also, in some cases, documents are lost during war or
conflict, or society itself changes to become more formalistic, and new rules are applied to
old buildings. A further cause can be that previous legalization programs were not
implemented properly or were too expensive, so people failed to regularize their buildings
when they could have done so. This is not an exhaustive list, but it gives a flavor of the
causes, which are varied and sometimes overlapping.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Resolving the informal buildings problem is beyond the scope of a first registration
program, so it is important to engage with those who can address it. If a national strategy
and legalization legislation, plus new urban plans and a legalization program, are required
before buildings can be registered, then it might be better to focus on the issues of planning
and legalization before even beginning systematic registration, or if registration must go
ahead, then to combine the two programs in a staged approach. If so, then the following
options could be considered.

Prior to embarking on a first registration program, it would be useful to assess the extent
to which the problem exists, where it exists, and the nature of the problem across the
country. Social factors should also be considered. In many countries, there is already
extensive research on this topic, so a desk review could be sufficient to inform strategic
planning and identify who could be partners in resolving the problem. A review and
assessment of the legal framework should be included in this work.

Within the current legal framework, a registration program could reach agreement with
local authorities to cooperate in regularizing buildings in coordination with the first
registration activities. This would require support and engagement with those authorities,
particularly the political leadership, which would be required to introduce streamlined,
quick, low cost methodologies to investigate and issue approval documents for buildings.
There might be, for example, an amnesty in which no fees are charged, particularly if the
mayor recognizes that any income lost in the short-term could be recouped from increased
annual land taxes. An official of the municipality could be made a member of each
registration team, and deal with matters on the spot. For example, in the first Kyrgyz
Republic land registration project, in all the urban centers (except Bishkek), the teams
worked with the mayors to issue documents for buildings that had been constructed without
papers (as no such papers where required during the Soviet Union era). If an assessment of
the legal framework showed that new or amending legislation were required, it would also
be necessary to work with the national government to enact such legislation. These issues
would need to be resolved before systematic registration fieldwork commenced.




                                                                                           19
A more radical solution, which would certainly require legislation, would be to provide an
amnesty for informal buildings – perhaps all or perhaps certain categories. In Bosnia
Herzegovina, for example, legislation was prepared to deem all buildings constructed
before a certain date to be legal, even if the papers had been lost, on the basis that they
could be assumed to have complied with the standards and legislation of the time at which
they were constructed.

If no agreement could be reached with the local or national authorities, an alternative
approach would be to identify each informal building and register the property, but to
record a note that no construction permission papers were presented or that the status of
the building is not known. In this way, as occurred in Serbia and a number of other
countries, a record for the property and its ownership is created and the owner is better
placed to go about legalization when it becomes feasible. Although not ideal, this approach
ensures that the registration program’s resources are not wasted and a more complete set
of property data emerges at the end of the program. It also provides a framework for a
legalization program in the future. It should be made clear in the legislation permitting this
approach that the property can be traded without the need to formalize the building.

Checklist

    Conduct a desk review into the situation of informal buildings before deciding on
     starting a systematic registration program in a particular area.

    Engage with those who are responsible for construction permitting and urban
     planning, and work with them to develop responses to resolve the problems with
     informal buildings.

    Develop and adopt legislation to implement workable solutions.

    Create teams from local municipalities to work in parallel with the systematic
     registration teams to resolve problems with informal building either before or at the
     same time as registering the property.

    Consider legislation that would legalize all buildings, or certain categories of
     buildings, without the need to apply for legalization.

    Where buildings cannot be legalized, record the existence of the building when
     registering the property, but note that its status is unknown. Permit trading of such
     properties without the need to legalize the buildings first.




                                                                                           20
5. Elite capture

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the unequal allocation of the benefits of first registration programs to
those with more valuable property assets, usually located in cities or major towns, and the
corresponding reduced distribution of benefits to those with lower value assets, usually in
rural or forest areas, but also in informal settlements. The issue applies to first registration
programs no matter whether they adopt the systematic approach or another approach, such
as sporadic registration or conversion.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Without a fair distribution of the benefits of first registration across society, a systematic
registration program would fail to comply with the principle of providing equal benefits to
the whole of (landholding) society. It would also fail to contribute to reducing poverty and
lifting the economic wellbeing of the poorer segments of society.

A failure to address elite capture could also undermine public support for the program if
the bulk of the population, and possibly vocal interest groups, sees that the program is
benefiting only the wealthy. This, in turn, could lead to the rapid loss of support from
politicians and threaten the entire program. Reputational risk for donors involved in
funding such programs, too, can be a consequence of elite capture.

What are the causes of this issue?

Systematic registration programs commonly focus on valuable areas because these are
often the most economically productive, have relatively high turn over, can make best use
of lower-cost credit possibilities, and will quickly have a positive impact on the economy.
The return on investment is therefore greatest in such areas.

Some level of elite capture is bound to occur because the elite have, by definition, more
valuable assets than the poor, particularly the landless poor. Therefore it is not possible to
address this problem in absolute terms because the rich will always get a greater benefit (in
dollar terms) even if the benefits are spread equally (in percentage terms). However, as will
be discussed below, this inherent problem should not be exacerbated by conducting first
registration only in areas where the wealthy dominate.

Elite capture can also arise because those in charge of the program focus only on economic
factors when selecting areas to conduct first registration and ignore the social side. In terms
of overall wellbeing and social stability, the poorer segments of society are likely to benefit
more from registration, in relative terms, than the wealthy.

This leads on to the next possible cause, which is a lack of understanding or recognition of
the economic impact of registration on the poor, particularly how registration can have a




                                                                                             21
small impact in dollar terms but large impact in terms of impact on farmers and poor people
through both recognition of ownership and consequential access to lower-cost credit.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

At the outset, in the design phase, the program documentation should explicitly include the
delivery of benefits across the entire range of (landholding) society as an objective, and
there should be a clear statement that identifies the poor as specific beneficiaries. Similarly,
in the communications and engagement activities and also in discussions with officials and
other stakeholders, it should be stressed that the program is designed to benefit the entire
community.

Those designing the program need to consult with local communities and NGOs to capture
the full picture outside the major urban centers. This will identify the types of communities
that could be included in the program and how it could benefit them.

In the economic assessment, the benefits to the poor, including greater access to short-term
credit for agricultural or other income generating inputs should be specifically considered.
For example, one farmer in the Kyrgyz Republic whose home was registered reported how
he used it as collateral for seasonal loans for seed and fertilizer, and reported that without
these inputs, the land would sit unused. In the social assessment, there should be
consideration of the different segments of (landholding) society.

In the selection of areas for the program, a mix of areas with a range of economic and social
conditions (as identified through the assessments) should be included throughout the
program’s schedule, ranging from cities and large towns through to small towns and rural
areas. The program should be progressively rolled out in all areas so that work in each type
of area across the entire country (or selected area) is concluded at approximately the same
time.

As discussed in section 12, to deal with the issue of informal settlements on state land, the
program would need to coordinate systematic registration with a program to formalize
ownership.

Checklist

    Explicitly include fair and equal distribution of the benefits of the program to all
     segments of society as an aim of the program, and identify the poor as particular
     beneficiaries, and communicate this fact.

    Work with local communities and NGOs to understand the full picture.

    Assess the impact of first registration on the poor, including economic and social
     impacts.




                                                                                             22
     Implement the first registration program in a range of areas across the country that
      covers both the wealthy and poor, rural and urban.


6. Subsequent registration system

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the existence, accessibility and use of a system for registering
transactions with land after it has been registered for the first time under a systematic first
registration program. It goes to the maintenance and sustainability of the results of first
registration, and whether the money spent on registration is wasted or not.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Having a workable system for the registration of transactions after land has been registered,
which people can and do use, is essential if the information created by the registration
program, and the various benefits that come to people and the state from registration, are
to be maintained. Without a system for continuously updating the records of ownership,
boundaries and subsidiary rights, which is cheap and easy enough for people to use, the
results of first registration will soon become out of date and many of the benefits of the
program will be lost.

What are the causes of this issue?

Commonly, the primary focus of first registration programs is the set of activities involved
in identifying and recording parcels and owners. This is understandable because it is the
reason for the program, and all energies are dedicated to this challenging task. However,
there can be a lack of understanding that first registration is only the initial step in creating
a sustainable registration system, which means that first registration can be the sole focus
of the program. Sometimes, those designing programs do not know about, forget or ignore
the need to have a system in place that permits transactions to be registered after the final
determinations have been issued. As a result, at the end of the program, there is no means
for updating the information, and it quickly becomes out of date. Eventually, the entire first
registration process must be repeated because so much of the information has become
unreliable.

Another cause of this issue is that even where the designers understand the need for a
subsequent registration system and take steps to provide one, they fail to create a system
that is accessible, affordable and relevant to the owners. Or they might make insufficient
changes to the existing system, which is inaccessible, costly, slow and suffers from a poor
reputation. If the registry is too far away, if its services cost too much or if it is not
trustworthy, property owners will not register their transfers, inheritance documents,
subdivisions and other types of transactions. This is the more common cause of the problem
– existing systems that are inaccessible are kept in the hope that people will use them to
register their property transactions, without taking steps to improve access or affordability.



                                                                                              23
Despite years of experience with this issue, first registration programs are still being
implemented that fail to address accessibility and affordability.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Those designing first registration programs need to be aware that a problem could exist
and that a failure to deal with subsequent registration will make the ultimate result of the
program, no matter how successful at first registration, a failure. If the records are quickly
made irrelevant, and people revert to private deals, then the initial investment is largely
wasted. Once they accept this fact, those designing programs need to ensure that they
include activities aimed at either creating a subsequent registration system or improving an
existing system.

A review of the legal framework should be conducted to determine whether the existing
laws are adequate and how they could be improved to cater to a well-functioning
subsequent registration system. Where a new law or amendments are required, these should
be promptly drafted and enacted.

As to making the system accessible, or more accessible where a system already exists, there
are a number of aspects:

      Easy access, with registration offices close to the public. This could include the
       introduction of local front offices, booths at multi-function centers and mobile
       offices. As technology becomes more widespread, access via the internet will
       greatly improve access. Access points should be welcoming and well equipped.

      Good access to information so that people know about the processes, forms and
       costs involved. Various media can be used to communicate with the public (see
       section 7).

      Simple legal rules and transaction processes, both for the public and the registry
       staff, so that the tasks of documenting and registering transactions can be
       accomplished easily, cheaply and quickly.

      Low fees, taxes and other financial costs. These can also include the costs of
       professionals in land transactions, particularly lawyers and notaries.


And to promoting the registration of transactions:

      Linkages with local officials, land market professionals and others, to open the way
       to registering transactions and to create a culture in which registration is both well
       understood and an automatic step in any transaction.

      Education of owners on the need to register transactions and benefits of doing so.



                                                                                           24
      Engagement with lenders, including micro-lenders, to build into the lending process
       a final step of registering the loan transaction.

      Education of staff in customer service and ethics, and creation of a customer
       focused environment, with a strong anti-corruption culture.

Checklist

    Understand the need for an accessible and affordable subsequent registration
     system to maintain the information created during first registration, and thus ensure
     the sustainability of the system, its information and benefits.

    Conduct a legal review and amend the laws as necessary to establish a sustainable
     subsequent registration system.

    Introduce measures to make the subsequent registration system accessible, such as
     improved physical access, more information, simplified legal rules and processes,
     and reduced costs where possible.

    Promote the registration of subsequent transactions through creating linkages with
     land market professionals and lenders, educating owners on the need to register
     transactions, and developing the registry into a customer-focused, professional
     organization.


Part 2         Implementation
7. Communications and engagement

What is this issue about?

As the title indicates, this issue concerns engaging with land owners as part of the process
of systematic registration, which is a cornerstone and also a key safeguard measure for the
entire process. Without participation by owners, which can only be achieved through
communications and other forms of engagement, the program will not progress well, and
without community involvement (particularly at the public display stage), the quality
control and safeguards inherent in the systematic registration process will not operate
effectively. It is worth repeating here that the reference to “owners” should be read widely
to include not just owners but also occupiers, lessees and owners of other rights, such as
mortgages, and all such groups need to be the target of the communications and
engagement activities.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

A failure to engage with owners so that they actively participate in the process of systematic
registration will have various negative consequences. There will be gaps in the records


                                                                                           25
because owners will not come forward to claim their land and present their documents and
evidence, which results not just in incomplete and therefore less valuable records, but also
in wasted resources and higher costs per parcel. The resulting maps and records will
therefore be less valuable. Further, the accuracy of results will be reduced without
community participation, leading perhaps to loss of rights and even litigation, and owners
will miss out on the chance to benefit from registration.

What are the causes of this issue?

First registration programs generally have some element of communications and
engagement because they require owners to cooperate. The registration teams have to make
contact with owners to inspect the property and obtain the documents and other evidence.
This is a logistical type of communications, and can be considered as a minimum, but it
falls short of motivating the community to fully engage in the program. Even where there
is some advertising, this too can fall short of what is required. For example, if only a few
posters are printed and placed in local government offices or if only a few notices are
published in the government gazette, then it is highly unlikely that the message will get
across and, more importantly, that there will be acceptance of the message. In a number of
countries, there is a belief among officials that the people will do as they are told, so little
effort to motivate them is needed, but the systematic registration process requires a more
active form of participation and engagement to produce the best results.

Poor communications and engagement can also result from sub-standard design and
implementation of the activities. For instance, the communications materials might be
poorly designed and delivered, they might miss important target groups (such as
mortgagees and the diaspora) due to the lack of an analysis and strategic approach, the
messages might not be appropriate or address people’s concerns, the distribution of
materials and public meetings might be uncoordinated with fieldwork, the national
language might be used instead of the language that local people speak, or the means of
communications might not fit local conditions. Many other possibilities can be imagined.

People can fail to engage with a first registration program even if there is a well designed
and executed communications program. They might be suspicious about the motives of the
government, fearing that the collection of property ownership information foreshadows
greater tax collection. People can also fail to engage simply due to inertia. Evidence from
one former socialist country, for example, indicates that about ten per cent of the population
failed to claim the Soviet era apartments that they occupy, even though the program
privatized the apartments at little or no cost and commenced many years ago. And in those
countries where there have been a series of land reforms, the population might fail to
engage in yet another government land program due to reform fatigue.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Most importantly, those designing systematic registration programs need to understand the
importance of a thorough, well designed and implemented communications and
engagement campaign as an input to the success of the program and the functioning of the



                                                                                             26
quality control and safeguards mechanisms inherent in the process. Examples from other
programs can be used to show how communications and engagement campaigns were
designed and implemented, what worked well and what did not work, and what kind of
impact the campaigns had on the success of the programs.

At the planning stage, a communications and engagement strategy needs to be produced
based on an analysis of owners, their concerns, the key messages that are required and how
best to communicate with the various categories of owners. The strategy should look at the
most effective (and cost effective) means of communicating using the full range of
communications options, as well as the timing and regularity of communications and the
format for delivery of general and specific messages. An advertising campaign using all
forms of media (including social media), based on a recognizable logo and color scheme,
should be developed. There should also be national and local press conferences, as well as
local level community events. Specific messages and images would be required for
identifiable special groups (including women, minorities, disadvantaged groups, the
diaspora and also the legal and surveying community and local banks). Local leaders and
special group representatives should also be engaged to lead public opinion, and they
should receive briefings so that they can disseminate the messages.

Adequate resources need to be allocated to fund the program. This involves not just money
to pay for the preparation of materials and their publication, but also the time of officials
and communications specialists to make presentations and engage at the local level with
communities. Although those involved in technical work might try to cut back on the
budget for communications so that resources can be assigned to “more important”
fieldwork, this bias must be countered. Where there are sufficient funds, a professional
agency could be engaged to help design and also run the campaign, as occurred in the land
registration programs of Azerbaijan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Serbia, which had long-term agreements with local agencies to develop and disseminate
publicity material.

The program needs to be staged effectively, commencing well before the start of fieldwork
and running throughout the program. The messages will change as the program unfolds,
with people being encouraged to work with registration teams at the beginning (as well as
having the benefits of registration explained), through to encouraging them to view the
results and make corrections during public display, to informing them of the appeals
process. In the final phase, the success of the program needs to be publicized through such
means as awarding certificates at public events, articles in newspapers, television and radio,
which in turn lead into the education of the public about the need to register transactions
with their properties in the registry (see section 6). Public events, such as ceremonies to
distribute certificates, are also a source of free publicity because the local media will often
cover them. Television and newspaper coverage in one area can educate people in
neighboring areas where the systematic registration program has yet to commence.

All staff, but particularly field staff and those working with the public, should receive
training in communications skills and the particular messages that need to be delivered at
various stages of the program.



                                                                                            27
An assessment of the effectiveness of the campaign should be conducted on a routine basis
during the program to identify what worked well and what did not. Such an assessment is
a valuable source of information on how to adjust the campaign for the next round of
communities whose land is to be registered. It is also an opportunity to assess cost against
effectiveness of the various means of communication and engagement, and thereby
improve future allocation of resources.

Checklist

    Understand the need for a well designed and implemented communications and
     engagement campaign and its role in ensuring the success of the systematic
     registration process.

    Conduct an analysis of owners and develop a strategy for the communications and
     engagement campaign at the planning stage.

    Use a range of media to communicate and engage.

    Target special identifiable groups with messages and images that are relevant to
     them.

    Ensure adequate resources are allocated to the communications and engagement
     campaign.

    Engage a professional media agency, if funds permit.

    Train field staff and other staff working with the public in communications and the
     messages that they need to deliver.

    Run the campaign over the full cycle of the first registration process, with different
     messages at different stages.

    Utilize cost effective means for communicating as much as possible, including free
     publicity through local media events.

    Conduct an assessment of the campaign’s effectiveness and adjust future activities
     in light of the results.


8. Effective public display

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the public display of the results of systematic registration, which is a
cornerstone of the process and acts not just as a quality control mechanism but also as a
safeguard against people losing entitlements by drawing on the knowledge of both


                                                                                         28
individual owners (who have a vested interest in making sure that the results are correct)
and the entire community (which can draw on everyone’s knowledge to confirm or correct
the results). Sometimes, however, public displays are implemented in such a way that
owners and members of the community cannot play their role adequately and the accuracy
of the results suffer.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Unless the public display process is implemented effectively, the quality control and
safeguard functions will not operate properly and could even fail. If people cannot see the
results and make their contributions, then errors in the fieldwork findings will not be picked
up and will appear in the final determination, and expensive litigation could follow. At
worst, some people could lose their rights, with consequential negative impacts on their
livelihoods and wellbeing.

What are the causes of this issue?

There are various causes of the public display stage not functioning effectively. These
include locating the display in places that are far from the owners and community, limited
opening hours, insufficient number of days of display, poorly presented results, lack of
publicity, lack of staff to explain results and take down objections and other comments,
and lack of community engagement. Occasionally, contractors will simply fail in their duty
to open the doors of the display venue at the specified hours, either due to poor management
or cost cutting. Additionally, some groups within a community, such as women, might face
specific barriers to taking part.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Those designing and implementing systematic registration programs need to be aware of
the importance of the public display stage, and its role in providing quality control and
safeguards, so that proper attention can be given to conducting the public displays. Not
only is such awareness needed when designing the systematic registration program and its
schedule, but if contractors are to be used, then those in charge must ensure that the contract
fully addresses the contractor’s obligations regarding the public display stage.

Public displays need to be conducted in accessible places, often a public space, that the
owners and community can reach easily. It should not therefore occur in a distant town or
city. Similarly, the opening hours need to take into account the working hours of the
population, and have viewing times early and late, as well as on weekends. People need to
be informed about the display through a communications and engagement program, and
there needs to be a sufficient number of days of display so that everyone has time to visit.
For example, a one week (or even one month) viewing period would usually be inadequate.

The results of the fieldwork need to be presented in a way that people can understand.
Simply providing them with maps and a long list of owners’ names is meaningless to most
people. The presentation of results needs to be made accessible, such as by presenting



                                                                                            29
smaller areas separately, and there needs to be sufficient numbers of qualified staff who
can explain the results and help people find their property. Staff are also required to assist
people with questions about the findings, and also to record corrections (such as the
spelling of a name), add information that is missing (such as a personal identification
number) or take down objections. Information on how objections will be addressed, and
what appeals rights exist if the objection is not successful, should also be available.

The communications and engagement program (see section 7) should have a focus on the
public display phase. Engagement with community leaders, such as local political and
administrative leaders, is needed to encourage everyone to visit the display. There should,
therefore, be special engagement with such leaders, including having them on hand during
display periods to work with the owners. As people commonly leave such matters until the
last minute, there should be a clear message to come early to avoid crowds.

Finally, there needs to be close supervision of the implementation of the public display
activities to ensure that the doors are open, qualified staff are on hand, objections are being
taken down, and owners are not confused or dissatisfied. Good management of either the
officials responsible for the public display or the contractors engaged to carry out
systematic registration is essential. As a visit to a public display venue made during the
Albanian registration program showed, when the gates and doors of the venue are locked,
it is very difficult to examine the program’s results.

For measures to assist women, who often face specific barriers to taking part in the public
display process, see section 13.

Checklist

    Understand the importance of the public display stage of systematic registration,
     how it needs to be accessible to owners, and the resources that will be required.
     Ensure that the obligations of contractors regarding public display are clearly
     spelled out in the contract.

    Locate public displays in places that are accessible to the community and have
     extended opening hours, and ensure that there is a sufficient number of days for
     everyone to visit. Publicize the display as part of the communications and
     engagement program.

    Present the fieldwork results in a way that people can understand and have qualified
     staff present to help people understand, answer questions, take down objectives and
     provide additional information, such as information on their appeal rights.

    Use the communications and engagement program to educate the community and
     encourage everyone to visit the public display, and engage with community leaders
     to promote participation.




                                                                                            30
     Closely monitor that the public displays are operating during the agreed days and
      hours, that there are qualified staff on hand, and that the public understands what is
      happening.

9. Corruption and improper influence

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the various forms of corruption and improper influence that can emerge
during systematic registration programs and their consequences. Corruption can range
from very minor forms, such as asking a favor of the first registration team to straighten a
boundary or recognize an informal subdivision, through to major forms of corruption, in
which senior officials, politicians or others use the first registration program to grab land.
Improper influence, exerted on officials from above, can also take various forms, such as
recognizing unsubstantiated claims, altering records, removing documents from the file, or
failing to deal with legitimate complaints properly.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Corruption matters on two levels: at a higher level, corrupt administration in any sphere of
government has various well known negative impacts for the country, its economy and
national wealth, as well as the citizens who are forced to engage in it. More directly, if a
first registration program gains a reputation for corruption then its results (that is, the
property records) could be called into doubt, undermining the very security and reliability
that first registration is meant to provide. Also, the public’s participation and faith in the
program, which is a cornerstone of the process, could be threatened if it were perceived to
be corrupt.

What are the causes of this issue?

As noted in the Transparency International/ FAO publication, Corruption in the Land
Sector, “Corruption in the land sector can be generally characterised as pervasive and
without effective means of control.”8 Corruption in the land sector is caused by many of
the same factors that give rise to corruption in other areas of government, such as lack of
concern for the rule of law, an environment in which corruption is permissible, lack of
checks and balances, low salaries, etc. The land sector, however, is a particular area of
concern for corruption because highly valuable assets are often involved.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Systematic registration programs can incorporate a variety of measures to eliminate or
minimize corruption opportunities, as follows:

       Establish a solid legal basis and issue clear instructions that minimize the extent to
        which officials can use their discretion.
8
        http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/am943e/am943e00.pdf


                                                                                           31
      Educate owners about their rights, including appeal rights, and provide information
       to citizens in a manner that they can understand, including in minority languages,
       and distribute that information widely.
      Adopt measures that incorporate checks and balances, such as three person teams
       making decisions and the requirement for all decisions to be in writing, which make
       it difficult for corruption to go un-noticed.
      Recruit staff from outside the area in which the first registration program is being
       implemented who have no ties to local politicians, officials or others.
      Provide citizen advocates who can develop expertise in first registration and
       represent the interests of citizens.
      Establish a complaints or corruption hotline.
      Ensure that the objection, appeals and redress mechanisms function well, and
       establish a reporting system covering the number and outcomes of appeals. The
       public display and appeals process, which are fundamental to systematic
       registration, are covered in sections 8 and 3 of this paper respectively.
      Provide full public disclosure of the results of first registration, with reporting both
       in the local area and nationally in widely accessible ways, such as newspaper, notice
       boards and on the internet.
      Create digital records that are stored in two places, which not only provide a good
       backup for the data, but also make it difficult to tamper with documents or “lose”
       them.
      Conduct a review of the process and its results by an independent third party, such
       as an ombudsman. Work with the national anti-corruption agency, if one exists.

Further measures, outlined in Corruption in the Land Sector, are recommended for other
areas in the land sector, particularly registry operations, urban planning, state land
management and customary tenure.

Checklist

    Establish a solid legal basis and issue clear instructions that minimize the extent to
     which discretion is used by officials.

    Educate owners about their rights, including appeal rights, and provide information
     to citizens in a manner that they can understand, including in minority languages,
     and distribute that information widely.

    Adopt measures that incorporate checks and balances, such as three person teams
     making decisions and the requirement for all decisions to be in writing, which make
     it difficult for corruption to go un-noticed.

    Recruit staff from outside the area in which the program is being conducted who
     have no ties to local politicians, officials or others.

    Provide citizen advocates who can develop expertise in first registration and
     represent the interests of citizens.


                                                                                            32
     Establish a complaints or corruption hotline.

     Create digital records that are stored in two places.

     Ensure that the objection, appeal and redress mechanisms function well, and
      establish a reporting system covering the number and outcomes of appeals.

     Provide full public disclosure of results of first registration, with reporting both in
      the local area and nationally in widely accessible ways, such as newspaper, notice
      boards and on the internet.

     Conduct a review of the process and its results by an independent third party, such
      as an ombudsman. Work with the national anti-corruption agency, if one exists.


10. Staff instructions and training

What is this issue about?

As the title indicates, this issue concerns the instructions and training that need to be
provided to the staff of a first registration program so that they can do their jobs efficiently,
correctly and in a nationally consistent manner. “Staff” in this context covers both
government officials as well as those temporary employees who carry out first registration
activities, either as individual consultants or as employees of a contractor.

A failure to provide clear instructions and deliver appropriate training is a major omission
in the preparation of first registration programs. Due to improved design and management
of programs, this problem occurs less and less, but where countries have embarked on first
registration programs without providing clear instructions and proper training to those
responsible for conducting the work, their results have often been poor, particularly in
terms of the number of finalized cases.

Instructions and training are cross-cutting matters in land registration and administration,
so the following discussion and recommendations can be applied to other areas of land
administration, particularly subsequent transaction registration.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

It is obvious, but worth stating, that without clear instructions, staff will not know how to
go about first registration. As first registration is a specialized process, few (if any) staff
will have all the required knowledge at the start of the program to correctly carry out their
duties. Learning on-the-job is not an option due to the complexity of the process, the many
different types of cases that can arise, and the need to produce high quality results
immediately, even in a pilot program. Instructions are essential for the tasks to be
conducted in a legal, efficient manner, with minimal room for discretion and associated



                                                                                              33
opportunities for corruption, and for the work to be completed in a nationally consistent
manner.

Similarly, without adequate training, staff will have difficulties in applying the laws,
regulations and instructions. They will not be fully familiar with the rules in a practical
way, they will not have developed the specific skills required for first registration, and they
will depart from a nationally consistent approach as they carry out tasks as they see fit.
They will be slow and inefficient. At worst, they will fail to complete their tasks, and in
doing so, they will waste time, money and valuable public support. Further, poor
performance due to a lack of training exposes staff to stress and conflict, and possible
accusations that they are seeking improper payments, with the consequential negative
impact on the program itself.

What are the causes of this issue?

While most countries manage to adopt the laws and even regulations to support first
registration prior to a program’s commencement, the development of instructions and
guidelines (which includes case studies and practical examples) is sometimes missing at
the start. Unless those designing and implementing the program understand the importance
of instructions and their role in the process, they will not allocate resources to developing
them, including resources to continually update the instructions as new issues are
identified. Commonly, there is a belief that the law covers everything, so no other materials
are required. A lack of instructions can also occur because management does not yet
understand the practical issues that will be confronted in the field, so they do not envisage
that any further information (other than the laws, etc.) would be required. Further, there is
likely to be a lack of people with the necessary experience to draft the instructions even if
management understands the need, particularly in countries where first registration
programs have not been conducted in recent times. Finally, a lack of instructions can
simply be due to poor project management, even if the need for instructions is understood,
with their drafting being omitted from, or incorrectly scheduled in, the program plan.

Additionally, but to a lesser degree, there is sometimes inadequate understanding of the
importance of training, or a lack of time and resources that are required to develop a formal,
well-structured and complete training program. Instead, staff are sent copies of laws,
regulations and orders from the headquarters, and they are left to their own devices to
interpret and apply these formal directives. Similarly, even if the need for training is
understood, the type of practical, case-based training required to apply the laws, etc. might
not be understood. Nor, commonly, is there an understanding of the role of soft skills, such
as communications and dispute resolution, which are required to successfully implement a
systematic registration program.
What can be done to deal with this issue?

Most obviously, those designing and implementing the program need to understand that
there is a requirement for instructions and appropriate training prior to the commencement
of fieldwork. In an environment where managers are under pressure to quickly commence
fieldwork and deliver results to their political superiors, it can be difficult to delay the



                                                                                            34
commencement of activities while instructions are being drafted and training conducted.
Examples from successful (and unsuccessful) first registration programs are therefore
needed to show how a failure to instruct and train staff at the outset will result in sub-
standard outcomes.

One good example comes from the highly successful Kyrgyz Republic first land
registration program, in which detailed materials and training were provided to staff prior
to the start of fieldwork. Materials were developed with international technical assistance,
training was provided at two dedicated centers, and recruits were required to pass an
examination before they were employed.

Of equal importance, the legal framework, including laws, regulations and orders, needs to
be drafted and in place. Subsequently, instructions, guidelines or a manual need to be
drafted. They must explain the various steps in the systematic registration process, interpret
the legislation, and cover the full range of practical issues that registration teams can be
expected to encounter. The instructions need to be continuously updated as experience
grows. These documents need to include practical examples and they need to be widely
available to staff.

Forms should be developed as part of the instructions. The forms should facilitate the
investigation and decision making process, and they should incorporate reminders about
key matters that can be missed, such as women’s rights and recording personal
identification numbers (where they exist), by marginal notes or footnotes or hyperlinks.

The drafting and adoption of instructions should be a key milestone in a first registration
program, and included in the management plan. It should be completed at the preparation
stage or in year one, and it could be made a trigger for further investments, particularly the
acquisition of equipment (such as cars, surveying equipment, IT hardware). This should
ensure that the management team understands the importance attached to instructions.
Failure to do so will have ramifications throughout the program. For example, in one land
registration project in the MNA region, 9 guidelines on first registration had not been
drafted or adopted by the time the project was suspended after three years of inadequate
results from the field. The lack of such instructions was seen as a key failing in guiding
otherwise capable staff in how to conduct their activities efficiently.

Foreign technical assistance, foreign examples and study tours can be an important means
of developing instructions where local expertise is limited. Foreign technical assistance for
preparing the instructions should be incorporated into the budget or sought from donors.
Those who have already experienced the problems encountered in the field are a great
resource, even if their experiences come from other countries. They should work with a
dedicated local team that is responsible for delivering the instructions.

Similarly, collegiums and forums of staff involved in first registration need to be held on a
regular basis to deal with issues as they arise, and the results should be reflected in clear


9
    Middle East and North Africa



                                                                                           35
directions for new or novel cases. It is also important to share the experiences of field staff,
who are actually implementing the first registration work, with the headquarters. Field staff
are well placed to develop appropriate solutions, but they are sometimes ignored. Their
input is very valuable when updating the instructions.

A well-structured set of training courses should be developed, with common courses for
all staff and specialist courses for those engaged in specific areas, such as surveying, public
outreach and law. The issues to be covered should not be restricted to technical issues
concerning surveying and legal documents, but should also cover communications, dealing
with people, dispute resolution, special concerns for certain groups (women, minorities,
children), etc. A training team needs to be constituted, and its functions reflected in the
program plan.

Training centers need to be established. They can be mobile or permanent centers, as long
as they have adequate resources. As well as formal presentations, the courses should
incorporate practical sessions and role playing, which allow staff to develop skills in a safe
environment. Soft skills in dealing with owners are just as important as the technical skills
required to measure boundaries and assess documents. For example, dealing with two
neighbors who have had a boundary disputes for many years requires not only skills in
surveying, but communications and negotiations.

Examinations should be conducted at the end of each training course to ensure that the staff
are equipped to begin work. This applies even where the staff are employed on a temporary
basis or are a contractor’s employees.

Checklist

    Understand the need for instructions and proper training, and the type of practical,
     case-based explanations that will equip staff to deal with the situations that they
     encounter in the field.

    Use successes and failures of other programs to illustrate the important role of
     instructions and training.

    Once the legal framework is in place, focus on drafting of instructions, which
     include practical examples and case studies.

    Include forms, with prompts, to assist staff in gathering information in a complete
     and structured manner.

    Make instructions widely available to staff, in various media.

    Incorporate the drafting of instructions and training of staff in the work plan. Make
     the drafting of instructions a key output of the initial stage of the program.




                                                                                             36
    Use foreign expertise and study tours to understand the need for instructions, what
     they should cover and how staff should be trained.

    Update instructions as new cases emerge, and draw on the field staff’s experiences
     and suggestions in doing so.

    Develop a training program and courses. Courses should include formal
     presentations, practical case studies and role playing. Include soft skills,
     particularly communications and negotiations, in any training program.

    Establish training centers (permanent or mobile) and resource them adequately.

    Include examinations at the end of training, and permit only those who pass to carry
     out fieldwork.


Part 3         Owners
11. Failure to capture all rights and right holders

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the failure of a systematic registration program to capture all rights and
right holders during the fieldwork and legal investigation stage, and what can be done to
improve the data capture. Such failures can result from poor legislation and procedures as
well as poor implementation and communications. But in failing to do so, one of the basic
objectives of the first registration program will not be met, that is, to systematically capture
and record all rights and right holders. This issue gives rise to the consequential need for a
mechanism to deal with outstanding rights and right holders’ claims that are missed, and
which must be reflected in the records after the systematic registration program has been
completed.

Further, this issue is closely tied to the design question about how best to go about
systematic registration from a cost-benefit perspective and whether a thorough
investigation is best, or whether a rapidly implemented data conversion program that
misses some rights and right holders, but which can be captured subsequently through a
remedial process, is a better approach than a slower program that seeks to capture all
information. The design question has been raised separately in Part 1 of this paper.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Capturing all rights and right holders, so that there is a complete record and also so that all
right holders can benefit, is a basic objective and design feature of a systematic registration
program. To fully achieve that objective, a systematic registration program also needs to
identify and record all subsidiary rights such as leases, mortgages, servitudes/easements,




                                                                                             37
etc.10 In this way, resources are used most efficiently and the results are more complete and
therefore more useful. A failure to identify rights and right holders is not only inefficient
and inconsistent with the aim of systematic registration but it can cause the community
members to doubt the process if they see that some people are left out. This may raise
questions of possible corruption, and undermine public support for, and engagement in, the
process and confidence in its results.

Further, the issue matters because correcting incomplete records either during the objection
or appeal phases, or even after the program has closed, can be a less efficient approach and
requires specific (and different) resources. A failure to correctly identify all rights and right
holders can even result in costly and time consuming disputes, and at worst, the loss of
some rights holders’ property, with subsequent stress, costs and negative impacts on their
livelihoods and wellbeing. High numbers of problem cases can also threaten political
support for the program.

What are the causes of this issue?

There are a number of causes for missing rights and right holders during a systematic
registration program. In relation to the failure to capture rights, this can be due to:

        a poorly drafted or incomplete legal framework, which fails to adequately cover
         rights, and also poorly drafted procedures;
        poor instruction materials or training, which result in a failure by field staff to
         understand that all rights need to be identified and recorded;
        a failure by field staff to properly inspect the property and identify features that
         would suggest the existence of other rights (such as fences, track marks, etc.),
         whether due to poor implementation and work practices, lack of a legal right to
         enter the property, lack of time or other reasons;
        a lack of physical indicators (on the ground) that the right exists, which can hinder
         identification of rights such as easements/servitudes, even if the registration teams
         inspect the whole of the property and know what they were looking for;
        a lack of contact with owners, particularly where the property is vacant or the
         owners live elsewhere;
        a failure to explain the legal obligations to owners to reveal all rights and the
         consequences of concealing information. Without prompting, owners might not
         know that they have to disclose all rights affecting the property (particularly
         subsidiary rights such as mortgages, leases, easements/servitudes, etc.) or they
         might conceal such rights if they think they can. The situation of mortgagees is
         particularly challenging because loans might be informal, owners might not admit
         their existence (either innocently or fraudulently), and lenders (particularly banks)
         might not have a local presence;


10
  In a small number of exceptions, such as for the rights of spouses and certain subsidiary rights,
particularly easements and servitudes and short-term leases, the law often provides protection without
recording, so that these rights do not need to be identified and recorded for the owner to receive protection.
However, there are clear advantages to capturing all such rights during the systematic registration process.


                                                                                                           38
       a failure to ask the necessary questions that would prompt the owner to give a full
        account and reveal other rights;
       a failure to explain to subsidiary right holders that they are part of the program and
        to encourage them to come forward to claim their rights. Owners of subsidiary
        rights might not be aware that they should engage with the program, they might not
        be aware that subsidiary rights are to be registered, or they might not be aware of
        the program itself (particularly if they live outside the area where fieldwork is
        underway or even overseas).

These failures can be collectively considered as a poor regulatory framework, lack of
guidance and training on how to identify all rights, and a failure to communicate and
engage.

In relation to the failure to capture right holders, this can be due to:

       a poorly drafted or incomplete legal framework, which fails to adequately identify
        right holders, and also poorly drafted procedures;
       a lack of contact with owners, particularly where they live elsewhere, so they are
        unaware that they can or should take part in the fieldwork activities due to an
        inadequate communications and engagement program, or poor implementation of
        that program;
       a failure to understand the types of right holding arrangements that might exist,
        such as beneficiaries under a will, spouses in relation to matrimonial property,
        children in relation to family lands, etc.;
       a failure to take action to address cultural factors that restrain wives, for example,
        from coming forward to claim their matrimonial rights, or daughters coming
        forward to claim their inheritance;
       a failure to have field staff who can engage with local people in their own language,
        particularly relevant to minorities;
       a failure to ask the necessary questions that would prompt the owner to give a full
        account and reveal other right holders, such as how the property was acquired – by
        marriage, inheritance, etc.;
       poorly designed forms that do not have space for multiple owners’ names.

Here, too, these failures fall under the headings of a poor regulatory framework, lack of
guidance and training, and a failure to communicate and engage.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

This is not a simple matter to fully address due to the difficulty in identifying rights,
particularly subsidiary rights, and certain categories of right holders as outlined above.
However, there are a variety of activities that can be implemented to reduce the number of
cases of failure to identify rights and right holders. These are to:

       ensure that the law makes it clear that the systematic registration process covers not
        only ownership but all subsidiary rights. There should be a clear definition of rights;


                                                                                            39
      through clear instructions and good training, ensure that the registration teams
       understand that all rights need to be identified and recorded;
      through proper supervision and oversight, ensure that all properties are inspected,
       based on a statement in the law that gives the field staff a legal right of access (after
       notice is served);
      use case studies and examples in the instructions and training to show how
       subsidiary rights can be identified even if physical indicators are not present or
       obvious;
      utilize the communications and engagement campaign to ensure that owners and
       subsidiary right holders know about the program and take part. Publicity for the
       fieldwork activities needs to be wider than just the local area to capture those who
       live outside the immediate area;
      ensure that all owners understand their obligation to disclose subsidiary rights and
       work with other local people to confirm the situation;
      include specific questions in the fieldwork teams’ instructions that they can ask to
       prompt owners to give a complete description of existing rights, and provide
       training to the teams in communications;
      establish a relationship with local lenders and keep them informed about the
       schedule for fieldwork so that they can provide their input.

As to right holders, the program should:

      ensure that the law and procedures cover all right holders, with the law including a
       wide definition of right holder;
      design and conduct a proper communications and engagement program that
       addresses the problems noted above;
      have clear messages about subsidiary rights as part of the publicity and
       communications campaign which specifically identifies subsidiary right holders as
       beneficiaries and informs them of the need to come forward and claim their rights;
      ensure that the publicity and communications program extends over the country
       and even beyond. The communications and engagement program needs to
       recognize that not all landholders will be living in the local area. Communications
       need to reach out to other parts of the country using national media. While it is
       much more difficult to reach people living in other countries, much can be achieved
       through contact with embassies, religious and cultural centers, articles in local
       language newspapers in other countries, web site information and word of mouth.
       All materials should also be published in minority languages of the area in which
       the program is to operate;
      take actions to overcome barriers faced by certain right holders, such as women, to
       engage in the process. Deliver specific messages for women, make special
       procedures and facilities available as required, and engage a women’s advocate (see
       section 13);
      work with land professionals and lenders to publicise the program and ensure that
       their clients’ interest are identified;
      provide clear instructions and train fieldwork teams in the types of right holding
       arrangements that can typically exist and how to identify other right holders. Make


                                                                                             40
       them aware that there can be multiple right holders over a single property – both as
       to “owners” and holders of lesser rights, such as leases and mortgages. Case studies
       and examples, in both the instructions and training, are needed to highlight these
       matters;
      ensure that the fieldwork teams are given questions that prompt owners to give a
       full picture of the ownership, particularly as to how the property was acquired, and
       ensure that the teams are trained in asking these questions. Require the teams to
       make thorough inquiries about how the property was acquired. Often the means by
       which a person becomes the owner of a property gives an indication as to who else
       might have an interest. For example, if the property was acquired through
       inheritance, then the other heirs might still be owners, or if the property was
       acquired while the claimant was married, then it probably also belongs to his or her
       spouse. If someone gained property from his or her deceased brother or sister, did
       the deceased have children? If so, perhaps the property belongs to those children;
      ensure that forms leave space for the names of all right holders, not simply the
       “head of household”, and that there is space for including full names and personal
       identity numbers (if they exist), which are checked for accuracy;
      through proper supervision and oversight, ensure that the fieldwork teams follow
       these steps;
      ensure that the objections phase of the program functions efficiently so that any
       rights and right holders that have been missed can be incorporated in the final
       results (see section 3).

What can be done with rights and right holders that are missed?

Even where the fieldwork teams do everything correctly, it is still possible to miss some
rights, whether as to ownership or subsidiary rights. However, there can be a failure to
provide a mechanism for recording such missing rights and right holders after the program
has closed, either due to a belief that the program will capture all rights and right holders
or simply a lack of awareness that the problem could even exist. Those designing and
implementing systematic registration programs can also underestimate the magnitude or
extent of the problem even when they are aware of its existence.

To capture rights and owners after the systematic registration program has been finalized,
there must be a specific means by which outstanding rights are recorded and owners,
particularly beneficiaries under a will, can have their ownership recorded. Therefore, at the
design phase of the systematic registration program, those designing it need to understand
that this problem will arise and that it will need to be addressed.

The law should recognize that not all rights will be identified and incorporate a provision
that allows updating, without penalty, within a specified period of time (such as three, six
or 12 years). Procedures need to be developed, and staff trained in how to apply them.
There also needs to be publicity, particularly with key stakeholder groups (such as banks
and the legal professionals) about the process. It is important to protect third parties who
are using the register’s information during this period. The law and the registry should
therefore make it clear to anyone relying on the records that outstanding rights could exist


                                                                                          41
and that the register is not guaranteed as being complete. This can be achieved by including
a note on any search, extract or inquiry results. Finally, the cost of making an application
to update the information should be free (or relatively low) to ensure that there is no
financial barrier to completing the work.

Checklist

As to rights:

    ensure that the law, procedures, instructions and training cover these issues,
     particularly that all rights and right holders are to be part of the program;
    oblige fieldwork staff to inspect the properties, and specify in the law that they are
     entitled to enter properties after giving notice;
    ensure that all owners understand their obligation to reveal the full range of rights
     and right holders of the property;
    work with local lenders to ensure that mortgages are identified; and
    oblige fieldwork teams to ask questions of the owners that prompt them to explain
     the situation fully.

As to right holders:

    ensure that the communications and engagement program reaches all right holders
     and it encourages them to take part in the program;
    train fieldwork staff in how to ask questions that would reveal other owners;
    design forms with space for more than one owner;
    take specific actions to overcome barriers faced by some members of the
     community in protecting their land rights; and
    ensure that the public display and objections phase runs efficiently.

As to rights and right holders that are missed, introduce a relatively simple, cheap and quick
mechanism for their rights to be recorded.


12. State land

What is this issue about?

State land is not a single issue but a multitude of issues with a common denominator – the
land is owned or managed by the state. The concept of “state land” covers a range of types
of land, such as the public domain, the state’s private domain, land that is occupied by third
parties with the state’s permission (such as leases), natural resources and the rivers and
coast. In fact, the concept really refers to any land that is not privately owned either by
individuals or corporations.

Due to space constraints, the following discussion covers only two aspects of state land,
but these commonly arise during systematic registration programs. These are: 1) the need
to engage officials to protect the state’s interests during the registration process; and 2) the


                                                                                             42
need to deal with claims based on occupation of state land that are revealed during
systematic registration.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

It is important to ensure proper representation of state owned land for several reasons.
Firstly, as for all property owners, the state’s interests should be protected during the first
registration program. Unless someone can represent the state’s interests, it is very likely
that land will be lost through occupation or encroachment, or it will simply not be identified
as belonging to the state, particularly where the existing records are poor.

Secondly, managers of state land (such as ministries for agriculture, forests, defence, etc.)
often have valuable records on the land that they manage, which can be very helpful in the
first registration process. Particularly where they are responsible for large areas, it is
important for managers of state land to be part of the program so that both the quality of
the data is high and the coverage of the area registered is maximized. Such involvement
will help to ensure that the results of the program are comprehensive so that state land can
be managed in a more informed way and the entire community has access to data on state
land for other purposes, such as planning, disaster management, environmental
management, etc.

Thirdly, a failure to properly deal with encroachments and long-term occupation of state
land can damage community support for the first registration program, and even create
antagonism towards the program if it causes people to be removed from the land that they
occupy. From the viewpoint of occupiers, too, a sudden end to their occupation of state
land, which they have used for housing or income production, can have a serious negative
impact on their lives and wellbeing. Thus, a state representative needs to be engaged in the
process to address and ideally formalize such occupations as part of a parallel process or,
at a minimum, permit some form of occupancy as an interim measure that would allow the
occupiers to apply for the land or find alternative land.

Lastly, registering state land as part of the overall registration program is the most efficient,
cost effective means of capturing state land in the registration system, even if it will not be
traded subsequently, and creating complete maps and records that benefit all.

What are the causes of this issue?

In some countries, there is no easily identifiable body that is responsible for the
management of state owned land, particularly at the local level. While there might be a
national level body with general responsibility, on the ground there is likely to be a range
of government bodies that have interests in state land, such as municipalities, utility
suppliers, representative agencies of ministries and national infrastructure bodies, and
semi-commercial bodies. Other land, which is not allocated to any government body, or
for which there is no record of the agency responsible, will probably have no local
representative. Further, there can be wide variations in the level of engagement of officials
in representing the state’s interest in such land and also in the knowledge, capacity and



                                                                                              43
available time of the officials with responsibility for state land. It can therefore be difficult
to find the right person to protect the state’s interest in land, to match that person (or
anyone) to a particular area, and to have that person take an active role in the systematic
registration process.

Further, those who have custody and management of state land can sometimes be opposed
(either actively or passively) to systematic registration programs. Making an accurate
record of all state owned land is often not in the interests of those managers and politicians
who benefit from the uncertain status of state land to allocate or lease out that land at below
market levels and thereby secure corrupt benefits for themselves. Experience in Serbia, for
example, showed that there was systematic under-pricing of leases of land managed by the
state to the benefit of the local officials in charge of managing that land.11

There are various causes for the occupation of state land by private persons or corporations.
It can occur because no one is actively monitoring the situation and excluding people from
occupying the land. Therefore, vacant state land becomes available for use, albeit
informally. In times of war, disaster or emergency, people might be forced to occupy state
land as they have nowhere else to go. Occupation of state land can also occur because the
occupier is unaware of the location of the boundaries of his or her land and innocently
encroaches onto an adjacent area owned by the state, or he or she believes the land to be
otherwise available for occupation.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

Engaging with the managers of state land at an early stage in the preparation of a systematic
registration program is important. The importance of the program and its benefits, plus the
need for active involvement of state land representatives should be impressed on them.
Care must be taken that other agencies do not hold up the process by refusing to cooperate
and provide their records (at risk of revealing poor management or corruption, as noted
above). It might be necessary therefore to have ministerial level engagement to secure the
cooperation of state land managers, or even the direct involvement of the prime minister.

As a first step, the various bodies need to be identified. Then, managers of large holdings,
such as those responsible for forests, roads, defence, farmland, pastures, etc., need to be
engaged directly in the process and, if possible, their records should be made available.
Similarly, municipalities should be contacted because they often have large areas under
their control. Once the process of systematic registration begins, nominated persons need
to take part in the fieldwork and investigation activities. They also need to check the
findings during the public display period.

In some countries, where there is no agency directly responsible for state land management
at the local level, a body with general responsibility for the state, such as the public
prosecutor’s office, will be engaged to represent the state. However, without specialist
knowledge and records, it is very likely that the public prosecutor’s involvement would be
a formality. Often in such situations, it falls on the land registration authority to protect the

11
     Personal communication, Director of Restitution Agency of Serbia, 22 March 2013.


                                                                                              44
state’s interests. Therefore, the land registration authority needs to be prepared to take an
active role in protecting the state’s interests and to allocate the necessary resources if
required.

Dealing with occupations of state land need to be addressed through a parallel process if
possible, or through a subsequent process. As allocating rights over state land is outside
the ambit of a systematic registration program, once occupation of state land is identified,
the ownership of that land by the state should be recorded, and the circumstances and
presumptive rights of the occupiers should be documented for immediately regularization
or future action. Ideally, the regularization of occupation of state land could take place
quickly as part of a parallel process, and then the results could be reflected in the register
at the same time that systematic registration is concluded. This approach was successfully
adopted in one pilot area in Romania, where the local authority made the decisions to
allocate land in coordination with the systematic registration program. Regularization
could range from short-term licences to occupy all the way through to granting ownership
of the land to the occupant. If regularization cannot occur immediately, there should be a
recording in the register that the state land is subject to some form of occupation or claim,
and that proceedings are underway to regularize the occupation (if that is the case).

It is assumed in the discussion immediately above that the legal framework would permit
occupation of state land to be regularized, and that there is a process that is relatively
simple, inexpensive and accessible. Were that not the case, then appropriate action would
need to be taken to address those shortcomings through research, policy engagement,
adoption of legislation, development of procedures and implementation of those
procedures.

Checklist

    Identify and engage with those responsible for managing state land early in the
     preparation of the program at a national level.

    Utilize the land records of each ministry and agency that has state land holdings in
     a particular area.

    Prior to commencing fieldwork in each locality, engage with local level officials
     and municipalities.

    Where nobody is responsible, the land registration authority might need to take on
     the responsibility to represent the state’s interest.

    Regularize occupations of state land as part of a parallel process where possible.
     Otherwise, make a record of occupations of state land that permit regularization to
     occur subsequently.




                                                                                           45
13. Women, minorities, children

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the problems faced by women in being able to engage in first
registration programs on an equal basis with others in society, and the special additional
steps that need to be taken to overcome barriers and hurdles to their participation. This
issue also affects minorities12 and children, although they can also have concerns that are
particular to them.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

A systematic registration program should create opportunities for all members of the
community to participate equally in registration, so that everyone has the opportunity to
protect their rights and enjoy the other benefits of registration. A failure to deal with the
special needs of women, as well as minorities and children, could see them missing out on
the benefits. Additionally, a failure to include all owners no matter their gender, ethnicity,
religion or age could undermine the validity of the registration process in the eyes of the
community, which in turn could result in lack of public engagement and trust in the
outcomes. Further, a failure to capture all properties and owners is not as cost efficient as
a program that covers all rights at the same time. In the extreme, a failure of women,
minorities and children to participate in first registration can result in the loss of their rights
if others step in to claim those rights, with consequential threats to their livelihood and
wellbeing.

What are the causes of this issue?

Women face a variety of barriers to taking part in some aspects of society, including
cultural, educational and financial barriers, and taking part in a land registration program
is no different. Culturally, women might not be permitted (either expressly or impliedly)
from taking steps to protect their land rights, particularly in inheritance cases and for
matrimonial property; they might be excluded because they cannot read or write; or they
might not have the financial resources or time to engage, even where first registration is
free, because they cannot travel or take time away from work or home. There is a great
deal of research on the barriers faced by women, which should be consulted to better
understand such problems.13 These barriers can, and often do, also apply to members of
minorities. Children (particularly orphans) face even greater barriers, although little
attention has been paid to them in systematic registration programs.14

12
   Minorities, as used here, can mean linguistic, social, ethnic minorities and potentially men in matrilocal
societies, where a husband marries into a wife’s family, such as in Laos.
13
   Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2008/10/9953789/gender-agriculture-sourcebook;
FAO Governing Tenure for Women and Men,
http://www.fao.org/docrep/017/i3114e/i3114e.pdf
14
   The discussion here relates primarily to orphans, such as those children whose parents have died through
conflict or disease, and are under the care of other relatives or organizations. There is potential for orphans,
who sometimes cannot speak for themselves, to be overlooked during systematic registration, particularly if


                                                                                                             46
Another cause of women being excluded can come from the legal framework, which can
have express or implied barriers regarding women and their property rights. Express
hurdles could include prohibitions against them holding property, or holding property
solely by themselves, or dealing with their rights without another’s permission. Implied
hurdles could include omission of any mention of women or a failure to specifically address
in the law the barriers that they face with positive statements to overcome cultural norms.

A further cause of this problem is the failure of those conducting systematic registration to
be aware of the hurdles faced by women and their particular needs. Women are sometimes
simply ignored. Procedures and forms, for example, can be designed in such a way that
they omit any possibility of women taking part in the process, such as by having space only
for the head of household’s name. Minorities can face similar hurdles as well as language
barriers, and the needs of children receive little or no attention.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

There are numerous steps that can be taken to address the barriers faced by women and to
encourage and empower them to take part in a systematic registration program.

Awareness of the problems and need to take action: often, those designing and
implementing systematic registration programs will not be aware that there is any problem,
so it is necessary to make them aware that problems can exist and that remedial action
needs to be taken. Experience shows that this is not a simple matter as most men and many
women refuse to accept that women have problems in relation to land, even when they are
presented with statistical evidence which demonstrates gross inequalities in ownership.

Review of the social and legal context: as a preliminary step, there should be a thorough
investigation of the social setting, with a focus on property ownership and the issues facing
women, which could also recommend appropriate actions to overcome such issues. An
assessment of the legal framework should be prepared, noting provisions that facilitate and
also impede women’s ownership and their ability to deal with their property rights.

Legal reform: if necessary, the law should be amended firstly, to remove any obstacles to
women’s involvement in the program and secondly, to actively facilitate their
involvement. 15 More broadly, legislative reform is necessary to allow and encourage
women to obtain and use property rights.

Communications, education and publications: as part of the communications and
engagement program, there should be a special focus on women. Pictures of women should
be included in all publications; there should be text dealing specifically with women; and

their carer (such as a grandparent, uncle or aunt) claims the property right for himself or herself or is
assumed by the registration field staff to be the owner without proper investigation. However, in some
limited cases, children within families can have property rights (such as through division of collective
farms in some countries of the former Soviet Union) that are separate from the rights of their parents.
15
   See Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook for suggestions on the types of reforms that can be introduced.


                                                                                                            47
there should be public meetings for women (see section 7). Publications can also cover
specific matters for women, such as their legal rights and entitlements. Awareness raising
of the problems facing women should be held with officials, staff, community leaders and
others who are closely involved in the systematic registration program as part of the
broader educational activities. The relevant laws concerning women’s rights can be
published in a booklet and incorporated in the instructions to staff.

Processes and procedures: the steps of the systematic registration process should include
positive actions to elicit and identify women’s rights, to give them opportunities to take
part, and to ensure their consent and engagement (particularly in relation to matrimonial
property). The process can be designed to deliver these outcomes through mainstreaming
concerns for women in the each of the program’s activities.

Instructions and forms: field staff should have clear instructions on how to assess whether
women of the household have rights, including subsidiary rights, and how they should ask
questions to get an accurate picture of the situation. Forms should be designed to facilitate
this process, with hints and reminders of what needs to be identified. Also, the forms should
make room for multiple owners, rather than just “head of household”, and subsidiary rights.

Field staff and training: there should be a mix of men and women in the field, including at
the field offices and public display. They should have training in problems faced by women
in protecting their property rights, the legal rights of women, how to best communicate,
how to use the instructions and forms (as above) to overcome barriers, and how to work
with NGOs and women’s advocates to get the best results.

Public meetings and women’s advocates, including engagement with NGOs: meetings
should specifically address women and their rights, and there could be meetings just for
women. It can be useful to engage a women’s advocate who can directly advise and
represent or counsel women during the process. Building a close relationship with women
focused NGOs or community groups can give access to useful networks, bodies of
knowledge and assistance.

Hours and access: the fieldwork and public display activities should be conducted around
times that not only suit the staff but also the owners. This can mean after hours, weekends,
after markets have closed, etc. depending on the local setting. Women only service times
or even days should be considered. Public displays should be located close to where people
live so that everyone has easy access, particularly if they have other duties at home.

Data collection and evaluation: gender disaggregated data should be collected on
participants at meetings, field staff, inquiries at the public display and ownership of
property (including subsidiary rights). All reports should include a gender section, which
can assess the extent to which systematic registration is facilitating the recording of
women’s rights and what needs to be done to better communicate, encourage engagement
and deliver better results.




                                                                                          48
Many of these initiatives are useful, when modified, to facilitate the engagement of
minority group members in systematic registration. For example, communications and
publications need to be in minority languages. Children encounter much greater barriers,
but the use of advocates, NGOs, legal aid and other services to look out for their rights can
go some way toward protecting their interests.

Checklist

    Educate senior management on the barriers faced by women and the need to take
     steps to overcome those barriers.

    Review the social and legal context, and introduce reforms to the legal framework
     if necessary.

    Ensure women are a particular focus of the communications and engagement
     program.

    Mainstream women in the processes and procedures of systematic registration.

    Draft instructions and forms to capture women owners and their rights.

    Have a mix of male and female field staff, and provide training in gender issues to
     all.

    Conduct meetings for women, work with women’s NGOs, and engage a women’s
     advocate to represent women.

    Adopt working hours and set meeting times that take into account the
     responsibilities of women in the home and at work.

    Collect gender disaggregated data and report on women’s participation.


14. Indigenous Peoples with Customary Tenure Systems

What is this issue about?

The issues concerns the challenges faced during systematic registration when the program
deals with indigenous peoples and other communities with customary tenure systems, and
the extra steps that need to be taken to engage with such people and to ensure that their
rights are identified and recorded.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Programs to register property rights, such as through systematic registration, should cater
to all members of the community, and take action to make the program accessible to all.
This includes indigenous peoples, who can face specific barriers and also have particular


                                                                                          49
needs that should be addressed so that they can benefit from the program equally with other
members of the society. Further, if the specific issues raised by indigenous peoples are not
considered, systematic registration could exacerbate conflict, violate legitimate rights and
generate tensions that neutralize efforts carried out by the program, particularly where the
land being registered is under pressure due to the advance of the agricultural frontier,
growing interests in the exploitation of natural resources, increases in migration,
displacement of populations affected by armed conflict which can often be seen in areas
traditionally occupied by indigenous communities.

What are the causes of this issue?

Regarding the recognition of rights (see Part 3), legal frameworks in many countries do not
capture adequately the rights of indigenous peoples and other communities with customary
tenure. Despite the fact that national constitutions in 104 countries have provisions
recognizing customary practices and 32 countries have specific provisions on customary
land tenure and resource rights, implementation of these provisions is very poor. In some
countries, national laws ignore customary tenure or consider such land as vacant state
owned land; in others, some forms of customary tenure are acknowledged as occupation or
possession but not worthy of a registered title. It is also very common that land
administration organizations act in an uncoordinated manner, following their own sectorial
agendas –granting concessionary rights for resource use to large firms, for example for
timber or hydrocarbons exploitation – and disregarding the traditional forms of use and
management of territories by customary systems.

Regarding the design of programs (see Part 1), indigenous peoples and other communities
with customary tenure systems usually have insufficient or no official documentation to
support their tenure rights. In many countries, the evidence accepted by law to prove tenure
rights are associated with the agricultural use of land and are unable to capture the complex
forms of resource use by communities that live there (such as seasonal harvesting, fishing
and hunting, nomadic herding and other ways of resource management). In some cases, the
need to comply with the agricultural-focused proof of tenure has produced incentives for
deforestation by colonos and communities wanting to receive title. This situation is an
indication that indigenous peoples and other communities with customary tenure systems
have a peculiar views of the cultural, social and religious values of the land and natural
resources, which do not always conform with the values of land implicit in the current laws.
In many countries, legislation establishes that communities can only receive land titles if
they are previously registered as juridical persons through administrative procedures that
are too long, cumbersome, and expensive, and there processes end up excluding these
communities from the systematic registration program.

Regarding the implementation of systematic first registration programs (see section 7), the
communications and engagement efforts require inquiring and understanding the views and
aspirations of indigenous peoples and communities concerning their land, for which state
organizations face language, cultural and social barriers. In many cases, a long history of
spoliation and dispossession, and/or environmental damage to their habitats, has produced




                                                                                          50
the additional challenge of restoring trust and respect to assure meaningful participation by
the communities and their organizations.

What can be done to deal with this issue?16

Regarding the recognition of rights, it is necessary to identify whether there are
international obligations related to indigenous and other communities with customary
tenure rights (such as the international conventions ILO 169, or the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights), and if the laws and regulations regarding first registration
comply with the international obligations and the national constitution. A comprehensive
and detailed analysis identifying the different types of land tenure and use would identify
areas in which legal reform is required, and there would need to be consultation on such
changes with all sectors of society with the free, previous and informed consent of
indigenous peoples and their organizations. Coordination of legal frameworks and policies
with other land administration agencies such as environmental authorities and resource
management agencies is critical.

Regarding the design of programs, the rules should consider the use of non-documentary
mechanisms to demonstrate tenure rights, respecting the diversity of customary uses (both
exclusive and shared) and recognizing legal pluralism. The program should also
incorporate traditional dispute resolution mechanisms and recognition of existing and
legitimate customary structures.

Regarding the implementation of systematic first registration programs, the
communications and engagement strategy should pay special attention to making all
materials accessible in local languages. It also needs to take into account the needs and
practices of local communities about the adequate time for discussions, reflections and
formulation of responses. A unit specialized in indigenous people’s communications, able
to create capacities within the other operational units (legal, technical) could be considered.
The use of local networks and organizational structures for data gathering and social
monitoring may facilitate the work. The strengthening of these customary structures,
especially to sensitize them on the importance of, and respect towards, women’s and other
vulnerable groups rights, are crucial to ensure efficiency and sustainability.

Checklist

       Identify what international obligations related to indigenous and other communities
        with customary tenure rights are relevant.

       Perform a detailed analysis identifying the different types of land tenure and use to
        identify areas in which legal reform is required.

       Consult on such changes with all sectors of society with the free, previous and
        informed consent of indigenous peoples and their organizations.


16
     See Annex 1 for additional resources on this issue.



                                                                                            51
        Coordinate of legal frameworks and policies with other land management agencies.

        Incorporate traditional dispute resolution mechanisms and recognition of existing
         and legitimate customary structures.

        Ensure specialized communications for these communicates with all materials
         accessible in local languages.

        Create a unit specialized in indigenous people’s communications.


Part 4              Legal Issues
There are numerous legal issues that arise during a first registration program, particularly
when investigating ownership documents. The following covers only a small number of
legal issues that are relevant to first registration. For a discussion of a wider range of legal
issues relating to the governance of tenure, see the FAO publication Responsible
Governance of Tenure and the Law, A guide for lawyers and other legal service
providers.17

15. Constitutional concerns

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the doctrine of separation of powers, which is a foundation of many
constitutions around the world, and its relevance to first registration programs.

The doctrine of separation of powers is commonly established or applied through an
express statement in a country’s constitution that the powers of the legislature, executive
(administration) and judiciary are separate, but it can also be implied by the structure of
the constitution, with separate parts or chapters dealing with each of the three arms of
government. The main consequence of the separation of powers is that an attempt by one
arm of government to exercise the powers of another arm will be regarded as invalid and
ineffective.

As first registration of title is a function of investigating, determining and recognizing
rights, it has been characterized as a judicial function in many parts of the world, and thus
only the judiciary can conduct it. But in practice the executive arm of government often
conducts first registration of title to make it quicker and cheaper. Thus a conflict potentially
arises as to the validity of the executive arm of government conducting title registration.
This issue applies to both the systematic and sporadic means of first registration.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

17
     http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5449e.pdf


                                                                                             52
This issue is central to the question of who should be responsible for first registration and
whether the executive arm of government can validly implement a program. It is also very
important for operational and financing purposes because characterizing first registration
as a judicial process, rather than an administrative one, would mean that all applications
for first registration would have to be considered by a judge in a duly constituted court –
either an existing court or, more likely, one created specifically for the purpose of first
registration. This would not only change the approach to first registration normally
employed but it would impose higher costs both in terms of time and money, and it could
eliminate some of the procedural safeguards that are part of the systematic registration
process, such as the public display.

This is not simply a theoretical concern. As attempts to introduce title registration in
various states of the United States of America in the 19th and 20th centuries show, special
interest groups can successfully challenge title registration conducted by the executive arm
of government on constitutional grounds (that is, the executive’s actions were in breach of
the doctrine of separation of powers), with the result that the program becomes
uneconomical and fails.

What are the causes of this issue?

As noted, the basis of the issue lies with the doctrine of separation of powers (which cannot
be easily altered due to its fundamental basis in the constitutions of many countries) and
the nature of first registration activities – whether they are judicial or administrative in
nature. The issue arises because the executive arm of government is often best placed to
carry out a registration program.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

At the very start, a legal review needs to establish what the constitution provides.
Presumably, it will have adopted the separation of powers doctrine either expressly or by
means of the constitution’s structure because most written constitutions use the separation
of powers as a starting point.18

If so, the law regulating first registration needs to make it clear that the process is one of
declaring the existing situation, rather than adjudicating on rights or boundaries, and that
the newly created records merely reflect the existing situation in a new form. The powers
of officials under the law would also need to be expressed in a similar way. Further, the
law needs to make clear that any disputes between parties are to be referred to the judicial
arm of government for resolution (after the appropriate dispute resolution processes have
been followed – see section 3).

Otherwise, there is nothing that a law regulating first registration or a government agency
implementing first registration can do to alter such a fundamental constitutional matter as


18
     If the separation of powers doctrine does not apply, then the problem discussed here does not arise.


                                                                                                            53
the separation of powers. The situation must be accepted and the risk of a challenge kept
in mind.

Assuming that a challenge were made, presumably by an interest group opposed to title
registration, then the registration authority would need to mount a defence of the law and
the process of first registration. That defence would highlight the administrative nature of
first registration, the mere acceptance of existing documentation and other facts, and the
transference of the current situation into the registry. It would need to be stressed that
officials are not exercising discretion or deciding between competing rights. Rather, it
would be stressed, only clear cases would be registered and contentious issues would be
referred to the courts, as would any other dispute between parties.

Were a challenge to the registration law to prove successful, such that the executive arm
could no longer conduct all aspects of first registration, then it would be necessary to re-
think the first registration process. It might be necessary to establish a process through an
existing court or perhaps a newly created land court that would be dedicated to handling
the hundreds or thousands of cases that are typically involved in a first registration
program. A hybrid approach, in which the executive arm prepares cases that are then
formalized by the judiciary, could also be considered. Resources, including trained staff,
would need to be assigned to the court, and a streamlined process developed, such as one
in which non-judicial staff investigate and prepare draft determinations that a judge can
simply review and endorse. The cost of all this would need to be assessed and balanced
against the benefits of first registration to the community.

The failure of title registration in the United States of America can be directly attributed to
the cost and complexity of the judicial process that is required to register property, and it
is also proof that a risk exists in any country that has a constitution based on the doctrine
of separation of powers. Another illustration of the risk comes from Sri Lanka where, in
the early 2000s, the Law Society planned to challenge the Registration of Title Act on
constitutional grounds, which would have dramatically changed the registration process
had they been successful. While no challenge was brought because the registration program
did not proceeded for other reasons, the threat and consequences of a challenge were taken
very seriously.

Checklist

    Determine whether the separation of powers doctrine has been adopted in the
     constitution, either expressly or by means of the constitution’s structure.

    Draft the law regulating title registration in such a way that it characterizes the first
     registration process as one of declaration rather than determination, and that
     contentious matters are to be referred to the courts.

    In any challenge, stress the administrative nature of the process and the role of the
     judiciary in dealing with disputes.




                                                                                            54
    If a challenge were successful, develop court-based methods that draw on the
     efficiencies of systematic registration to reduce the cost of the program. Ensure that
     adequate numbers of administrative and technical staff are available to support the
     judges, who would formalize draft determinations made by the non-judicial staff.


16. Legislative basis

What is this issue about?

This issue concerns the need for an adequate legal basis to permit first registration to occur
and to ensure that all the necessary powers and protections are included in the law. This
issue, too, applies to both the systematic and sporadic means of first registration.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Without a solid legal basis, a variety of risks can arise, such as:

       the process and its decisions could be seen as not being legitimate because they are
        not legally sanctioned or authorized;
       the process and its decisions could be challenged in court as beyond or inconsistent
        with what is authorized;
       officials might be unwilling to make decisions without legal backing;
       variations in practice are likely to develop, and the way is open for undue influence
        or corruption because discretion would need to be used to implement the process;
       existing rights could be lost or diminished through poorly defined processes, lack
        of checks and balances, and lack of possibilities for appeal;
       many cases might not be registered because existing laws might only cover formal
        ownership, and therefore fail to deal with cases such as ownership by long-term
        possession (see section 1).

Negative consequences could follow. For example, the first registration program could
completely fail or it could fail to benefit the whole community, and resources could be
wasted as a result and the credibility of the program and the institution responsible could
be damaged.

Thus, ensuring that there is a robust, complete legal foundation for the systematic
registration program is important if it is to be effective, nationally consistent and efficient,
if corruption opportunities are to be minimized, if it is to be accepted by the community,
and if all property holders are to benefit and be protected.

What are the causes of this issue?

It is uncommon for a first registration program to have no legal basis, as there are generally
laws on property rights, ownership, transactions, inheritance and other aspects of tenure.
However, these laws generally fall short when it comes to the process of first registration,


                                                                                             55
particularly in regard to clearly defining the processes, rights and responsibilities of both
officials and owners. So reliance on the existing legal framework as a sufficient basis to
conduct first registration can often give rise to problems.

In terms of providing an adequate legal basis, once a decision is made to have a law that
covers first registration, there can still be problems in establishing an adequate legislative
basis due to lack of experience in both the practical and legal aspects of the process, or
underestimating the magnitude of issues, such as dealing with ownership by means of long-
term possession. Without practical experience in first registration, particularly the
systematic registration process, it is difficult to know which issues will need to be
addressed in the law and how they will need to be addressed. Further, even with some
experience, the knowledge of how to best deal with the issue might also be missing.
Copying laws from elsewhere might help somewhat, but as each country has its own
circumstances and needs, no foreign law would be exactly appropriate.

Failure to identify inconsistencies and conflicts, and also gaps, in the legal framework can
also give rise to problems. A failure to carry out an overall review and assessment of the
existing laws, from a first registration perspective, and then take the necessary remedial
action, can commonly cause problems when implementation commences.

What can be done to deal with this issue?

There are several actions that need to be taken to ensure that the legal framework is
adequate to commence first registration activities.

Firstly, an overview of all the laws that are relevant to land should be produced. It does not
need to be detailed, but should locate and consider all relevant provisions across the
constitution, various codes, implementing laws and regulations. The overview should
establish the existing powers, rights, etc. that are useful, the provisions that are missing,
any overlaps (particularly in authority or responsibility), and the provisions that run counter
to good practice in first registration (if any). A set of essential and also non-essential
changes can then be formulated, with essential changes being introduced before first
registration work commences.

For all the steps discussed here, foreign technical assistance can be greatly beneficial,
particularly in countries with no experience of first registration programs. Study tours, too,
can be helpful.

Secondly, a solid legal basis for the activities of first registration should be established,
which would require either a new law or amendments to the existing law. At a minimum,
the law should cover:

      appointment of officials to conduct first registration;
      powers of officials to consider documents and other evidence to confirm ownership;
      the main steps and stages in the process, such as declaring an area subject to first
       registration, public awareness, fieldwork investigation, determination and public


                                                                                            56
       display, appeals, final conclusion and completion of the process, with the results
       transferred into the registry’s records;
      power to consider non-documentary evidence and to make conclusions regarding
       long-term possession, including possession for periods that are shorter than the
       limitation period;
      provisions that protect and promote the rights of women, minorities and members
       of vulnerable groups;
      details on how to deal with transactions that occur while first registration is
       underway (instead of prohibiting any transactions), including changes of ownership
       due to inheritance;
      adequate appeal provisions, using an ascending order of complexity and cost, such
       as the first level of objection being a simple internal review, then a more formal
       administrative review and finally a judicial review (see section 3);
      power to issue regulations, instructions and a practical manual to deal with the
       details of the matters covered in the law.

Interestingly, and perhaps surprisingly, two matters of deep concern to lawyers are often
not relevant or do not have a negative impact on first registration programs. These are the
effect of registration (what benefit does registration provide?) and the closely connected
issue of the clarity and security of land tenure rights being registered (are the people’s
rights freehold, use right, usufruct right, etc.?). Although a very serious concern to lawyers
and those involved in securing tenure rights for people, these issues can often be put to one
side (at least at first) during first registration, primarily because they do not have an impact
on the process itself. For example, vaguely defined use rights are just as capable of being
registered as freehold ownership. These issues should, however, be on the medium term
agenda in a successful land registration program to ensure that there is adequate clarity and
tenure security for the owners and those who deal with them.

Thirdly, there needs to be implementation materials, such as regulations and instructions.
These, too, should be prepared before registration work commences, and staff provided
with appropriate training (see section 10).

Checklist

    Carry out a review of all relevant laws and identify which provisions need to be
     changed to support a first registration program.

    Use technical assistance to help conduct the review, draft legislation and prepare
     implementation materials.

    Ensure that all key matters are addressed in the law regulating first registration,
     including powers of officials, the key steps in the processes, dispute resolution
     mechanisms, etc.

    Prepare implementation materials and provide training to staff in their use before
     the registration program begins.


                                                                                             57
17. Legal aspects of area

What is this issue about?

Problems relating to the legal consequences of locating and measuring boundaries can
occupy a disproportionate amount of time and effort to understand, develop solutions and
negotiate acceptance of changes (including to the law). There are many such issues, but the
problem of discrepancies in measurements of area is one that commonly arises, along with
the related question of how to deal with shortages and, to a lesser degree, excesses. Others
include discrepancies in dimensions, informal subdivisions (particularly arising through
inheritance), access to land locked parcels, informal servitudes and encroachments.
Disputes between neighbors over boundaries can also be a significant problem, and will
often require officials to make a decision that can be appealed against (see section 3). The
following discussion will, however, focus only on the area issue.

Why does this issue matter for first registration?

Problems with boundaries and area are important to address because disputes or
dissatisfaction regarding area can threaten the validity of fieldwork results, including
through appeals and even legal challenges to the first registration process itself (see section
15). If the problem is widespread, the public’s confidence in the entire systematic
registration program can be threatened by a failure to address it. Likewise, a failure to deal
with area problems means that time and funds spent on registration can be wasted, and
people can miss out on the benefits of registration. Where the system guarantees areas (in
a very small number of countries), then problems with area could lead to claims for
compensation that could have a major negative impact on government finances and even
the financial viability of the registration system.

What are the causes of this issue?

There are multiple causes to the problems with measurements and areas, depending on the
history, customs, level of technology, legal framework and standards of the surveying
profession. Also, differences in the purpose of the surveys would have an impact, as some
surveys were conducted with other objectives in mind and therefore adopted a different
approach. Another common cause of the problem of discrepancies between declared areas
and measured areas is tax avoidance, with former owners understating the area of their land
so that they would pay less tax. Further, legal documents will often refer to a specific area
although this might never have been correct, yet once the numbers are written, they take
on a life of their own. Alternatively, stated areas might have once been correct but no longer
reflect the actual situation due to changes in the physical world over the years that were
never incorporated in legal documents, such as re-alignments and subdivisions.

What can be done to deal with this issue?




                                                                                            58
Investigate the situation. Each country will have different problems, so it is important to
conduct an investigation prior to rolling out a systematic registration program to identify
the main types of cases that will arise (if any) and consider how to deal with the problems
well in advance. An assessment of the legal framework should also be conducted to see if,
and how, the laws deal with shortages and excesses of area.

Provide clear legislative response to issues. Once the nature of the problem and its causes
are identified, technical and legal specialists can develop workable solutions. It is likely
that a legal basis for the solutions would be needed, so legislation should be drafted and
adopted. For example, one solution that has been incorporated in the law elsewhere is the
concept of permissible discrepancies, which allows certain discrepancies in area to be
regarded as within acceptable limits and for no action to be necessary or permitted.
Alternatively, the law could make it clear that the measured area prevails, and that areas
stated in documents are indicative only. Importantly, any implied or express guarantee as
to area should be removed from the law, with a statement (if necessary) to the effect that
dimensions and areas as shown are indicative only.

Clarify the status of information and include disclaimers in the records. While area is an
important element of a survey and very useful for private and public sector users, the status
of this information should be clearly specified. Based on the text of the law, diagrams and
other records should carry a disclaimer making it clear that the statement of area is not
absolute. Where the system has a history of recording areas in deeds, that area should not
be reproduced in the register. But where it is decided that the area in the deed must be
recorded and displayed, then it should be clear that it is historical information only.

Adopt a holistic approach to problems, including redistribution through quasi-judicial or
judicial processes. In formulating solutions, particularly in locations where discrepancies
in area are endemic (such as a result of poor land allocation processes), then the option of
a reconfiguration of the boundaries should be considered. This would normally require a
scheme to be developed, considered by a judge, and then confirmed by a court order
because some form of redistribution or expropriation would be necessary. A detailed
legislative basis would be required, as would a good public relations program.

Educate the public, professionals and officials. Work on educating the public and others
that parcel areas are approximate only, and that surveyed dimensions and areas will change
with time. As noted immediately above, a statement on diagrams and maps to this effect is
a good first step in the process. As some countries calculate the sale price of property on
the basis of an amount multiplied by area (such as a $x per square meter), advising owners
that the area of their property is lower than they thought can be a difficult public relations
exercise, so it needs to be well thought out and owners need to be given a long period of
warning. Professionals can play an important role in educating their clients, so working
closely with notaries, lawyers, surveyors, real estate agents and others involved in the land
sector would be helpful. Similarly, land registry staff need to be educated so that they can
explain the situation to the public.

Checklist



                                                                                           59
    Carry out an investigation into the possible problems with area, and assess how the
     law deals with such problems.

    Develop workable solutions and provide a legal basis for them if necessary, and
     eliminate any guarantee as to area that might exist in the law.

    Do not reproduce old areas as shown in deeds, but if it is necessary to do so, then
     include a disclaimer that such information has only historic relevance.

    Take a holistic approach to resolving the problems, particularly where they occur
     consistently, such as reconfiguration of all boundaries.

    Educate the public, professionals and staff on the issues and solutions well in
     advance of introducing changes.




Conclusions
While much can go wrong with systematic registration, as this paper shows, there are many
actions that can be taken to avoid or minimize the adverse impacts. The design and
preparation stage is, perhaps, the most important time to address these potential problems
and take actions in accordance with best practice. That phase needs to focus not just on the
processes, but also the legal framework, instructions and forms, preparation of training
materials and courses, and design of the communications and engagement program.
Spending a substantial amount of time designing and preparing the program might make it
appear that the fieldwork will never commence, but the time spent is an investment and
will permit the fieldwork to progress more quickly and with less risk than would otherwise
be the case. Experience has shown that ill prepared programs not only fail but they use up
the goodwill and enthusiasm that are essential for the success of a mass campaign, such as
systematic registration, making the possibilities of registering all the properties in a second
attempt more remote.

This paper has also noted the importance of overseeing implementation to ensure that the
field staff follow the design, while also allowing for the program to develop and evolve in
light of first-hand experience. Systematic registration programs can take many years to
complete, so it is to be expected that they will change over time, and therefore a flexible
approach to implementation is required.

As many countries have found, it is possible to successfully conduct systematic registration
programs and for the country to benefit as a result. This paper will, hopefully, contribute
to the success of future programs by drawing on the lessons to be learned from both the
successes and failings of other programs.




                                                                                            60
             Annex 1: Indigenous Peoples with Customary Tenure Systems
                              Guidelines and references

Colchester Marcus, et al. Indigenous land tenure: challenges and possibilities. In: FAO
Land Reform, land Settlement and Cooperatives. 2014/1

Comision Interamericana de Derechos Humanos. Derechos de los Pueblos Indígenas y
Tribales Sobre sus Tierras Ancestrales y Recursos Naturales.
Normas y Jurisprudencia del Sistema Interamericano de Derechos Humanos.
http://cidh.org/countryrep/TierrasIndigenas2009/Cap.VI.htm Accessed 26/05/2016

Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous People’s Issues – IASG. Lands, Territories
and Resources. Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous People’s Issues. Thematic
Paper towards the preparation of the 2014 World Conference on Indigenous Peoples.
June 2014
http://www.un.org/en/ga/president/68/pdf/wcip/IASG%20Paper%20_%20Lands%20territ
ories%20and%20resources%20-%20rev1.pdf. Accessed 26/05/2016

International Council on Mining and Metals. Indigenous People and Mining. Good
Practice
https://www.icmm.com/document/1221 Accessed 26/05/2016

Plant, Roger and Søren Hvalkof. Titulación de tierras y pueblos indígenas / (Sustainable
Development Department Technical papers series ; IND-109). BID. 2002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?docnum=1481878 Accessed
26/05/2016

Siegel, B, M. D. Childress, and B. L. Barham (2013). Reflections on 20 years of land-
related development projects in Central America 10 things you might not expect, and
future directions.
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.638.480&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Accessed 26/05/2016


World Bank: Land Tenure Policy. Securing Rights to Reduce Poverty and Promote Rural
Growth. Nicaragua: Indigenous Peoples’ Land Demarcation and Titlings
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSDNET/Resources/5944695-
1342131595036/Land_Tenure_Results_Note_2011.pdf
Accessed 26/05/2016




                                                                                          61
