East Asia and the Paciﬁc Corporate Governance Program
Annual Summary 2015




in partnership with
SELECTED CUMULATIVE PROGRAM RESULTS AS OF JUNE 2015:

•    Direct ﬁrm engagements facilitated more than $1.5 billion in ﬁnancing due
     in part to corporate governance improvements.
•    More than 100 public-awareness events attracted over 8,500 participants
     and 2,000 ﬁrms.
•    Over 350 trainers in countries throughout the region received training.
•    Partner-conducted workshops— enabled through train-the-trainer
     workshops—reached more than 7,000 executives.
•    14 laws, regulations, codes, and policies in countries throughout the region
     were improved.
•    More than 6,000 women at the board and senior management levels were
     trained and/or attended corporate governance events.




IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution
focused exclusively on the private sector. We help developing countries achieve
sustainable growth by ﬁnancing investment, mobilizing capital in international ﬁnancial
markets, and providing advisory services to businesses and governments. For more
information, visit www.ifc.org.


All rights reserved.

This report is a product of the IFC, a member of the World Bank Group. The material in
this report is set out in good faith for general guidance, and no liability can be accepted
for any possible loss or expense incurred as a result of relying on the information
contained herein. This report is not meant to be exhaustive. It should not be relied
upon as a basis for formulating business decisions. The report is distributed subject to
the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, sold, hired out. or
otherwise circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior consent.

Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its work
and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

www.ifc.org/eastasia
@IFC_EAP
Dear Reader,
Welcome to the 2015 IFC East Asia Paciﬁc Corporate Governance Program Annual Summary.

This publication spotlights the ongoing efforts to create a more open, accountable, and transparent
business sector throughout East Asia and the Paciﬁc (EAP). IFC has been active in promoting
corporate governance in EAP for the past several years. IFC’s approach is to leverage its private
sector development expertise – gained through its investment activity and World Bank Group
knowledge – to promote good governance practices at different levels of a market. This includes
working with individual ﬁrms, strengthening laws and regulations, building capacity of partners and
market intermediaries, and supporting various awareness raising activities. The goal is to help both
individual ﬁrms and entire markets attract investment and build vibrant, sustainable private sectors.

During the past ﬁscal year, highlights of IFC’s work included support for Indonesia’s newly created
regulatory agency, Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (OJK), as it created a landmark corporate-governance
roadmap to strengthen the nation’s governance regulatory framework. In partnership with our
World Bank colleagues, we also advised Vietnamese lawmakers as they revised the country’s Law
on Enterprises, which took effect on July 1, 2015. Likewise, we provided assistance to regulators in
various other markets as they revised their corporate-governance codes and regulations in support
of investment climate improvements. We also partnered with institutes of directors, the media,
and other associations to organize awareness-raising events and train-the-trainer workshops to
broaden governance expertise across the region.

Through these efforts, IFC, along with the World Bank and various other local partners, has achieved
signiﬁcant results the past several years. Yet there is much more to be done. The year ahead will
present many monumental challenges and opportunities. On the one hand, the region continues to
cope with an economic slowdown and work through various sector restructurings such as banking
consolidations and corporatization of state companies in many markets. Meanwhile, the formation
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) economic community will increase the ﬂow
of goods, services and investment in the region, providing signiﬁcant new opportunities for many
companies. It remains crucial, therefore, that the region continue its momentum to raise corporate
governance standards across all markets to address these challenges and opportunities.

We hope this summary will provide a snapshot of initiatives around the region and facilitate
knowledge-sharing among our partners in both the public and private sectors. We would like to
acknowledge and thank our primary donor partner, the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs of
Switzerland (SECO), for their valuable cooperation and support.

Sincerely,



Chris Razook
IFC EAP Corporate Governance Lead
    Vietnam

    IFC is working at multiple levels to improve Vietnam’s investment climate. This past year, the project
    team advised the government on improving regulations, supported the effort to form an institute of
    directors, and promoted the annual report awards for listed companies, the corporate-governance
    scorecard, and the corporate-secretary master training. These activities build on achievements from
    prior years, including: collaborating with regulators in enacting three key regulations incorporating
    good corporate governance practices; advising the government on a Decree for implementing the
    Law on Enterprises; advising on circulars for Corporate Governance Regulations and Information
    Disclosure for Public and Listed Companies; developing the ﬁrst corporate governance manual
    and Corporate Governance Scorecard for Vietnamese Public and Listed Companies; and helping
    companies improve their governance in order to enable over $1 billion in ﬁnancing.

    Project FY15 highlights include:

    •   The Law on Enterprises: At the behest of the Central Institute for Economic Management
        (CIEM), the project team advised the CIEM drafting team and the National Assembly’s reviewing
        team on corporate-governance-related provisions in the revised Law on Enterprises. IFC and the
        World Bank provided substantial inputs to the corporate-governance reforms in the revised Law,
        including strengthening independent directors and audit committees, improving shareholders’
        rights by reducing the approval threshold on material transactions at general meetings of
        shareholders, and introducing good governance board and control environment practices to
        state-owned enterprises. The revised law was enacted in November 2014 and came into effect
        on 1 July 2015.

    •   Institute of Directors (IOD): The project team is supporting efforts to form an institute
        of directors. This institute would promote good governance, train board members, hone
        their professional development, and encourage boards to adopt best practices to improve
        transparency and accountability. IFC has been supporting the State Securities Commission
        (SSC) by advocating international good practices for the IOD that ﬁt Vietnam’s operating
        environment, and organizing consultative meetings with the SSC and a number of private sector
        stakeholders. This project is being implemented in collaboration with the Asian Development
        Bank and the World Bank and a number of private sector organizations.

    •   Guidebook on Related Party Transactions: Reviews of the banking and ﬁnancial sector
        indicate a number of corporate-governance weaknesses. Non-performing loans and issues
        in certain corporate cases demonstrate the need for stricter regulations and increased
        transparency and disclosure requirements for related party transactions. IFC, FMO (the
        Netherlands Development Finance Company), Dragon Capital, and the State Bank of Vietnam
        (SBV), developed a Guidebook for Banks on related party transactions and transparency issues
        in order to provide good governance models that will support sound development of Vietnam’s
        ﬁnancial markets.




1
•   Annual Report Awards: To improve standards and transparency
    in ﬁnancial reporting for Vietnam’s listed companies, the project
    team provided technical support for the 2014 Annual Report
    Awards, that are organized by the Ho Chi Minh City stock
    exchange and the Vietnam Investment Review. The awards
    recognize the top 50 annual reports out of nearly 700 listed
    companies. IFC will continue to support the Annual Report Awards as a means to improving
    transparency, attracting investment across Vietnamese industries, and enhancing ﬁrm
    performance as a precursor to economic growth.

•   Corporate Governance Scorecard: IFC is supporting listed companies in Vietnam by
    training them to go beyond national legislation requirements for corporate governance and
    board practices. Part of this support includes incorporating corporate-governance standards
    established in the Corporate Governance Scorecard developed by the Asian Development
    Bank and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Capital Markets Forum. The
    scorecard’s methodologies are based on international best practices. Vietnam is one of six
    ASEAN countries participating in the annual exercise.

•   Corporate Secretaries Toolkit: IFC issued the Corporate Secretaries Toolkit in partnership
    with the Corporate Secretaries International Association (CSIA). The toolkit was developed
    in response to strong demand from companies and institutions in emerging markets for
    corporate-secretary practical training and skills development (the Corporate Secretary
    is responsible for initiating and improving governance standards in their company). IFC
    also sponsored four delegates to attend a regional corporate secretary training-of-
    trainers workshop; the four have completed the training and become Corporate Secretary
    Champions.

•   Corporate Governance Success Stories: To further public awareness of the value of good
    corporate governance, IFC published and distributed a “Corporate Governance in Vietnam:
    Success Stories” report proﬁling the case studies of two companies. Ho Chi Minh City
    Securities and Mobile World stand out as good models of corporate governance among
    portfolio companies managed by private equity investment ﬁrms in Vietnam. To read the
    report, please go to the following: http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_
    content/ifc_external_corporate_site/corporate+governance/publications/lessons+learned/
    cg_in_vietnam_success_stories

•   State Capital Investment Corporation Workshop: For the purpose of equipping
    companies with the capability to implement sound corporatate governance processes and
    structures, IFC organized a corporate governance workshop on March 6, 2015, aimed at
    attendees from the State Capital Investment Corporation’s selected large-scale portfolio
    companies. The workshop attracted fourteen participants who were company directors and
    senior managers.

•   Supporting Firm-Speciﬁc Improvements: IFC worked with several ﬁrms to help
    strengthen their speciﬁc governance practices and ultimately lead to a demonstration effect
    for Vietnam. This includes companies in the banking, tourism, pharmaceuticals, property, and
    equipment sectors. IFC also partnered with Mekong Capital to provide in-depth training to
    Mekong’s portfolio companies spanning multiple sectors.




                                                                                                   2
    Indonesia

    In keeping with the landmark Corporate Governance Road Map launched in 2014 by the
    Indonesia Financial Services Authority (Otoritas Jasa Keuangan (OJK)), IFC helped OJK develop
    four new corporate-governance laws and regulations over the past ﬁscal year. IFC also enabled
    three institutes to deliver corporate-governance training, and introduced new training modules
    and 46 qualiﬁed corporate-governance trainers. These activities are evidence of the project’s
    growing impact on the business sector and underpin a broader effort by Indonesian companies
    and regulators to prepare for the ASEAN Economic Community by harmonizing corporate-
    governance standards in their ﬁnancial markets. Such progress builds on prior achievements
    including: building capacity of training institution partners, Indonesia Corporate Secretary
    Association (ICSA) and the Center for Risk Management Studies (CRMS); and collaboration with
    the World Bank and the OJK in the launch of the aforementioned Road Map.

    •   Corporate Governance Code: Support for Indonesia’s ﬁnancial services authority, OJK,
        included developing a Corporate Governance Code for publicly listed companies and resolving
        gaps in Indonesia’s regulatory framework. The code, planned to be released by OJK at the
        end of 2015, will provide best practice guidelines for board members and senior executives of
        listed companies.

    •   Road Map Impacts: Based on IFC’s recommendations for the Indonesia Corporate
        Governance Road Map published in January 2014, OJK drafted four new regulations related to
        boards, nomination and remuneration practices, the annual general meeting, and corporate
        secretaries. This will enhance the role of boards in Indonesian companies on par with other
        markets and help strengthen shareholder protection.

    •   Family-Owned Businesses: IFC signed a memorandum of understanding with the Family
        Business Nusantara (FBN) Foundation (Indonesia) in June 2014 to improve the corporate
        governance of family-owned businesses. During the last ﬁscal year, FBN has engaged with
        targeted family businesses and launched its monthly trainings and workshops on various
        family-governance topics in order to raise awareness on the importance of good corporate
        governance. Given the importance of family-owned businesses in Indonesia, the partnership
        aims at helping these businesses operate more efficiently and strengthen their sustainability.




3
•   Risk Governance Programs: The project continues
    to support the Center for Risk Management Studies
    (CRMS) in regular Master Classes on Enterprise Risk
    Governance (ERG). These master classes aim to help
    boards better understand audit and risk oversight,
    and carry out their duties and responsibilities more
    effectively to achieve better control environments. Three master-class events were
    organized in Indonesia the past ﬁscal year, attracting more than 30 participants
    from different companies. IFC will help CRMS further expand its client base and
    market outreach to achieve a bigger impact in the Indonesian market.

•   Corporate Secretary Support: IFC signed an agreement with the Indonesian
    Corporate Secretary Association (ICSA) to improve corporate secretaries’ capacities
    and promote good corporate governance in Indonesia. Two corporate-secretary
    workshops were organized during the ﬁscal year: the ﬁrst regional training-of-
    trainers workshop for corporate secretaries in cooperation with the Institute
    for Corporate Directorship (IICD) and ICSA; the second was the ﬁrst fee-based
    workshop (also organized with IICD), which attracted 32 participants, including
    20 women. The project will continue to support ICSA on being a leading voice on
    corporate-governance issues and international best practices, and a driving force
    behind advancing the role of corporate secretaries in Indonesia. The project team
    also signed license agreements on the Corporate Secretary Toolkit with ICSA and
    IICD, helping them enhance their capabilities in terms of developing their own tools
    for corporate secretaries.

•   Supporting Firm-Speciﬁc Improvements: IFC worked with several ﬁrms in
    Indonesia to help strengthen their speciﬁc governance practices and ultimately lead
    to a demonstration effect for the country. This includes companies in the banking,
    transportation, healthcare, media, and infrastructure sectors.




                                                                                           4
Project Highlights throughout the Region

Cambodia

IFC intends to begin selected activities in Cambodia to help strengthen the regulatory environment
and raise market awareness on the importance of corporate governance in the coming years.

Early initiatives: IFC conducted a corporate governance seminar attracting more than 100
companies, followed by an in-depth workshop for more than 40 participants to begin to raise
awareness of corporate governance IFC is now coordinating with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) of Cambodia to identify areas of cooperation. IFC and the SEC are exploring a
country-wide corporate-governance diagnostic assessment, which will lead to the development
of a Corporate Governance road map for the country. IFC will also target the banking sector in
particular, given its catalytic effect on the market. These efforts will continue to help Cambodia
harmonize with the rest of the ASEAN community and attract investment to its private sector.

China

IFC has been active in China for several years and continues to focus on selected activities in the
country. Prior achievements include: supporting the Shanghai Stock Exchange on development of
the “Guidelines of Election and Conducts of Directors of Listed Companies”, building capacity of 76
professional institutions on corporate governance training and consulting services, launching three
Corporate Governance handbooks and one on-line corporate governance portal, providing in-
depth services to over 20 client companies and facilitating US$ 50 million of investments.

•   Family Business awareness: Over the past ﬁscal year, the project team developed and
    published the Chinese version of IFC’s family-business governance video to expand outreach
    and raise awareness in the market. This provides a framework for China’s vast number of
    family owned businesses to consider key governance issues to ensure generational succession
    and long term sustainability of their companies. IFC will continue to reach out to family-
    owned businesses through its market partners in the coming years.

•   Corporate Governance Code: IFC has offered its support to the China Securities Regulatory
    Commission and the China Association for Public Companies (CAPCO) for their efforts to
    update the Corporate Governance Code for listed companies in China. This will likely occur
    during the next calendar and will bring additional measures to strengthen investor conﬁdence
    in the Chinese capital markets. The code has been in effect for more than a decade but has
    never been revised; the authorities aim to bring it in line with international best practices. IFC
    intends to sign an MoU with CAPCO to provide other capacity building activities.

•   Supporting Firm-Speciﬁc Improvements: IFC worked with several ﬁrms to help strengthen
    their speciﬁc governance practices and ultimately lead to a demonstration effect for China.
    This includes companies in the ﬁnancial, energy, and engineering sectors. IFC also supported
    a large private equity company to develop a corporate governance, environment, and social
    framework for its own investments in China.

Lao PDR

IFC intends to begin selected activities in Laos to help strengthen the regulatory environment and
raise market awareness on the importance of corporate governance in the coming years.

•   Early initiatives: IFC organized a conference with the Lao Securities Commission in February
    2015 as a ﬁrst step toward introducing good corporate-governance practices to entrepreneurs
    and companies and raising awareness about the beneﬁts of a robust corporate governance
    framework. The conference attracted 98 participants, including 63 women.
5
•   ASEAN compatibility: With the planned establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community,
    many countries in the region, including Lao PDR, have launched initiatives to improve their
    regulatory framework to strengthen corporate-governance practices, attract more investment,
    and foster their competitiveness. Together with the Lao Securities Commission, IFC is
    contemplating a capital market corporate-governance road map, including a diagnostic and
    action plan for reform.

Mongolia

IFC has been very active in Mongolia for the past several years and plans to continue targeted
initiatives in the country going forward. Prior achievements include: supporting the development of
ﬁve laws including the new Mongolian Company Law and new Corporate Governance Code, helping
to build up corporate governance training capacity for eight training institutions, developing the
ﬁrst Mongolian Corporate Governance Scorecard of listed companies, and helping ﬁrms facilitate US
$409 million of ﬁnancing partly as a result of improved corporate governance.

•   Addressing Related Party Transactions: The dynamic development of the banking sector
    during the last decade has come with certain risks, including related party lending, which has
    become a threat to the sustainable development of the wider economy. In partnership with the
    Mongolian Bankers Association, Bank of Mongolia and FMO, IFC has developed a Related Party
    Transactions Handbook for Banks in Mongolia. The handbook aims to provide bank directors
    and senior management with a consolidated source of best practices and also send a strong
    signal to all investors and stakeholders about the Mongolian banking sector’s commitment to
    good corporate-governance practices.

•   Improving Shareholder Practices: IFC and the Financial Regulatory Commission of Mongolia
    (FRC) organized a seminar on international best practices in conducting an effective annual
    shareholders meeting, which gives shareholders a unique opportunity to interact with company
    management and board members. Keeping high standards in organizing and conducting such
    meetings will help shareholders understand how well companies are run, risks are managed, and
    their investments are safeguarded, which will boost shareholder conﬁdence in the companies.
    IFC and FRC have previously partnered to revise the Mongolian Corporate Governance Code and
    developed sample corporate governance-related documents for listed companies.

•   Corporate Governance Awareness: In partnership with the Corporate Governance
    Development Center (CGDC), IFC hosted a seminar to encourage the private sector to adopt
    good corporate-governance practices, which will help companies make better decisions and
    improve risk management.

•   Corporate Secretaries Toolkit: IFC and the CGDC signed a licence agreement for the
    Corporate Secretary Toolkit. In addition, ﬁve participants from the private sector attended the
    regional Corporate Secretary Training. The toolkit was developed in response to strong demand
    from companies and institutions in emerging markets for corporate-secretary practical training
    and skills development. After completion of the training, participants may become Corporate
    Secretary Champions, responsible for initiating and improving governance standards.

•   Women Corporate Directors: With IFC support, The Women Corporate Directors, Mongolia
    Chapter was launched in July 2015. The project team addressed the Chapter and participants
    with a keynote presentation on “The Importance of Women in Corporate Boardrooms”.
    IFC representatives also attended the ﬁrst Mongolian Board Bootcamp and provided
    insight into Mongolia’s legal environment, corporate practices, and diversity requirements.




                                                                                                      6
    Myanmar

    IFC plans to launch an active corporate governance program in Myanmar in the coming years.

    Early Planning: Good corporate governance is critical in Myanmar to shore up investor
    conﬁdence and help companies attract capital. The launch of the project will start with several
    targeted initiatives in order to create a more transparent, accountable, and attractive business
    environment. These will include raising awareness through a corporate governance conference,
    regulatory strengthening, and translation of the Family Business Handbook. IFC will also support
    the legal and regulatory reforms undertaken by World Bank colleagues. IFC is exploring possible
    collaboration with the new SEC to support the new stock market and will also build training
    capacity in key partners.

    The Philippines

    IFC has supported selected initiatives in the past in the Philippines, including work with the
    Institute of Corporate Directors and support for the ASEAN Corporate Governance Scorecard
    initiative. IFC began ramping up work in the country this year.

    Supporting the Institute of Corporate Directors: The project team signed an agreement with
    the Institute of Corporate Directors (ICD) to provide various capacity building activities. The ICD
    has already played a crucial role in championing good governance in the country and across the
    region. IFC will help launch new programs and activities to continue efforts to raise governance
    standards of Filipino companies. This includes support for the ASEAN Corporate Governance
    scorecard initiative, launch of training for the Media and Corporate Secretaries and other activities
    which will be further deﬁned.

    SEC Collaboration: IFC has begun a collaboration with the Philippines Securities and Exchange
    Commission (SEC). This included providing inputs to the new Company Law, and developing a
    Corporate Governance Blueprint for the country. From this, the corporate governance code for
    listed companies will be updated, supported by IFC and the World Bank.

    Corporate Secretaries Master Program: Two participants from the private sector attended the
    regional Corporate Secretary Training. After completion of the training, participants may become
    Corporate Secretary Champions, responsible for initiating and improving governance standards in
    their companies.

    The Paciﬁc

    IFC began to scope possible corporate governance work in the Paciﬁc this year.

    Early initiatives: Throughout the ﬁscal year, the project team met with ﬁrms, regulators, and
    other stakeholders across the region to identify potential projects, particularly in Fiji and Papua
    New Guinea. This included conducting a seminar in Port Moresby with various government and
    private sector stakeholders. The team has been exploring programs with the banking sectors in
    PNG and Fiji speciﬁcally, which would lead to activities targeting other types of companies and
    possibly other Paciﬁc markets as well.




7
EAP Firms Beneﬁtting Directly from IFC Corporate Governance Advisory Services

 2010-2014                                        2015
  Country       Industry                          Country       Industry
  Cambodia      Insurance                         China         Bank
  China         Bank                              China         Bank
  China         Bank                              China         Bank
  China         Bank                              China         Construction
  China         Energy                            Indonesia     Bank
  China         Engineering                       Indonesia     Bank
  China         Mobile Banking Service Provider   Indonesia     Investment Fund
  China         Private Equity                    Indonesia     Media
  Indonesia     MFI                               Indonesia     Health
  Indonesia     Private Equity                    Indonesia     Telecom
  Mongolia      Bank                              Indonesia     Transportation
  Mongolia      Bank                              Indonesia     Transportation
  Mongolia      Bank                              Mongolia      Bank
  Mongolia      Diverse                           Mongolia      Bank
  Mongolia      Manufacturing                     Myanmar       Agriculture
  Myanmar       Bank                              Myanmar       Bank
  Timor-Leste   MFI                               Myanmar       Bank
  Timor-Leste   MFI                               Philippines   Bank
  Vanuatu       Bank                              Philippines   Hospitality
  Vietnam       Bank                              Vietnam       Bank
  Vietnam       Bank                              Vietnam       Bank
  Vietnam       Bank                              Vietnam       Bank
  Vietnam       Bank                              Vietnam       Equipment
  Vietnam       Bank                              Vietnam       Pharmaceutical
  Vietnam       Bank                              Vietnam       Private Equity
  Vietnam       Energy                            Vietnam       Private Equity
  Vietnam       Insurance                         Vietnam       Property
  Vietnam       Private Equity                    Vietnam       Retail
                                                  Vietnam       Technology
                                                  Vietnam       Travel




                                                                                  8
