Id ntiﬁc tion for D v lopm nt (ID4D)
      Id ntiﬁc tion S st ms An l sis




             Countr
             Ass ssm nt




                                   BOTSWANA
identification for development (id4d)
      Id ntific tion S st ms An l sis




              September 2015
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover photos: Top left: A boy holds his birth certificate, outside African Development Bank Zanzan II Primary
School, in Bondoukou, Côte d’Ivoire. © UNICEF/NYHQ2011-2489/Asselin; Center: Identification cards for
women in a local finance cooperative. © Simone D. McCourtie / World Bank, SDM-IN-046 World Bank; Bottom
left: A refugee filling an application at the UNHCR registration center in Tripoli, Lebanon. © Mohamed Azakir /
World Bank, _ZAK6881F; Top right: Fingerprint. © Jose Luis Gutierrez; Right center: Man guiding another in
using a fingerprint scanner. © leezsnow; Bottom center: Using smartphone. © mihailomilovanovic.
Contents


 Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . v

 Acronyms, Abbreviations and Setswana Terms .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vi

 Executive Summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . viii

 Introduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
         Background .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
         Rationale for Identity Management Systems Analysis  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
         Methodology  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
 National Level Civil Registration and Identification Ecosystem  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5
         Department of Civil and National Registration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
         National Civil Registration  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
 National/Foundational ID  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11
         National ID Database  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
         The Omang  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
         Inter-Agency Information Flows and Interoperability  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
 Key Dimensions of the National/Foundational ID System .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15
         Accessibility  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15
         Robustness .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
         Integration and Regulated Access to Data  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 18
         Legal Framework and Personal Data Protection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 19
 Program Specific ID Cards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  21
         Social Protection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
 Conclusion .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25




                                                                                                                                                                                iii
Way Forward .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
        The 2015–2020 CRVS and Identity Management Investment Plan  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
        Strategic Impact .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 27
References  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  31

APPENDIX 1: National Registration Act  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 33




iv
Acknowledgments


 This report was prepared by the University of Botswana, Department of Population Studies in collaboration
 with the Department of Civil and National Registration in the Ministry of Labour and Home affairs (MLHA) and
 with support from the World Bank Group. The University team was led by Dr. Serai Daniel Rakgoasi with team
 members Professor Kannan Navaneetham, Mr. Kenabetsho Bainame, Mr. Mpho Keetile, and Mr. Motsholathebe
 Bowelo.

 The work was co-authored by Ms. Neo Corneliah Lepang, Director, Department of Civil and National Registra-
 tion, MLHA. In guiding the work technically, she provided key information, research, and resources for the work.
 Dr. Samuel Mills, Senior Health Specialist, Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice, together with the
 World Bank Group Identification for Development Working Group, also provided technical guidance.

 The work benefited greatly from the useful and insightful peer reviewer comments of Mr. Benito Semommung,
 UNICEF Botswana; Mr. Moses Keetile, UNFPA; Mrs. Grace Mphetolang of Statistics Botswana; and Mrs. Hauwa
 Nhuru, Assistant Registrar, Administration of Justice, who collaborated closely with the DCNR on the issue of
 accelerated improvement in Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (CRVS) and Identity Management.

 Acknowledgments are also due to the Senior Management Team and the Staff of the Department of Civil and
 National Registration who contributed immensely to the development of the report, including providing data
 sources and validation of the report.




                                                                                                               v
 Acronyms, Abbreviations
 and Setswana Terms


AFIS	        Automated Fingerprint Identification System
APAI-CRVS	 Africa Programme on Accelerated Improvement of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics
BDRS	        Births and Deaths Registration System
‘Botho’	     Humility
CR	          Civil Registration
CRVS	        Civil Registration and Vital Statistics
DCNR	        Department of Civil and National Registration
DPP	         Destitute Persons Program
DSP	         Department of Social Protection
e-ID	        Electronic Identity Cards
ICS	         Immigration and Citizenship System
ICT	         Information Communication Technology
IDM	         Institute of Development Management
ID-M	        Identity Management
IEC	         Independent Electoral Commission
IMS	         Identity Management System
IMSA	        Identity Management System Analysis
MLHA	        Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs
NIS	         National Identification System
OAP	         Old Age Pension
‘Omang’	     An Identity Card in Setswana vernacular directly translated to mean “who are you”
OVC	         Orphans and Vulnerable Children Program
RADS	        Remote Area Dwellers
SOBERS	      Social Benefits Registration System
UID	         Unique Identification Number
UNFPA	       United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF	      United Nations Children’s Fund
WBG	         World Bank Group
WHO	         World Health Organization

vi
Executive Summary


 This report analyzes the Identity Management System of the Republic of Botswana with respect to 1) accessibil-
 ity, 2) robustness, 3) integration and regulated access to data, and 4) legal frameworks and data protection, and
 documents the extent to which the legal and institutional framework and the human and physical infrastructures
 have facilitated the establishment, operationalization and management of identity management as a comprehen-
 sive system.

 Botswana has a single foundational Identity Management System which is a primary tool for public administration
 and governance as well as facilitation of service delivery to the public. It creates one identity per person pursu-
 ant to the current legal framework which is used several times by the person at various institutions to facilitate
 the individual’s access to services including social safety net programs, claiming of rights and entitlements. The
 national identity card is used as a breeder document for obtaining other documents such as passports, driver’s
 licenses and voter registration cards.

 The National Identity number used at age 16 is the same unique identification number (UID) issued upon reg-
 istration of birth. This strategy ensures an identity life cycle from “Identity Establishment” to “End of Identity.”
 “Identity Establishment” is accomplished on the basis of ‘Evidence of Identity’, such as timely birth registration,
 and ‛End of Identity’ is accomplished through death registration or emigration. In the case of a resumption of
 citizenship, identity will be reactivated.

 The National Identity Management System is linked with other systems, such as the electoral system, the Social
 Benefit Registration System (SOBERS), government payroll, and the transport system. Similarly, through this
 link, the National Identity Management System is updated in real time when a death occurs. The status of the
 registered citizen is changed from ‘Live’ to ‘Deceased’ and subsequently all other systems for service ministries
 interfaced with the NIS receive the update as well.

 Although Botswana is a vast country with low population density, the registration services are highly decentral-
 ized in the country. There is a network of 37 offices across the country in 12 districts and 25 subdistricts. It also
 operates 13 on-site registration offices at various hospitals across the country. Further, birth registration, birth
 certificates, and the first issuance of the national ID are all free. Late registration fees for births and deaths have
 been waived through subsidiary legislation.

 The Botswana National Identity System is facilitated by legal reforms and reviews, risk management, rigorous
 re-engineering and re-design of business processes, an effective ID management cycle, continuous monitoring
 and evaluation, and data security and integrity management. It is envisaged that the ID-management system will
 in the future be linked to the immigration and citizenship system under the department of immigration and citizen-
 ship to progress it to a fully-fledged Population Register or People Hub.


 Strategic Foundations for the Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs
 Vision: Excellence in provision of Labour and Homeland services

 Mission: MLHA to promote Social and Industrial Harmony and Homeland Security


                                                                                                                     vii
Values: Integrity, Botho

Strategic Themes: Service Excellence, Operational Excellence, Homeland Security

Strategic Results: Customer Satisfaction, Efficient Operations, Labour Safety and Security


Strategic Foundations for the Department of Civil and National Registration
Vision: To be the best in providing registration services

Mission: To undertake registration of births and deaths; national registration, marriage solemnization, authoriza-
tion of name changes as well as providing registration and monitoring of societies

Values: Integrity, Botho

Strategic Themes: Service Excellence, Operational Excellence, Homeland Security

Strategic Results: Customer Satisfaction, Efficient Operations




viii
Introduction


 Table 1	     Botswana at a Glance

  Populationa                                  2,024,904
  Residence                                    64.1% (Urban), 35.9% (Rural)
  Literacy rate (females aged 15–65 years)b    89.6 %
  Poverty rate (headcount index) (2009)        23%
  Official language                            English
  Birth registration mandatory                 Yes
  Rate registration of births (0–1 year)       76.9% (Source: Vital Statistics Report, 2012)
  Undocumented population                      520,000 (Population above 14), 188,000 (Population below 14)
  National ID mandatory                        Yes
  Unique (or personal) identity number         Yes (*A unique identity number given at birth and printed on
                                               birth certificate and used at 16 years when one acquires an
                                               identity card)
  Percentage of population with NID (%)        67.3% with the remaining 33% accounting mostly for the popu-
                                               lation under 16 years
  Percentage of eligible population with NID   80–90%
  NID in the eligible population (Number)      1,541,571
  electronic identity cards (e-ID)             Botswana does not have an electronic identity card (e-ID)
                                               but has an analog machine-readable laminated card which is
                                               also barcoded with biometrics (finger print, photo). This multi-
                                               purpose analog-ID card is foundational and is used by holders
                                               to access most services off-line. However, the NIS is interfaced
                                               with many Government systems for online authentication of
                                               person identity and person data and particulars for service
                                               delivery purposes.
  Digital signature is included in e-ID        None (manual signature affixed on manual card) but digital
                                               signature to be included in the upcoming e-ID
                                                                                                    (continued)




                                                                                                                  1
    e-ID card can be used for remote online      Analog card, not e-ID card, is used in remote areas
    transactions
    Type of passport issued                      Electronic Passport issued on the basis of the ID
    Business registration is automated           Yes, but the registration is handled by the Companies and Intel-
                                                 lectual Property Authority
    Unique business ID                           Yes

Statistics Botswana Population & Housing Census 2011 ANALYTICAL REPORT
a


b
 Statistics Botswana, Republic of Botswana. Literacy survey 2014. Stats Brief. (http://www.cso.gov.bw/images/
literacy.pdf)

Botswana is a landlocked upper-middle income country in Southern Africa. It shares borders with South Africa
in the south and southeast, Namibia in the northwest, and Zambia and Zimbabwe in the northeast. Botswana
has a surface area of 582,000 square kilometers with the Kalahari Desert comprising more than two-thirds of the
total area. About 87 percent of the population lives in the eastern part of Botswana where rainfall is more regular,
ground water is available, and the soil is relatively fertile. At independence in 1966, Botswana was one of the
poorest countries in the world with a per capita income estimated at less than US$100 per annum and a largely
rural economy that was dependent on agriculture. However, with the discovery of minerals, especially diamonds,
soon after independence, Botswana quickly became the fastest growing economy in the world. Yet, while dia-
mond mining contributes a relatively large proportion to growth, GDP, export shares, and government revenues,
its direct impact in terms of employment is quite small because it is capital intensive by nature. Botswana’s stable
democracy and prudent economic management have facilitated good investment in infrastructure, health, and
education, which has resulted in improvements in social indicators, such as the female literacy rate (among
15–65 year olds) which has increased from 67.7 percent in 1991 to 89.6 percent in 2014.



Background
Identification plays an important role in proving one’s identity, exercising one’s basic rights, claiming entitlements,
accessing a range of governmental services, and conducting many daily activities (World Bank, 2014). The Gov-
ernment of Botswana recognizes and places value on the national identity management and civil registrations
systems as critical for good governance and accountability for sustained socioeconomic development, and as
vehicles for facilitating the establishment of an array of human rights, such as the right to a name, citizenship,
nationality, voting, and other associated rights. The right to identity and nationality is embedded in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and Convention on the Rights of the Child Resolution 44/25 of November 20, 1989.
Therefore, the possession of an identity is a precondition for full citizenship.

The importance of Identity Management Systems is recognized in the post-2015 Sustainable Development
Goals, namely Goal 16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, providing
access to justice for all, and building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. This goal has
as a target the provision of legal identity for everyone, including birth registration (target 16.9).

In Botswana, every citizen must be registered and issued an identity card within 30 days of turning 16 years
of age or acquiring Botswana citizenship. Furthermore, the Government, through legislation and government
operations, has committed to ensure that citizens can enjoy these most fundamental rights. The centrality and
value of a robust, secure, and reliable identity management system is confirmed in the country’s Tenth National
Development Plan (NDP10).




2
Rationale for Identity Management Systems Analysis
Once a National Identity Management is in place, it is necessary to assess the system with respect to 1) acces-
sibility, 2) robustness, 3) integration and regulated access to data, and 4) legal frameworks and data protection,
to document the extent to which the legal and institutional framework and the human and physical infrastructures
have facilitated the establishment, operationalization and management of identity management as a comprehen-
sive system. This assessment used the criteria and guidelines developed by the World Bank Group (WBG) and
development partners within the framework of the National Identity Management and Civil Registration System.



Methodology
The Identity Management Systems Analysis (IMSA) included informant interviews with key stakeholders in the
Identity Management System (IMS), including representatives from the Department of Civil and National Registra-
tion (DCNR), the Department of Social Services (Social Protection), and the Independent Electoral Commission.
Representatives of other Ministries and departments were not interviewed because the Identity Management
System IDs are the ones used for validation of a person’s data and identification of persons for service deliv-
ery by these Ministries and departments. Data collected from the three basic stakeholders clearly showed how
Identity Management supports service delivery across agencies. Additionally, desk reviews were conducted of
pertinent documents including: a) National Development Plan 10; b) Africa Programme on Accelerated Improve-
ment of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (APAICRVS); (2012) c) Botswana’s National e-Government Strat-
egy 2011–2016; d) Yamoussoukro Declaration (2015); e) Global Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Scaling
Up Investment Plan 2015–2024; f) Reforming and Improving Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Systems in
Africa Regional Medium-Term Plan: 2010–2015; g) Handbook on Civil Vital Registration and Statistics Systems
Developing Information, Education and Communication; and h) Improving the Quality and use of Birth, Death
and Cause-of-Death Information.

Information collected from the IMSA questionnaire and desk review was analyzed for each of the various key
areas. Tables were created to show the distribution of registration of births, deaths, and benefits. The document
was circulated to key stakeholders for validation of findings. In addition, the team consulted with outside experts
for peer reviews and technical inputs.




                                                                                                                 3
National Level Civil
Registration and
Identification Ecosystem
 Department of Civil and National Registration
 The Department of Civil and National Registration (DCNR) was established in 2003 with the merger of the divi-
 sion of National Registration and the division of Civil Registration and Vital Events. It is a Government Depart-
 ment within the Ministry of Labour and Home Affairs (MLHA). It is statutorily headed by a National Registrar who
 is also an administrative Director. The core mandate of the Department is the delivery of registration services on
 civil registration (CR) and identity management (ID-M), as well as registration and monitoring of societies. The
 DCNR has a staff complement of four hundred and fifty four (454) stationed in 37 stations across the country
 in 12 districts and 25 subdistricts. It also operates 13 on-site registration offices at various hospitals across the
 country. There are plans for future expansion of the on-site registration initiative to other health facilities. The
 annual budget for civil registration for the 2014/15 financial year was P56 000 000 (equivalent to US$5.6 million).
 The different items of infrastructure available at the offices across the country are shown in Table 2.

 The DCNR derives its core mandate from six (6) Acts of Parliament: The Births and Deaths Registration Act; the
 National Registration Act; the Marriage Act; the Married Persons Property Act; the Change of Name Act; and the
 Societies Registration Act. In carrying out its work, the DCNR utilizes strategic partnership alliances with numer-
 ous other stakeholders, including: the Ministry of Health, which is both a source and user of the births and deaths
 data; the Administration of Justice, which is responsible for divorce administration; and Statistics Botswana, which
 by law is responsible for the compilation, analysis, and dissemination of vital statistics. The DCNR has working
 collaborations with various development partners such as the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the


 Table 2	        Department of Civil and National Registration Infrastructure Capacity

         Infrastructure capacity                                   Percentage of offices
     Photocopiers                                   70
     Telephone                                      100
     Computers                                      100
     Electronic formsa                              0 (*There is no online application for registration services;
                                                    applications are submitted through manual forms)
     Capacity to transmit data by internet          100 (*ICT infrastructure including network, bandwidth, Internet
                                                    and so forth available in all the 37 stations and 13 hospital-
                                                    based Births and Deaths Registration Centers. However, in
                                                    some very few instances, the network is unstable)
     Regular power supply                           90 (*The Country is currently undergoing load shedding in
                                                    power supply of a maximum of one hour which sometimes
                                                    affects systems availability at outstations. Central Data Base
                                                    is connected to back-up power supply.)
 a
  Online services will be introduced in which electronic forms (such as online application forms for births and
 deaths registration) will be used upon completion of the People Hub project.
                                                                                                                      5
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the World Health Organization (WHO), the African Development Bank
(AfDB), and recently, the World Bank Group. Other strategic partnerships are maintained with non-state actors
such as the Project Concern International (PCI), funded by the United States Agency for International Develop-
ment (USAID), the Masiela Trust Fund, and the Marang Child Network Trust. These partners and stakeholders
assist the registration processes and sustained acceleration of civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS) and
ID-M improvements through resource mobilization, including financial and technical assistance.



National Civil Registration
Civil registration is defined by the United Nations as the “Universal, continuous, permanent and compulsory
recording of vital events provided through decree or regulation in accordance with the legal requirements of each
country.”1 Civil registration provides the most important source of vital statistics and is a basis for identity man-
agement. It provides individuals with documentation needed to establish legal identity and family relationships,
and by extension, to exercise their civil rights, access services and participate in modern societies.

The Births and Deaths Registration Act CAP (1968, last amended in 2014) provides for mandatory registration
of every birth and every death that occurs in Botswana within 60 days and 30 days, respectively, of each occur-
rence. It also requires doctors and midwives to notify the Registrar of Births and Deaths of birth and death events
that they attend to. Initially there was resistance from some health personnel, but this was resolved after the
country undertook a comprehensive assessment of CRVS in November 2013 and a recommendation was made



On-site Birth registration kiosk awarding a birth certificate to a newly born baby at Marina Hospital
in Gaborone




 United Nations Statistics Division—Principles and Recommendations on Civil Registration and Vital Statistics, 2014.
1




6
that notification of births and deaths be required as part of the duties of health personnel. Although about 94 per-
cent of births are occurring at health care facilities, there is a mechanism in place for also working with community
leaders and engaging in community outreach for registration of noninstitutional births.

The transfer of documentation about births and deaths from local and regional offices to a central national data
repository is performed online. There is a central data repository connected to outstations that allows changes
on registrations and updates to be made in real time. The DCNR has undertaken a number of initiatives which
have significantly improved registration over time.


Electronic On-site Birth Registration
Realizing that health institutions are a natural partner in civil registration, and in order to utilize their key position
as a source of data where about 94 percent of births and 54 percent of the deaths occur, Botswana instituted a
strategy of electronic On-site Registration of Births and Deaths in hospitals in 2011 and to date has opened up
on-site registration facilities in 13 hospitals. Assistant Registrars are placed in health institutions to register births
and deaths as they occur. The strategy goes a long way in significantly reducing late birth registrations (that is,
registration after the 60 days of birth stipulated in the Births and Deaths Registration Act but before age 1 year)
or delayed registrations (after age 1 year) and the initiative is expected to significantly bring the country up to
the level of universal registration, building on the advantage of already having in the system the 94 percent of
births occurring in health institutions. This is crucial since every life counts and must be counted and accounted
for in a timely manner. Available data indicates that since its inception in 2011, on-site registration strategy has
significantly improved the number of registered births and deaths and has reduced the number of late registered
events. From an initial 2,856 births registered on-site in 2011 to a peak of 28,007 in 2014, this increase has
shown the importance of on-site registration (Figure 1).

The Government has also decentralized registration services in rural areas utilizing districts, subdistricts and
administrative offices, and has improved access to registration services. To this effect, the DCNR offices are
staffed with trained and semi-skilled personnel, such as professionals, technicians, artisans and preparatory
clerks, based in various districts and subdistricts across the entire country. To date there are a total of 37 offices
and 13 on-site registration centers. Therefore, decentralization is taken very seriously as services are taken
closer to the people.


Figure 1	 Number of On-site and Total Birth Registrations, 2011–2014, Botswana
       120,000
                                             107,848
                                                                                                97,850
       100,000                                                        92,636

        80,000
                   67,550
        60,000


        40,000
                                                                                                             27,739
                                                                                21,288
                                                       15,653
        20,000
                            2,856
              0
                        2011                       2012                    2013                       2014

                                    Number of registered births      Number of on-site birth registrations




                                                                                                                        7
The Births and Deaths Registration Processes
There are two processes to follow depending on whether the registration is on time (within 60 days of birth or
30 days of death) or is a late registration (60 days or more after birth).


On time registration
Registration can be done either at the health facility where the event occurred or at the nearest DCNR office.
For registration at the health facility, health personnel record the birth by completing a birth/death notification
form immediately after the event occurs and then forwarding the completed form to the relevant DCNR office for
processing, either on-site at the hospital within an hour of occurrence, or at a district or subdistrict office within a
week. Once the forms are received at the DCNR office, they are entered into the Births and Deaths Registration
System, where registration is quality checked and authorized. At this point event registration is complete. The
certificate is delivered to the mother before she leaves the hospital, or in case of death, to the next of kin before
the transfer of the body to the private undertakers or mortuaries. In cases where the form was submitted to offices
outside the hospital, the registration is processed and authorized, and the birth/death certificate is ready for print-
ing. In order to be able to pick up the birth/death certificate, the next of kin is required to produce a tear-off piece
from the birth notification form that was acquired at the time of the birth or the deceased’s death. The next of kin’s
own identity card is required for confirmation and authentication of identity, and linkage of the next of kin to the
subject. In addition, the DCNR operates through each district and subdistrict monthly/quarterly mobile registration
services to remote and difficult to reach areas, and other centers to conduct registrations of any noninstitutional
birth and death events and to distribute certificates without the respective individuals having to visit civil registry
offices. Civil registration is undertaken free of charge. A late registration fee of BWP 5 (US$0.50) is charged for
every month of not registering up to a maximum of BWP 100 (US$10). For a duplicate certificate, BWP20 (US$2)
is charged, while for alterations the fee is BWP 10 (US$1). However, in order to further improve access to the reg-
istration service and to facilitate the registration of vulnerable children, the Government made a decision in 2014
to suspend all late registration fees from April 2014 to March 2015, and to continue the suspension of fees for
the vulnerable population (destitute persons, orphans and vulnerable children) beyond March 2015. In addition,
another decision was made to relax requirements for supporting documentation for registration of remote area
dwellers. Instead, a local assessment committee comprising of local leadership and officials meets to orally hear
such evidence and on the basis of the minutes produced, an application for registration is completed and for-
warded to the Registrar for authorization and processing. As of June 2015, laminating machines were acquired
to specifically laminate the births and deaths certificates issued to those residing in remote and difficult to reach
areas. This was done for preservation purposes to assist people living a more nomadic lifestyle.


Late registrations
In the case of late registrations, the declarant also has to bring an affidavit and witnesses to confirm that the
event indeed occurred. These extra steps are designed to prevent ghost registrations. The application form is
considered by the Late Registration Assessment Board for data authentication and authorization at a higher
level. The Board is based at the head office of the Department of Civil and National Registration in Gaborone. It
can either ask for additional information, refer the matter for further investigation, or approve or reject registration.
All completed application forms, including approved late registration forms, are then immediately entered into the
registration system, at which point the registration process is completed and a certificate can be issued. The cer-
tificate collection protocols and procedures will then follow. It is important to note that at this point, the customer
can collect a certificate from any of the DCNR offices countrywide since the births and deaths registration system
is decentralized and connected to the central database.


Processes for Obtaining Duplicate Births and Deaths Certificate
Duplicate certificates are normally requested for various reasons. The procedure for acquiring a duplicate is that
a customer presents himself/herself at any of DCNR offices where he/she will be required to make a sworn state-
ment describing the circumstances that led to the loss of the certificate. The customer will then pay a replacement
fee of BWP20.00 (US$2) after which a supervisor authorizes a certificate to be issued. In cases where there


8
are changes as a result of a change in the surname or where the High Court has authorized material changes
in either birth or death registrations, the same capture and authorization procedures will be followed and new
certificates issued accordingly.


Coverage of Vital Events
According to the 2007 Botswana Family Health Survey report, about 94 percent of births in the country are insti-
tutional (that is they take place in a modern health facility, attended to by qualified, professional birth attendants).
Table 3 shows the number of births, deaths, marriages registered, and national identity cards issued between
2009 and 2015. The table also disaggregates the number of births according to whether they occurred in a health
facility or at home, as well as whether they were registered on-site or not.

Figure 2 shows the percentage of births registered on-site between 2011 and 2015 out of all births that were
registered during each year. The figure shows that the proportion of on-site births has been increasing steadily
from 4.2 percent in 2011, to 28.3 percent in 2014, and to 35.1 percent in the first half of 2015.


Figure 2	 Percentage of On-site Registered Births as a Proportion of All Registered Births
                                         40

                                         35                                         ◄
                                                                                    35.1
                                         30
                                                                          ◄ 28.3
                                         25
                                                                ◄ 23.0
                               Percent




                                         20

                                         15
                                                      ◄ 14.5
                                         10

                                          5
                                              ◄ 4.2
                                          0
                                              2011    2012     2013      2014     2015
                                                                                (Jan–June)
                                                               Year




                                                                                                                      9
10
     Table 3	   Number of Births, Deaths, and Marriages Registered, and National Identity Cards Issued

                     Number
                    of births                                             Number             Number of    Number of
                    in health        Number of         Number of         of on-site          registered   registered    Number of
                    facilities        births at       registered        registration           deaths     marriages      ID Cards
        Year          (MoH)          home (MoH)       births (CNR)          (CNR)               (CNR)        (CNR)     Issued (CNR)
      2009             45,145             220             123,524               —                14,497      4,637        245,601
      2010             49,853             475             197,382              —                 14,317      5,648        147,811
      2011             44,904             104              67,550             2,856              15,430      5,677        198,111
      2012             49,957              91             107,848            15,653              15,629      6,391        152,572
      2013             49,771              68              92,636            21,288              15,614      5,806        188,119
      2014               —                 —               97,850            27,739              14,551      5,609        177,002
      Total           239,630             958             686,790            67,536              90,038     33,768       1,109,216
National/Foundational ID


 The Botswana national identity management system is foundational (that is the mode of identification is national
 and is used for multiple purposes).

 According to the National Registration Act CAP 01:02, it is compulsory for every citizen of Botswana to under-
 take National Registration within thirty (30) days of attaining the age of sixteen (16), or within 30 days of acquir-
 ing Botswana citizenship. Birth registration establishes the identity of an individual or citizen and the additional
 enrolment in the national registration and the issuance of the National ID card, confirm his or her legal identity.
 The ‘Omang’ or National Identity Card is the prima facie proof of the particulars stated on the identity card. The
 National Identity Card enables every citizen to access reserved public services (such as social safety net pro-
 grams) by presenting it to service providers for identification purposes and authentication of personal data.

 The Government of Botswana has established an organic link between birth registration, national registration,
 and death registration through a unique identifier to ensure that birth registration becomes a credible foundation
 for identity management beyond just serving as a source of vital statistics and to ensure that death registration
 marks the official end of identity. In 2011, in addition to a certificate of naturalization, the birth certificate was made
 a compulsory requirement for National Registration and for acquisition of a national identity card at the age of
 16 years. In a case where the birth certificate is not available, mechanisms for dealing with the lack of breeder
 documents when applying for a new, national ID have been put in place. For instance, social footprints like school
 certificates and baptismal certificates are used to inform the reconstruction or establishment of identity. More-
 over, the law provides that the Registrar can require any additional information necessary to ensure authenticity
 of registration. In such cases the next of kin/parent/guardian or those with material knowledge of the events are
 often required to depose to an affidavit attesting to the facts they present. An additional affidavit from a local or
 village Chief or Headman may also be required in certain cases.

 The National Identity number used at age 16 is the same unique identification number (UID) issued upon reg-
 istration of birth. This strategy ensures an identity life cycle from “Identity Establishment” to “End of Identity.”
 “Identity Establishment” is accomplished on the basis of ‘Evidence of Identity’, such as timely birth registration,
 and ‛End of Identity’ is accomplished through death registration or emigration. In the case of a resumption of
 citizenship, identity will be reactivated.

 Identity establishment is a fundamental right of citizens, and the National Identity Management System is linked
 with other systems, such as the electoral system, the Social Benefit Registration System (SOBERS), govern-
 ment payroll, and the transport system. Similarly, through this link, the National Identity Management System
 is updated when a death occurs. The status of the registered citizen is changed from ‘Live’ to ‘Deceased’ and
 subsequently all other systems get updated upon enquiry of the NIS on the status of the person.

 The DCNR handles all the administrative functions, including card production, card distribution, enrollment, data
 storage and management, and card issuance and distribution. Only system maintenance and support is con-
 tracted out to the tune of P30 Million or US$3 million per annum over and above the approved annual budget of
 US$5.6 million. The system is based on proprietary technology or source code, although because the system has
 challenges, it is not good practice to use it. At the moment, it will be difficult to change vendors due to a lock-in of
 the vendor, but the DCNR is working on modalities for a more open source situation.


                                                                                                                         11
National ID Database
The National ID database includes all citizens. There is also a separate register maintained for noncitizens under
the Immigration and Citizenship System (ICS). However, a project is ongoing to link the two registers together
with the marriages/divorce function and change of name to create a comprehensive Population Register or
People Hub for all the people in the country.

For Gaborone and surrounding areas, the service delivery turn-around time standard is 8 days from the time of
application to identity card issuance and 14 days for other parts of the country.

A total of 1,710,345 national identity cards have been issued since 1988 of which 1,549,173 are currently held
by individuals. This represents 80–90% of coverage among the eligible population. Figure 3 shows the num-
ber of identity cards added annually to the National ID database between 2009 and 2015. There are reasons
for the apparent annual fluctuations in the number of national identity cards issued. For instance, the high-
est number—245,601 in 2009—coincided with the 2009 General Elections when demand for identity cards
for voter registration went up. Similarly, there were upticks in 2013 and 2014 prior to the 2014 elections. For
instance, about 137,647 replacement cards were issued in 2014. This number is a little high due to incidences
of replacement of lost cards to facilitate voters wanting to participate in the General Elections of 2014 since a
valid identity card is a requirement under the Electoral Act for one to register and vote at any election. Addi-
tionally, the initial general national enrollment for national registration which was first conducted from 1988 to
1993, and the 10-year cycle of card expirations requiring reissuance of identity cards, accounted for some of
the large numbers recorded in 2009 and to some extent in 2011.

The following information is obtained at the time of enrollment: (i) name; (ii) date of birth; (iii) sex; (iv) residential
and postal address; (v) place of birth; (vi) marital status; (vii) occupation; and (viii) information on parents or other
family members. Biometric data, mainly photo and fingerprints (two thumbs) are also captured at the time of
enrollment. The original source images are stored in the registry and are not stored as encrypted templates. Link-
age of the applicant information with parents’ identity numbers was introduced in 2012 to create family trees and
to further enhance de-duplication (that is, ensuring that each individual is entered in the central database only
once). Additionally, the Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS), which is similar to the one employed
by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation, is utilized to secure national identity. All national identity
cards issued should have gone through the AFIS, thereby ensuring uniqueness. AFIS uses biometrics and the


Figure 3	 Number of National Identity Cards Issued per Year, 2009–2015

     300,000

                 245,601
     250,000

                                               198,111
     200,000                                                                188,119
                                                                                          177,002
                                147,811                       152,572
     150,000


     100,000                                                                                               88,831


      50,000


           0
                  2009           2010           2011             2012        2013            2014           2015
                                                                                                         (Jan–June)
                                                          Year




12
identification numbers to verify the identity of an individual at the time of enrollment, subsequent re-application
and at any point of de-duplication.



The Omang
The Omang or National Identity Card, which was first introduced in 1988, is a barcoded paper laminated identity
card. There are currently no online identity services available, but an electronic identity card will be introduced
as part of the implementation of the NDP 10 project. The external features on the card are human and machine-
detectable. On the face of the card, the unique ID number, name, age, sex, place of birth, and color of eyes is
printed. The card has both first and second level security features. First level security features are those visible
to the naked eye, while second level features are machine readable. There is no other information stored on the
card that is not visible but is only machine readable. The Omang ensures the uniqueness of individuals in the
database. The unique ID number issued at birth is the same one used for the “Omang” at age 16 years. This
provides an organic link between the birth register, the National Identification System, and the Death Register.
Furthermore, biometrics are used to de-duplicate at the time of enrollment. In case of late registration, community
level verification is used by involving local leadership and collecting social footprints for re-creation of a person’s
identity.

By law, the identity card is valid for only 10 years, after which it expires and must be replaced. The National Reg-
istration Act also provides for replacements when particulars or the surname change, or when an identity card is
lost. The cost to produce and issue an ID is BWP150 (US$15). There is no fee charged for first time applicants.
However, a fee is charged for replacing a lost or stolen card, mainly as a deterrent. The cost of replacement is
BWP110 (US$11) and the renewal fee is BWP5 (US$0.50).

As in the case of issuance of a new ID, the replacement ID for renewal or for lost or stolen cards also takes about
8 days in Gaborone and large areas and 14 days in other places. There are mechanisms in place under the
Change of Name Act, which regulates use of surnames, and under the Births and Deaths Registration Act, which
regulates the use of forenames, which are used for updating information in the national registers for individual
identity. About 15,000 requests are made annually to process such changes, including those authorized under
the law by the High Court and the Honorable Minister of Labour and Home Affairs.

Under the National Registration Act, Chapter 01:02 section 8, any person shall be guilty of an offence under the
Act who:

   1.	   Furnishes false information or makes any false statement in his application for registration or in any affi-
         davit sworn under this Act; or
   2.	   Forges any document for the purpose of obtaining registration under this Act; or
   3.	   In any way seeks to illegally influence the decision of the Registrar; or
   4.	   Being already registered, applies for registration; or
   5.	   Being in possession of any identity card, applies for a new card falsely alleging that his identity card was
         lost or destroyed.

Section 19 of the same Act also states that any person who is guilty of an offence under the Act shall, in addition
to any punishment under any other law:

   1.	   Be liable under section 8 and under paragraphs (e), (f) and (h) of section 18 to a fine not exceeding P1500
         (USD 150) or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both such fine and imprisonment;
   2.	   Be liable under paragraph (a) to (d) and paragraphs (g) of section 18 of this Act to a fine not exceed-
         ing P500 (USD 50) or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both such fine and
         imprisonment.



                                                                                                                    13
Despite the fact that birth certificates and identity cards are key documents required by citizens to access social
and development services in the country, not all people have been registered. In recognition of this, a Spe-
cial Project on the Registration of Vulnerable People was launched in 2012 by the Ministry of Labour & Home
Affairs in collaboration with UNICEF. In June 2015, the second generation Universal Registration Campaign was
launched. The project is aimed at improving registration of births among vulnerable groups, which is mainly com-
prised of Remote Area Dwellers (RADS), people with disabilities, orphans, street children, and other vulnerable
children. During registration, stringent requirements are relaxed, but relevant evidence or information is required
through community level verification to reconstruct the person’s identity. For applicants who do not have any
proof of birth, the District Registration Assessment Committee assesses eligibility for registration as well as date
of birth and uses any available social footprints to assist in registration. This is a multi-sectorial committee chaired
by the District Commissioner with representatives from government departments and other stakeholders in the
respective locality. For instance, members are generally made up of representatives from the Botswana Police
Service, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, the Department of Social and Community Development,
the Old Age Pensions Office, the District Health Management Team, the Village Development Committee, and
the village Chief. A representative of the Department of Civil and National Registration serves as the Secretary
to the committee. The committee interviews the applicant and family members through the help of the Chief and
Village Development Committee to get as much information as possible and makes recommendations to the
Registrar. The Secretary then makes a report and forwards the application for processing to the Head office for
the registration to be effected and an identity card or birth certificate issued.



Inter-Agency Information Flows and Interoperability
It is a requirement for a person to possess a valid identity card in order to access numerous services, including
opening a bank account, obtaining credit or loans, reporting to the tax authority, obtaining a marriage certificate,
obtaining private health insurance, enrolling in social insurance programs, qualifying for cash transfers, food
or other safety net programs (especially those provided by or through the government), obtaining a cell phone
account, obtaining a passport, getting a driver’s license, registering for and voting during national elections, reg-
istering a vehicle, obtaining health care, purchasing property such as a house, and obtaining tuition assistance
for education. Furthermore, Government agencies and programs are not expected to issue their own forms of
identity cards because the DCNR is the only authority for issuing the Omang. However, the electoral registration
card and old age pension scheme card are issued on the basis of the Omang but they are not national ID cards
per se. Other government institutions use this one identity created to facilitate data authentication through system
interfaces and integration of data.

The organic linkage of the National Identification System (NIS) with the Births and Deaths Registration System
(BDRS) has been mutually beneficial. The ongoing project of establishing a Population Register or People Hub
will further improve the interoperability of systems.

Despite this Inter-Agency information flow and interoperability described above, there are some information com-
munication technology (ICT) related constraints. While ICT infrastructure is available, in some very few instances
the network is unstable. Specialized ICT technical skills are scarce, and this has necessitated the dependence
on international private contractors, especially for systems design and maintenance.




14
Key Dimensions of the
National/Foundational
ID System
 The following sections describe the four key dimensions of the status of the national ID (Omang) system:
 (1) accessibility, (2) robustness, (3) integration and regulated access to data, and (4) legal frameworks and data
 protection.


 Accessibility
 Accessibility is important to achieve significant access of an individual to a foundational ID. The extent of cover-
 age of civil registration and the Omang is noted above. Some factors that affect the accessibility of the National
 ID System are described below.


 Financial Costs
 As noted earlier, in Botswana, birth registration, birth certificates, and the first issuance of the national ID are all
 free. The renewal of the national ID is done every 10 years for a nominal fee of P5 (50 cents in US$). The replace-
 ment of a lost national ID card is P110 (US$11), which is imposed with a purpose to instill responsibility and to
 ensure safe keeping of the card. The free service and the nominal fees are instrumental in ensuring that there are
 no barriers to service access. In order to help improve access to registration services, there are set turnaround
 times for officials to provide these services.


 Geographic Access
 Although Botswana is a vast country with low population density, the registration services are highly decentralized
 in the country. The DCNR has a network of 37 offices across the country in 12 districts and 25 subdistricts. It also
 operates 13 on-site registration offices at various hospitals across the country. Additionally, every district or sub-
 district office undertakes a monthly outreach program, an initiative labeled “Taking Services to the People.’’ This
 was explicitly designed to expand outreach to the people, especially those in remote and hard to reach areas.


 Access to Vulnerable or Marginalized Groups
 The Special Project on the Universal Birth Registration of Vulnerable Groups, which was launched in 2012 by the
 Ministry of Labour & Home Affairs in collaboration with UNICEF, also aims to serve hard-to-reach individuals. The
 project is aimed at improving registration of births among vulnerable groups, including Remote Area Dwellers
 (RADS), people with disabilities, orphans, street children, and other vulnerable children. The main objective of
 the project is to improve registration levels of these target groups. One way is through ensuring an effective and
 targeted use of the mobile outreach service to those residing in remote and difficult-to-reach areas, orphans, and
 street children. Furthermore, the registration requirements have been waived to improve vulnerable population
 access to identity management and civil registration services. The DCNR deliberately engages with the leader-
 ship of their communities, and of NGOs working with them, to improve program inputs, and to foster the building
 of trust among them. Furthermore, although stringent requirements are relaxed, relevant evidence or information
 is still required to reconstruct the identity of such individuals through interviews by the registration committee in
 order to validate information vouched by the local leadership from where the client emanates. Additionally, thirty
 officers have been trained on sign language; and the braille book (for the visually impaired) has also been pro-
 duced for all registration services.
                                                                                                                   15
Provision of registration service during outreach to remote and hard-to-reach areas




Information, Education and Communication Campaign
Economic, cultural and logistics are some of the categories of barriers identified by the DCNR as bottlenecks to
civil registration and identification for vulnerable groups of the population. Accordingly, the Department provides
free services for them. According to the Affirmative Action Policy the following groups of people are vulnerable:
people living in remote and hard to reach areas; orphaned children; the poor; disabled people; and senior citi-
zens. On the basis of this policy, the DCNR has developed a Special Project on the Registration of the Vulner-
able People. The DCNR further has formal cooperation arrangements with other agencies and organizations to
improve inclusion and to gain better access to registration and identification documents. These include other
government agencies, international agencies and donors, and nongovernmental organizations.

Below are some of the actions undertaken to address the needs of the most vulnerable population groups:

     •	   In 2011, the First generation, Universal birth, Death and National Registration Campaign was launched
          targeting the whole population and specifically conducting awareness and registration campaigns in
          remote areas
     •	   Special project on the Registration of the Vulnerable Groups
     •	   Establishment of Registration Assessment Committees to facilitate the implementation of the Special
          project on the Registration of the Vulnerable Groups and to assist those who do not have required
          documents for registration
     •	   Waiver on payment of late registration penalty fees
     •	   Prioritizing applications from vulnerable groups
     •	   Second Generation Campaign on the Universal Registration launched on June 2, 2015.

Grievance Redress Mechanism
There is a robust client feedback system which utilizes prescribed instruments to collect client grievance and
feedback inputs. One of those is the Customer Feedback System introduced by the Government in 2015 and is


16
Street children with their guardians and Director of DCNR (center) showing and waving their newly
acquired ID cards and birth certificates. The street children are part of the 3 vulnerable groups—
orphans, street children and those in remote areas.




implemented across Government Ministries and Departments. Complaints are analyzed on a monthly basis and
appropriate corrective action taken, including following up with clients where necessary. Furthermore, a com-
plaint procedure is published in each service center detailing the contact details, including telephone numbers, of
officials to contact in case of a query, a complaint, or a compliment. The Ministry has a centralized Call Center in
Headquarters where customers from across the country can call to make telephone contact on any complaints or
compliments they may have. Further, there is a Minister’s Call-in Program once every month on the last Tuesday
of the month from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m. where the Minister receives calls from members of the public in the call center
on anything they may want to discuss with him, including complaints and compliments. The calls are received in
the presence of all Directors who may resolve or respond to the complaints on the spot or later depending on the
intricacies of the issues raised. In addition, many—but not all—of the registration laws stipulate that the office of
the Hon. Minister is the appeal authority.



Robustness
Robustness refers to the accuracy, reliability, and security of the mode of identification. Uniqueness, accom-
plished by assigning a unique identification number or card to a specific individual, ensures robustness of the
national ID system and minimizes fraud. Uniqueness facilitates a de-duplication process (that is ensuring that
each individual is entered in the central database only once). In Botswana, an elaborate mechanism is in place
to ensure uniqueness. The enrollment (how biometrics are captured) features of the identification card and the
use of an Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) for de-duplication are described in detail above
in the section on national ID. The Government of Botswana in 2003 established an organic link between birth
registration, national registration, and death registration through a unique identifier to ensure that birth registra-
tion becomes a credible foundation for identity management beyond just serving as a source of vital statistics


                                                                                                                   17
and conferring rights on individuals. The organic link extends to death registration that marks the end of identity.
In 2011, the birth certificate was made a compulsory requirement for National Registration and acquisition of
a national identity card at the age of 16 years. The national identity number acquired at age 16 at the time of
national registration is the same as the unique identification number (UID) issued at the time of birth registra-
tion. The integration ensures an effective management of an identity life cycle from birth (“Identity Establish-
ment”) throughout the lifetime to death (“End of Identity”). Establishment of identity is thus done on the basis of
“Evidence of Identity” such as a timely birth registration, or on the basis of social footprints (such as a school
certificate) in case of late registrations in cases where births occurred outside a health facility. “End of Identity”
is carried out through death registration or emigration. Under this system opportunities for double registration
are diminished (as further described above). Thus, only one identity is created and can be used several times,
securing the integrity of the identity.

Authentication (that is verification at the point of transaction) of the National Identification System is linked with
other Government systems, such as the electoral system, SOBERS, government payroll, the transport system,
and others, to facilitate service delivery because this identity serves as a gateway for an individual accessing
services. Similarly through this link, the National Identification System is updated when a death is reported. The
status of the registered citizen is changed from ‘live’ to ‘deceased’. At the same time, all other government sys-
tems maintained by service ministries that are interfaced with the NIS will receive such an update at the next
enquiry for the citizen’s status.

The integration between BDRS and NIS results in several advantages for identity management and service deliv-
ery. First, the integration process ensures that the identity management register is up-to-date and not bloated
with nonliving identities, and ensures further that identities listed in the register are actually living and represent
real identities. The organic link also stabilizes the identity of the individuals such that by and large, individuals are
who they say they are. This brings about integrity in identity management. Secondly, such integrity and trust has
resulted in the acceptance and use of identity by individuals and institutions, both private and public, in order to
transact business with one other. Identity is largely used to secure access to services by those qualified either
in terms of age, citizenship, or social safety net programs. As a result, this integration of civil registration and
identity management has effectively reduced governance challenges such as fraud, pilferage, ghost employees,
and so forth.

In terms of the electoral process, identity management has served to strengthen Botswana’s electoral process
and to continuously preserve its democracy through ensuring the integrity of the voter’s roll. The integrity is
achieved by ensuring that on the basis of an identity card, the right to vote is exercised only by those entitled
and qualified to vote by virtue of citizenship and age in terms of the Botswana Constitution and the Electoral Act,
and also by reinforcing the validation of identities of voters to ensure that they are indeed who they say they are
before registering to vote or actually casting a vote. The voters roll is also generated on the basis of the identity
management national register. The registration of someone not registered in the national identity management
register cannot proceed at once, but instead the person must first be subject to investigation and verification.
Similarly, any double registration is queried and cleared up before inclusion or exclusion in the voting roll. Fur-
thermore, any time the death of a registered voter is registered, a real time update occurs changing the status of
the voter from ‘live’ to ‘deceased’, hence maintaining the integrity of the voters roll.



Integration and Regulated Access to Data
Integration refers to the extent to which a unique ID is used by both private and public programs allowing the ID
holder to verify identity for many different purposes, and allowing for different databases to be mapped to each
other. As noted above, a single unique identification number is used mostly in the public sector, while a physi-
cal ID card is used by individuals to prove their identity in the private sector, since there is no integration of the
identity management system with those of the private sector for personal data authentication purposes. There
are, however, plans to interface the systems of the private sector for authentication purposes with the identity
management systems through the ongoing project to build a Population Register. The National ID system is


18
administered by DCNR. The creation of one department to deliver on civil and national registration headed by
one Registrar brought about an advantage of synchronization of processes and immediate decision making. This
has greatly stabilized the registrations and continues to facilitate the accelerated improvement and development
of civil registration and identity management.



Legal Framework and Personal Data Protection
Currently there is no explicit and comprehensive Act of Parliament regulating privacy and data protection save for
some provisions embedded in different laws. However there are administrative procedures and protocols on how
government agencies can link their databases to the national IDM which must be adhered to by the connecting
Ministries. Furthermore, Section 20 of the National Registration Act provides for secrecy of the data contained
in the National Register, which means that the registry databases cannot be accessed by the members of the
public. In the interim, in regard to privacy and data-sharing regulations and protocols, the National Registration
Act provides for creating a schedule containing a list of Government institutions allowed by the Honorable Min-
ister to access national registration data for administrative purposes. However, such access rights are limited to
only viewing the data. The provision spells out accountability responsibilities for the user agencies and their staff
and contractors in order to control data access. Furthermore, most of the released data is in the form of “yes” or
“no” data rather than the actual data transfer. In recognition of the fact that these initiatives are not comprehen-
sive enough, the country is in the process of promulgating data protection legislation which is currently at the
Bill Stage. Once completed, the Bill is expected to provide for critical improvements, such as a supervisory body
within government responsible for monitoring compliance with privacy, data protection rules for data processors
and users, and so forth. The Electronics Transactions Act has recently been enacted and among other things, it
proposes for the provisions on the general keeping and releasing of personal data; submission of digital evidence
and use of digital signatures among others.

On another note, the information that must be provided for obtaining the national level ID is the minimum required
for the purposes of this ID. The only information that is disclosed on the face of the Omang is the bearer’s name,
date of birth, place of birth, identity number, and sex. Also, there are penalties provided in the National Registra-
tion Act for violation of the privacy rules as contained under Section 20.

As already indicated, the DCNR is by law required to maintain a centralized national register. However, the
data is not stored in an encrypted or a confidential form. Despite this, there is no record of any distinct security
breaches reported in past years with respect to the identification system(s), although this does not neces-
sarily mean that breaches may not have occurred. As a result, there is no data available to substantiate how
many times individual data has been accessed by other entities (for instance, security agencies) outside of
the regular course of public affairs.

Similarly, there are no reports that have been received so far of situations where offenses or instances of mis-
representation of personal information have been recorded by registrars. There is recourse for administrative
and judicial appeal if individuals are denied registration or documentation in cases of misrepresentation of
personal data.




                                                                                                                  19
Program Specific ID Cards


 As already indicated, Botswana has a single foundational Identity Management System which creates one iden-
 tity per person pursuant to the current legal framework which is used several times by the person at various insti-
 tutions, and by those other institutions, to facilitate transactions between themselves as individuals and service
 providers. For instance, the post office card is simply a debit card produced on the basis of the Omang. The same
 principle applies to the voter’s card, which is given as proof that somebody has registered and is issued purely
 on the basis of the identity card issued under national registration. Also, the Electoral Act is explicit that a valid
 Omang is a requirement for one to register for elections and to be given a voter registration card and to vote in
 elections. The Electoral act, Ch0209s54]54(b) states that every voter desiring to vote shall go to the polling sta-
 tion where the voter is registered to vote, and shall produce his or her voter registration card and identity card to
 the presiding officer.


 Social Protection
 The Government of Botswana has created a comprehensive social protection system with numerous programs,
 including labor (SPL) programs, the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Program (OVC), the Destitute Persons
 Program (DPP), the universal Old Age Pension (OAP), the Community Home Based Care Program, Disability
 Cash Transfer, Vulnerable Group Feeding, Primary School Feeding, and the public works Ipelegeng program
 (which has reached roughly 220,000 persons).

 The Department of Social Protection (DSP) under the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
 uses the Identity Management System and the resultant identity cards to facilitate their clients to access pro-
 grams as follows:

    1.	   Orphan and Vulnerable Children Program (OCP)
    2.	   Destitute Persons Program (DPP)
    3.	   Old Age Pension (OAP)
    4.	   World War II veterans
    5.	   Community Home Based Care Program
    6.	   Destitute Housing
    7.	   Public Works Programme (Ipelegeng)
    8.	   Disability Cash Transfer Program (new one being designed)

 However, for the OAP, Disability Cash Transfer and World War II veteran’s program, beneficiaries can register as
 a proxy for those who are bedridden or those with caretakers. These registrations are reviewed every six months
 to establish if the beneficiary is still alive. This also ensures that the proxies do not continue to benefit from the
 program even when the main beneficiary is deceased. To date, 100,471 individuals over the age of 65 have been
 registered for the old age pension program, and 1,900 for the World War II veteran’s program. The total spending
 for the OAP under the 2015/16 budget stands at BWP393, 602,400.00 and BWP10, 699,920.00 (these figures
 are based on the projected numbers, acquired from the National Identification System, of people alive who ben-
 efit from the programs). The Department of Social Protection offer several benefits to their clients (see Table 4).

                                                                                                                    21
22
Table 4	        Functional Programs and Their Coverage, Department of Social Protection

                                                                                                                                           Payment       Number of         Total
                 Program/           Targeted                                                   Responsible          Geographical         mechanism     beneficiaries    expenditure
                  benefit          population                               Qualifying         implementing            areas             (if cash or   (value/latest   (value/latest
                 category            group              Objective           conditions            agency              covered            near cash)        year)           year)
 Old Age        Monthly Cash       Elderly              To empower          Age                Botswana IPost       Countrywide          Smart card    101,208         393,602,400
 Pension        Transfer           65 years and         the elderly eco-
                                   above                nomically and
                                                        eradicate pov-
                                                        erty amongst
                                                        them
 World War II   Monthly Cash       Veterans or their    To empower          Having served      Botswana Post        Countrywide          Smart card    2,077           10,699,920
 Veterans       Transfer           widows               them                at World War II
                                                        economically
 Destitute      Monthly Food       The poor who         To empower          Socioeconomic      Botswana Post        Countrywide          Smart card    31,829          247,594,200
 Persons        Basket and Cash    have been            the poor                               (Cash)                                                                  (Baskets)
                Transfer           assessed and
                                                                                               Smartswitch                                                             48,515,040 (Cash)
                                   found to have
                                                                                               Botswana
                                   monthly income
                                   less P300
 Commu-         Monthly Food       The terminally ill   To empower          Doctor’s refer-    Smartswitch          Countrywide          Smart card    1,229           P20,000,000
 nity Home      Basket                                  them and facili-    ral with the       Botswana
 Based Care                                             tate their heal-    assistance of a
                                                        ing nutritionally   Dietician
 Orphans        Monthly Food       Orphan               To empower          Every Orphan       Smartswitch          Countrywide          Smart card    32,803          P350,000,000
 and Vul-       Basket             Vulnerable Child     OVC                 Assessed and       Botswana
 nerable        School Uniform                                              recommended
 Children       Private Clothing                                            Vulnerable Child
 Disabil-       Monthly Food       Severe and Pro-      To empower          Assessed and       Not yet determined   Not yet determined   Not yet       Assessments     P20,000,000
 ity Cash       Basket and Cash    found Disability     PW severe           recommended                                                  determined    ongoing
 Transfer       Transfer                                and profound        PWD
                                                        Disability
To access programs such as the OAP and World War II veteran’s program, Botswana Post, which is a service
provider engaged by the Department of Social Protection (DSP), charges varying service fees depending on
whether payment is made at the Post Office or off site. The information that can be derived from the card is
not visible but the smart card is machine readable. Such information includes the National ID number, name,
address, age, and sex. As already stated, the Department of Social Protection does not issue IDs and any opera-
tional issues regarding the production and issuance of the IDs are the responsibility of the DCNR. However, for
its operations, the DSP captures from the National ID database the name of the client, date of birth, sex, and
address. Once clients enroll for the programs in DSP there is no photo taken. However biometric information
such as fingerprints is taken for the OCP, OAP, DPP, and World War II veteran’s programs. These biometric data
are stored on the card and the card can be used to authenticate the identity for transactions. The DSP is working
to interface their client registration database with the payment system. There are clear rules for access to the
data maintained by the programs under the DSP.


Replacement of Card
There is a cost to individuals for replacing a Botswana Post and Smart Switch Card that is lost due to negligence,
but a free replacement card is provided in the case of a stolen, burned, or malfunctioning card. The National ID
is required to apply for the replacement of these cards.


Elections Management and Voter Registration Card
The Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) was first established in 1997 and the voter registration cards came
into effect in 1998. During the October 2014 General Elections, 824,034 voters were registered. New voter reg-
istration cards, which are paper barcoded cards, are issued for each round of elections and a voter’s roll stays
in place for five years. Since at the time of enrollment neither a photo nor biometric information is captured, the
national identity card is used for proof of identity of a voter and for validation of records. The voter registration
card is used together with a national identity card by an individual during elections.




                                                                                                                  23
Conclusion


 The right to identity and nationality are firmly embedded in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
 Convention on the Rights of the Child. The possession of an identity is a precondition for full citizenship. The
 Botswana government has committed through legislation and operations to ensure that people can enjoy these
 most fundamental rights. The Department of Civil and National Registration in the Ministry of Labour and Home
 Affairs is responsible for administering the single foundational National Identity Management system based
 on birth registration. The Government of Botswana has established an organic link between birth registration,
 national registration, and death registration through a unique identifier to ensure that birth registration becomes
 a credible foundation for identity management beyond serving just as a source of vital statistics, and that death
 registration marks the end of registration. In order to synchronize the processes and decision making, one Reg-
 istrar is responsible for both civil and national registration. In order for individuals to have access to a national ID,
 they must be citizens of Botswana, born in Botswana, and aged 16 years or over.

 The national level ID is commonly used for accessing most services. An identity card is a requirement to access
 numerous services, including: health care; opening a bank account; obtaining credit or loans; reporting to the
 tax authority; obtaining a marriage certificate; obtaining private health insurance; enrolling in social insurance
 programs; qualifying for cash transfers, food or other safety net programs, especially those provided by or
 through government; obtaining a cell phone account; obtaining a passport; getting a drivers’ license; voting in
 national elections; registering a vehicle; purchasing property such as a house; and obtaining tuition assistance
 for education

 An inadequate budget and a shortage of skilled manpower are some of the political and economic limitations
 that affect the government’s ability to implement the ID system. However the resources that are available show a
 significant commitment on the part of government to CRVS and IDM development and maintenance. The current
 political commitment and leadership is visible both nationally and locally at councils and among local authorities.




                                                                                                                       25
Way Forward


 The recently completed Comprehensive Assessment of CRVS and ID-M in Botswana has identified gaps and
 bottlenecks that require remedial action. The Investment Plan based on the assessment and the on-going project
 on creation of a People Hub will be extensively relied on to further improve Identity Management in Botswana.
 The use of a formalized Memorandum of Understanding between the MLHA and other user agencies for secure
 data management and interoperability will facilitate service delivery in numerous programs, especially social
 protection programs.

 Botswana has deliberately moved slowly towards creating a People Hub and introducing electronic Identity
 cards in order to first ensure that data integrity and efficiency of processes for the civil registration and identity
 management systems are maintained, and also to ensure that the systems are reliable, stable, and dynamic,
 and not vulnerable to fraud. This is done by ensuring that the registration processes are dynamic and foolproof
 before proceeding with digitization and that the environment is in fact ready to embrace a full scale population
 register or People Hub. Rushing into digitization before ensuring that processes are efficient, adequately inclu-
 sive, and rigorous, could result in Identity Management Systems that are vulnerable to fraud, with multiple or
 ghost beneficiaries for social protection programs and other entitlements and services. This could erode trust
 and confidence of the national Identity Management System, and also could result in high implementation costs
 for various government programs. Botswana was careful to first build robust processes before proceeding with
 digitization and a People Hub.



 The 2015–2020 CRVS and Identity Management Investment Plan
 The following section highlights some of the key elements of the CRVS and Identity Management Investment
 Plan, which point a way forward for further development of Botswana civil and national registration.



 Strategic Impact
 Evidence-based decision making that contributes to national development and societal transformation towards
 prosperity for all.


 Strategic Outcomes and Goals
 The four CRVS strategic outcomes are:

    1.	   One lifetime unique identity created and used several times to secure civil rights and access to services
    2.	   Availability of disaggregated data and indicators for evidence-based decision making and good
          governance
    3.	   Enhanced service delivery and accountability
    4.	   Institutional excellence


                                                                                                                    27
These outcomes are to be achieved over the medium- to long-term period. They are aligned to the NDP 10,
Vision 2016 and the Africa Programme on Accelerated Improvement of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics
(APAI-CRVS).


Strategic outcome 1: One legal identity to secure civil rights for all
By 2020 the goal is to achieve a registration rate of 95 percent for births and deaths, 100 percent for civil mar-
riages and civil divorces, and 95 percent for customary marriages and divorces. On the basis of the organic link
between the births and deaths registration, national registration and death registration, and on the achievement
of universal registration for all, the country should continue to sustain one identity for all, since an identity is
created only once by only one institution for an individual and is used several times by agencies in delivering
services to the individual.

Key indicators for success are:

     1.	   Registration documents issued to all the registered
     2.	   All registration processes automated
     3.	   Standardized and harmonized registration processes
     4.	   All systems linked
     5.	   Increased usage of national service points
     6.	   Vulnerable groups have access and use of registration services
     7.	   National population register is part of the e-government system

Strategic outcome 2: Availability of disaggregated data and indicators for evidence-based decision
making and good governance
By 2020 the goal is to provide 95 percent of reliable and accurate vital statistical data and indicators derived from
a civil registration source for evidence-based decision making.

Key indicators for success are:

     1.	   Complete and reliable civil registration
     2.	   Improved civil registration data integrity and accuracy
     3.	   CRVS systems are integrated, interoperable and fully utilized
     4.	   Official statistics are published according to international standards
     5.	   Production and dissemination of an up-to-date Annual Vital Statistics Report generated from a civil reg-
           istration source

Strategic outcome 3: Improved service delivery and accountability of the state
By 2020, the goal is to provide and account for 95 percent of all CRVS services to ensure maximum customer
satisfaction.

Key indicators for success are:

     1.	   Registration points established in rural areas (replace with decentralized services to remote and difficult
           to reach areas)
     2.	   Integrated planning, implementation and coordination structures established
     3.	   The “People we serve” are satisfied
     4.	   Empowered government agencies for evidence-based decision making and good governance



28
Strategic outcome 4: Institutional excellence
By 2020 the goal is for CRVS institutions to be capable, sustainable and modern.

Key indicators for success are:

   1.	   Enabling CRVS legislation passed and implemented
   2.	   Performance of CRVS institutions monitored and evaluated
   3.	   Skilled staff for new environment
   4.	   Modernized and automated processes as part of the government modernization program
   5.	   Modern, accessible and set standards of office facilities
   6.	   Performance culture is all about the “People we serve”

Critical Success Factors
   1.	   Collaboration and cooperation by stakeholders
   2.	   Enabling laws
   3.	   Compliance to international standards
   4.	   Computerized/digital processes
   5.	   Decentralized Registration points: On-spot and mobile registration
   6.	   Good coordination structures: Local authorities and assessment committees
   7.	   Unique identifier/One identity
   8.	   Reliable, timely and quality data




                                                                                              29
References


 Africa Programme on Accelerated Improvement of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (APAI-CRVS) (2012),
    Second Conference of African Ministers Responsible for Civil Registration Durban, South Africa, E/ECA/
    CMRCR/2/EXP/3.

 Department of Economic and Social Affairs (1998), Handbook on Civil Vital Registration and Statistics Systems
   Developing Information, Education and Communication, STIESAJSTATISERI169.

 Government of Botswana (2010), Botswana’s National e-Government Strategy 2011–2016, Government Print-
   ers, Gaborone.

 United Nations Economic and Social Council (2012), Reforming and Improving Civil Registration and Vital Statis-
   tics Systems in Africa Regional Medium-Term Plan: 2010–2015, E/ECA/CMRCR/2/EXP/4.

 World Bank Group (2014), Global Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Scaling up Investment Plan 2015–2024,
  World Bank WHO.

 World Health Organization (2010), Improving the quality and use of birth, death and cause-of-death information:
  guidance for a standards-based review of country practices (NLM classification: WA 900).

 Yamoussoukro Declaration (2015), The Third Conference of African Ministers Responsible for Civil Registration—
   “Promoting the Use of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (CRVS) in Support of Good Governance in Africa.”




                                                                                                              31
 1
Appendix



                    National
                    Registration Act

 Section 20 of the National Registration Act Chapter 01:02 emphasizes the security and privacy of data. The fol-
 lowing are regulations stipulated in the act.

    1.	   The registrar shall not disclose any information received by him from any application for registration or
          from any inquiries or investigations made by him in connection with any application for registration.
    2.	   All persons who are employed in carrying out the provisions of this Act shall, subject to the provisions of
          subsection (3), keep secret and assist in keeping secret any information that comes to their knowledge
          in the course of the exercise of their duties under this Act.
    3.	   No person referred to in subsection (2) shall, except in the exercise of his powers or the performance of
          his duties under this Act or in obedience to an order of a court:
          a.	   disclose information acquired by him in the exercise of his powers or performance of his duties; or
          b.	   permit access to any record of information received by a registrar under this Act, to any person who
                is not an authorized person or to any person other than a person entitled to receive such information
                in the course of the exercise of his duties under this Act.
    4.	   Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, the Minister may, by direction in writing, autho-
          rize access to information obtained by the Registrar under this Act by specified members of the Depart-
          ments named in the Schedule.
    5.	   The Minister may, by Order in the Gazette, from time to time, amend the Schedule.
    6.	   Any person who, contrary to the provisions of this section, discloses information acquired by him in the
          exercise of his powers or the performance of his duties to, or permits access to information or records
          acquired under this Act by, unauthorized persons shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of
          P1000, in addition to any other disciplinary measures that may be taken against him by his employer.




                                                                                                                  33
Strategic Framework
January 25, 2016
