E- and M-Commerce and
Payment Sector Development in Vietnam
A survey of e- and m-commerce providers and users
and how payments and logistics services
can support market development


in partnership with:
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution
focused exclusively on the private sector. We help developing countries achieve sus-
tainable growth by financing investment, mobilizing capital in international financial
markets, and providing advisory services to businesses and governments. In FY13, our
investments climbed to an all-time high of nearly $25 billion, leveraging the power of
the private sector to create jobs and tackle the world’s most pressing development
challenges. For more information, visit www.ifc.org.

December 2014

All rights reserved.

This report is a product of the IFC, a member of the World Bank Group. The World
Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
Neither the authors, nor the organizations, countries they represent, are engaged
in rendering legal or financial advice. The material in this report is set out in good
faith for general guidance, and no liability can be accepted for any possible loss or
expense incurred as a result of relying on the information contained herein. This
report is not meant to be exhaustive. It should not be relied upon as a basis for
formulating business decisions. The report is distributed subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, sold, hired out, or otherwise
circulated on a commercial basis without IFC’s prior consent.

The report was made possible by the support of the government of Switzerland
through the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO).

All errors and omissions remain the responsibility of the authors.

Rights and Permissions

Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may
be a violation of applicable law. The World Bank Group encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work
promptly.

Contacts:

www.ifc.org/eastasia
@IFC_org
@IFC_EAP
               E- and M-Commerce and
Payment Sector Development in Vietnam
Acknowledgements

This study was commissioned by IFC’s Retail Payments and Digital Financial Services
Unit in the East Asia and Pacific region under the guidance of Rachel Freeman and Hang
Thi Thu Nguyen. Ivan Mortimer-Schutts, Brett Dickstein, and Yosha Gupta authored this
report. IFC would also like to thank Huynh Mai Huong and Alexander Young for their
participation in the research. Contributions, in knowledge and time, from the companies
and individuals surveyed are gratefully acknowledged.


Preface

This study investigates the state of the electronic (e) and mobile (m)-commerce sector
in Vietnam and its impact on the development of cashless payments and online financial
services. Internet-based business models1 are having a pervasive effect on consumers and
on the way small enterprises access markets and transact. Local entrepreneurs are driving
innovation and demonstrating that they can be a catalyst for change, can provide for new
business growth and employment, and can transform the market context for financial
technology (FinTech2) and development.

From California to Kenya, from China to Chile, technology companies3 are beginning to
gain visibility as they transform markets, attract large numbers of clients and create value
for users and shareholders. The recent IPO of Alibaba was a watershed moment that
highlights the broader developmental role that e- and m-commerce can play in emerging
markets.

But the overall e- and m-commerce industry is growing faster than the infrastructure
required to serve it, thus generating robust unmet demand for software, FinTech, and
payment solutions from both consumers and businesses looking for economies of scale
in places and market segments that traditional financial services do not yet successfully
serve.

New service providers are targeting this unmet demand and pioneering solutions
to support both the development of e- and m-commerce in Vietnam and evolving
consumption habits. Indirectly this is driving the emergence of innovative, payment
methods while simultaneously encouraging acceptance and uptake. In this way, e- and
m-commerce can transform user behavior and the purchase journey thus making an
important contribution to economic and financial sector development.

The IFC supports the role that new business models in commerce and FinTech can play
in broadening access to products, services, finance, and payments. Complementary policy
and market practices are also often required to facilitate payment sector innovation,
to encourage private sector investments and to help ensure that efficiency gains from
innovation generate benefits for consumers and the broader economy. Hence, in addition
to acquiring a better comprehension of the role e- and m-commerce is playing in
payments development, another aim of this study is to identify areas where policy makers,
market leaders, and the IFC can collaborate to accelerate or facilitate the adoption of new
cashless payment services.
1 Internet business models are categorized as business-to-consumer, business-to-business, and consumer-to-consumer. These types of
models traditionally sell goods and services, provide information to help online visitors make purchasing decisions, and facilitate the
exchange of information or products between consumers.
2 FinTech refers to the non-traditional financial technology sector covering payments, lending, and a range of business models inte-
grating finance more closely with real sector business models such as e-commerce.
3 Companies like Safaricom and M-Kopa in Kenya, Tiaxa from Chile as well as better known companies like Square and Alipay are a
few examples from advanced and emerging economies.
Acronyms


  B2B			        business to business
  B2B2C			      business to business to consumer
  B2C			        business to consumer
  C2C			        consumer to consumer
  COD			        cash on delivery
  E-commerce	   electronic commerce
  FinTech			    financial technology
  HCMC			       Ho Chi Minh City	
  IFC 			       International Finance Corporation
  LaaS			       logistics as a service
  M-commerce	   mobile commerce
  mPOS			       mobile point of sale
  MSME			       micro, small, and medium enterprises
  OTT			        over the top
  O2O			        on to offiline
  SaaS			       software as a service
  SBV			        State Bank of Vietnam
  SME			        small and medium enterprises
  VAS			        value added services
 Executive Summary
 E- and m- commerce, enabled by rising internet and smartphone penetration, are                                                    We expect
 expanding their reach in Vietnam. Mobile internet penetration is broadening access                                                growth of E- and
 and changing the way consumers interact, compare prices, research goods, and make                                                 M- commerce
 purchases4. The barriers between traditional commerce, including malls, big-box stores
                1
                                                                                                                                   to spark more
 and main street, and virtual channels are blurred. Business models are converging                                                 payment service
 and enterprises are experimenting with social-media marketing, multi-channel                                                      innovation.
 approaches and alternative payment methods in order to expand their footprint and
 market share. In parallel, the traditional borders and structures of payments are also
 beginning to blur. Vietnam is still searching for its answer to the future of cashless
 payments. As the industry continues to evolve and grow, there is a high probability
 that payment solutions built on the platforms of e-Marketplaces, e-Tailers, or mobile
 Chat applications (apps) will revolutionize point-of-sale choices and play a prominent
 role, either as a catalyst or as actual providers in the market for new digital payment
 solutions.

 Local consumer internet conglomerates, technology firms, retailers, and entrepreneurs                                             New payment
 are beginning to focus on bridging the infrastructure gaps and provide services                                                   solutions are
 needed to support further growth of e- and m-commerce. Historically in Vietnam,                                                   developing, but
 fragmentation and trust issues have been a deterrent for consumers to transition                                                  will need to reach
 from Cash on Delivery (COD) to online payments. Nevertheless, efforts to introduce                                                scale to succeed.
 convenient, easy methods that leverage mobile technology suggest that payment
 solutions may be ascending towards the scope and scale necessary to gain more
 traction with consumers.

 E- and m-commerce users are still concentrated in the two biggest cities in Vietnam,                                              E- and
 Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC). Regardless of this factor, Search Engines, Social                                              M-commerce can
 Networks and Chat apps are paving the way to new markets and novice users outside                                                 also be a catalyst
 of these two primary cities. E- and m-commerce is demonstrating potential to reach                                                to help extend
 the broader population despite the gap in payments and banking. How this gap is filled                                            payment services
 will help determine which payment methods have a chance for widespread adoption in                                                to reach beyond
 Vietnam.                                                                                                                          the main cities.
 Key findings from this survey include:

 Reaching new population segments outside the main cities

 •	   Firms across all the core e- and m-commerce segments said that 44% of their
      traffic comes via mobile devices which they feel will become a tool to reach the
      broader population and drive sales.
 •	   An estimated 34% of e- and m-commerce sales are to users outside of the two
      biggest Vietnamese cities. The e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers segment projected
      that 31% of their clientele reside outside HCMC and Hanoi.
 •	   Reliable telecommunications infrastructure and the popularity of smartphones
      are positioning the mobile device as the main online gateway to access e- and
      m-commerce sites from any geographic location.



4 Vietnam internet penetration is 39%, mobile internet penetration is 34%, mobile subscription penetration is 145%, smartphone
penetration is 20%, smartphone users researching products via their phone is 95%, smartphone users who made a purchase via their
phone is 60%. Source: We Are Social, 2014 Asia-Pacific Digital Overview	
M-commerce, led by Chat apps, is poised to gain significant uptake

•	   Over-the-Top (OTT) Mobile Messaging services are positioned to be an innovative
     channel for Mobile Value Added Services (VAS) and payment acceptance.
•	   Within just 2 years, the top 2 players boast over 25 million users, creating
     opportunities for m-commerce developments similar to those led by Chinese,
     Korean, and Japanese Chat apps that benefit from the portability and data-sharing
     capability of mobile devices.
•	   High uptake of smartphones coupled with new mobile payment innovations could
     enable m-commerce to eclipse other e-commerce channels.

Physical and online retailers are competing through hybrid, omni-channel
solutions

•	   As consumer preferences become more apparent, the borders between brick and
     mortar stores and online sites are converging to allow consumers to test products in
     showrooms but make purchases online or via mobile devices.
•	   Multi-channel alternatives are emerging to drive engagement including pop-up
     locations and click-and-collect shops.
•	   On the web, social networks are the launchpad for consumer interaction with
     products and services which highlights the added value that social media
     demonstrates for online merchants.
•	   E-Marketplaces and e-Tailers are adopting marketplace models that allow them
     to reduce inventory but thereby increase their dependence on third party logistics
     providers for delivery, order fulfillment and cash collection services.

Use of non-cash payments still very low

•	   75% of the surveyed firms felt that the greatest challenge facing the e- and m-
     commerce payments industry is lack of consumer adoption. They unanimously
     recognized that even if the technology exists, the hurdle they all need to overcome
     involves convincing people to use new methods.
•	   Cash on Delivery (COD) is the most common payment method accepted by
     merchants (73%).
•	   Third party logistics providers reinforce the COD method by providing low fee
     services that create a disincentive for merchants to promote other payment
     methods.
•	   Low consumer confidence in on-line payments, limited card penetration, and an
     appreciation of benefits of COD and cash payments are seen as factors contributing
     to the low uptake of digital e- and m-payments.

Technology companies and serial entrepreneurs are investing in logistics and
payments services

•	   Surveyed firms believe that in order to grow and reach more users, logistics and
     payment challenges will need to be solved. In rural areas, considerable effort is
     required to improve upon the existing infrastructure.
•	   In 2014, financial technology startups piloting mobile wallets (m-wallet) and
     mobile Point of Sale (mPOS) solutions commercially launched apps and hardware
     under trial licenses issued by the State Bank of Vietnam. It is too soon to tell if
     they are gaining traction or being adopted by stakeholders and consumers alike.
     Nevertheless these first movers are setting up strategic partnerships with banks and
     telecom firms which could help them rapidly educate consumers and spark mass
     market adoption.
Table of Contents


1. Introduction 									 1
2. Consumer Insights Survey 							 3
3. Market Survey 									 4
	      A. Survey Population Description 						                       5
	      B. Demographics of Participating Firms and their Consumers 		 13
4. Survey Findings 									 15
	      A. Geographic Reach 							 15
	      B. Online Traffic and Transactions by Segment 				            19
	      C. Payment Acceptance and Usage 					                         24
	      D. Distribution and Collection Services 					                 36
	      E. Industry Outlook 								40
5. Conclusions 									46

Annex 										 47
	    A. Economy 							                               48
	    B. Survey Research Population 						             49
	    C. Overview of Customer and User Interviews 				 50
	    D. List of Firms Interviewed* 						             51
	    E. Firm Snapshots and Key Bios* 						           52
	    F. Interview Guidelines 							 58
	    G. Online Survey 								 60
	    H. Additional Statistics on Surveyed Firms 				  62


	     *Annex D and Annex E are available from IFC upon request
List of Figures and Tables

Figure 1 Vietnam e- and m-commerce segmentation                              5
Figure 2 Breakdown of core e- and m-commerce segments                        6
Figure 3 Breakdown of segments supporting e- and m-commerce firms            6
Figure 4 e-Marketplaces/Tailer segments                                      7
Figure 5 O20 Services segments                                               7
Figure 6 Digital Content & Media segments                                    8
Figure 7 Search, Social & Chat segments                                      8
Figure 8 Payment Services segments                                           10
Figure 9 e-Solutions & Logistics segments                                    10
Figure 10 Launch date of surveyed firms by segment                            12
Figure 11 Current # of employees and launch date                              13
Figure 12 Average age of users across core segments                           13
Figure 13 Major cities in Vietnam                                             15
Figure 14 % distribution of clients from HCMC, Hanoi, and the rest of
	         Vietnam for firms in the core e- and m-commerce segments           16
Figure 15 Estimated % of traffic origin – PC vs. Mobile Devices              19
Figure 16 Estimated monthly visits by segment                                19
Figure 17 Average registered users by segment                                20
Figure 18 Referral source of traffic to core e-commerce firms                 21
Figure 19 % distribution of monthly transactions by segment                  22
Figure 20 Payment methods accepted by e- and m-commerce firms                25
Figure 21 Payment acceptance: e-Marketplaces/e-Tailers                       27
Figure 22 Payment acceptance: Digital Content & Media		                      28
Figure 23 Payment acceptance: Search, Social and Chat segment                28
Figure 24 Payment acceptance: On-to-Offline segment                          29
Figure 25 % payment adoption by consumers : cash vs. non-cash payments       32
Figure 26 Types of incentives offered to encourage users to pay online       32
Figure 27 Consumer Trust Issues with e-Payments                              33
Figure 28 Non-cash payments Issues                                           35
Figure 29 Common distribution methods                                        37
Figure 30 Rate of e-transactions cancelled by consumers                      38
Figure 31 Order fulfillment and cash collection issues                       39
Figure 32 Perspectives on the challenges currently facing the e- and 			
          m-commerce industry						                                          40
Figure 33 Will non-cash payments be widespread within the next five years?   42
Figure 34 Independently owned firms, those with a sister company, and 			
           conglomerates with multiple subsidiaries                          62
Figure 35 24% of the 88 surveyed firms are owned by six conglomerates        63
Figure 36 Percentage of ownership of pool of surveyed firms by investor      64
Figure 37 Top Facebook Likes Among Surveyed Firms                            65
Figure 38 Monthly Visits by Firms                                            66
Figure 39 Registered users by firm in the core e- and m-commerce segments    66

Table 1 Breakdown of core segments by conventional business models           6
Table 2 Breakdown of supporting segments by business models                  9
Table 3 Breakdown of Interviewees                                            49
Table 4 Overview of customer and user interviews                             50
Table 5 List of Firms Surveyed via Personal Interviews                       51
     1. Introduction
     E- and m-commerce continues to grow and diversify its impact across emerging
     and advanced economies. While the industry may be associated with high-income
     consumption, internet-based commerce in Vietnam is also being embraced by small
     and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) as a means to gain access to new markets,
     clients, and suppliers. E- and m-commerce can help reduce costs, support efficiency
     gains and strengthen commercial links within the economy.

     The sector is generating demand for new payments and logistics services that are
     more appropriate to the local market. E- and m-commerce are capable of altering
     the market context in which SME and consumer financial services are provided.
     Inefficient or under-developed payment and financial solutions can undermine the
     sector’s development and its potential to contribute to economic growth.

     The e- and m-commerce sector in Vietnam is growing organically. Although still
     immature and small in volume5, advances in the region6 suggest that the sector
                                                  1                                    2




     will continue to expand and that investment is increasing in startups involved
     in payments, FinTech, third party logistics, and software aiming to support
     development. Vietnam has one of the fastest growing economies globally and
     the World Bank estimates that its GDP per capital will double in the next decade.
     It is one of the most populous countries in South East Asia with a majority of its
     inhabitants under 30.

     High internet penetration and rapid uptake of smartphones is continuing to drive
     e-and m-commerce and facilitate new methods of receiving and making payments.
     Additionally, affordable broadband connectivity and bundled data plans are
     anticipated with the projected upgrade to 4G in 2015. This dynamic could support a
     wave of new distribution channels for products and services and could provide the
     foundation needed to encourage people to try new technologies like m-wallets or
     shopping online.

     Cash on Delivery (COD) remains the dominant means of payment. Non-cash
     payments services are gradually emerging. There are four partnerships with
     trial licenses from the State Bank of Vietnam for m-wallets and mPOS that
     leverage smartphone users. Needless to say, low consumer confidence, service
     fragmentation, and disappointing user experiences with online payment services
     continue to slow uptake of non-cash payment acceptance.

     At the moment, there are few compelling reasons for customers to switch from
     COD to e- and m-payments. Consumers appreciate the simplicity and value of COD,
     which is generally free. It is perceived as good customer service and a selection of
     items is often delivered to enable buyers to inspect goods prior to payment. This has
     become the norm. The associated costs of the COD service still tend to be low and
     are borne by the merchants. The third party logistics firms managing delivery and
     cash collection are perpetuating the COD problem, however these major providers
     have been exploring non-cash payment acceptance solutions that can leverage
     smartphones often carried by both their drivers and receiving customers.
    5 A 2013 report by the Vietnamese e-Commerce Information and Technology Association (VECITA) projected that the e-
    commerce industry only accounted for 0.5 per cent of the country’s total retail revenue. http://www.vecita.gov.vn/anpham/208/
    Vietnam-E-commerce-Report-2013/en	
    6 Alibaba’s recent IPO and investments in the region by firms including Softbank, Goldman Sachs, Mitsui, Sumitomo, eBay,
    Rocket Internet, Rakuten, Viber, Line, and Samsung are an indication of the potential lying within the e- and m-commerce sector
    in Vietnam and the ASEAN region.



1
The purpose of this research is to provide insights into the current state of e-and
m-commerce and identify prospects for firms to meet the sector’s growing demand
for non-cash payment solutions. Consumer insight analysis and surveys of firms
in the e- and m-commerce market have been conducted to better understand
demand side issues such as consumer shopping habits, geographic reach of firms
outside of the major urban areas, payment acceptance and usage of cash or non-
cash payments. Firms providing payment, software and logistics services that
support the industry were surveyed to gain insight into their strategies, challenges
and opinions on barriers to the ongoing growth of their businesses.

Policy makers are also interested in promoting the expansion of e- and
m-payments. The State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) has defined its objectives for the
expansion of non-cash payments usage across the economy. More efficient and
broader access to payments and financial services can help boost productivity,
reduce transactions costs and even mobilize savings. Broadening access to finance
is also an important means to alleviate poverty and contribute to inclusive growth.
E- and m-commerce firms and the service providers emerging to support them
are reaching beyond the boundaries of traditional banking models. They are
providing a means to expand access to finance and the essential goods and services
demanded by the broader public. Research into the sector’s development can help
inform decisions about policy and the role that industry collaboration and market
standards can play in facilitating payment sector expansion.

About the Research

Two related pieces of research were conducted in order to provide insight into the
broader e-and m-commerce sector and its impact:

•	   Market Survey: 178 e- and m-commerce companies as well as payments,
     software and logistics service providers were scoped for this study.
•	   Consumer Insights Survey: 23 interview participants (customers, SMEs,
     delivery men, employees) of surveyed firms were interviewed in locations
     outside of HCMC and Hanoi to provide insight into user experiences and the role
     that e-and m-commerce is playing in the less developed areas of the country.

The rest of this document is structured as follows:

•	   Section 2 provides a short overview of the research conducted with end users
     and clients of e- and m-commerce firms.
•	   Section 3 describes the company survey methodology and the survey population
     of e-and m-commerce and support service firms
•	   Section 4 presents the results from the survey including findings about payment
     acceptance and usage by e-and m-commerce firms and their clients as well as
     the business of payments and related services and logistics providers supporting
     the industry in Vietnam.
•	   Section 5 provides key conclusions.
•	   The Annex to this report contains information about the surveyed companies,
     questionnaires and a snap shot of the front running firms and investors that are
     active in this market segment.




                                                                                        2
     2. Consumer Insights Survey
     E-and m-commerce and the introduction of new ways to buy things, move
     money and accept payment are having an impact on the daily lives of consumers
     and businesses beyond the more affluent metropolitan hubs in Vietnam. The
     broader population is gaining exposure to commercial applications including
     e-Marketplaces, e-Tailers, Chat apps, Social Media platforms, and electronic
     solutions to logistics and payments that are influencing consumer behavior. To
     gain insight into these trends, personal interviews of actual clients and users of
     these products and services were conducted in smaller tier 2 and 3 cities and
     surrounding suburbs across Vietnam. With a better understanding of the consumer
     perspective, it was feasible to assess the impact of e- and m-commerce on their
     lives and identify the challenges and preferences they have with respect to payment
     solutions.

     Insights from these interviews are included throughout the survey findings section
     of this report. More specifically, the user surveys7 gathered insights into:
                                                                            1




     (i) The user journey for sellers, merchants, agents, customers, and delivery men in
           locations outside of HCMC and Hanoi. Participants were selected from a subset
           of leading firms operating in Vietnam’s e- and m-commerce industry, all of
           which were previously surveyed by IFC.
     (ii) Current payment, purchasing and credit needs and habits of these value chain
           participants.
     (iii) Issues for these diverse interviewees and suggestions for how they can be
           addressed.

          Survey locations

          Interviews were conducted in four locations:

          Ha Tay:
          •	 Part of Hanoi province since 2008
          •	 Population approximately 2 million
          •	 More than 120 handicraft villages
          Da Nang:
          •	 Fifth largest city in Vietnam
          •	 Major port city in central Vietnam
          •	 Population approximately 1 million
          •	 Economy evolving from industry and
              construction to services; in 2006, services
              became largest sector city by gross output
           Tien Giang:
          •	 Comprises one city, one town, eight districts
          •	 Population approximately 1.6 million
          Can Tho:
          •	 Fourth largest city in Vietnam; largest in
              Mekong delta
          •	 Population approximately 1.2 million
          •	 Famous for floating markets
          •	 Economic growth rate of 14.64% in 2011




    7 Primary research was completed over a 4 day period from October 17th to the 21st, 2014. Interviews were held with 23
    participants in Tien Giang, Can Tho, Da Nang & Ha Tay.

3
 3. Market Survey
 Survey Scope and Methodology

 88 firms associated with Vietnam’s e- and m-commerce industry
 participated in this study

 Over 170 firms active in the overall e-and m-commerce market were identified.
 Of this selection, 88 were surveyed directly through interviews, an on-line
 survey or via associated companies8 . Interviews were conducted through a
                                                 2




 combination of face-to-face meetings, telephone calls, and online surveys
 circulated to specific firms active in the e-and m-commerce sector. Persons
 interviewed were mostly founder and CEO level executives or persons in charge
 of payment service delivery. Additional, complementary information was
 sourced in the secondary market and leading experts were consulted to inform
 the researchers during the scoping process.

 This process enabled IFC to establish a reference point in terms of market
 perceptions, current attitudes of firms, and existing and future trends. The
 information has been acquired to inform market participants, investors and
 policy makers. The findings are not a representative sample of the total
 population as there was a heterogeneous pool that was surveyed. In some
 instances, research subjects did not respond or answer all queries leaving
 variations in resulting sample sizes. But given the fluid and quickly evolving
 nature of this market, the results provide sound insights and information
 beyond that available from other sources. The basis of the information obtained,
 including sample size and types of respondents, is presented in a transparent
 manner while respecting the confidentiality of survey participants.

 The full online survey questionnaire and interview guidelines are included in
 the annex. Annexes B, C and D provide a breakdown of the research subjects,
 an overview of customer interviews and a full list of firms surveyed. Figure 1
 outlines the segmentation structure used for further analysis of the survey
 population. 68 firms were consulted through personal interviews and telephone
 calls. The remaining 20 firms contributed through an anonymous online survey.




8 http://www.mindmeister.com/430120639/vietnam-e-and-m-commerce-ecosystem	




                                                                                    4
    A. Survey Population Description
    Company Segmentation by Products, Services and Business Model

    Companies providing e- and m-commerce services were segmented by business
    model and products or services provided by them into two groups: e-and
    m-commerce firms and firms providing support services to the industry.

    E- and m-commerce Firms: Although many continue to blur traditional boundaries
    and operate multiple style businesses, the firms were broadly categorized according
    to their dominant business models as Business-to-Business (B2B), Consumer-to-
    Consumer (C2C), or Business-to-Business-to-Consume (B2B2C). In terms of services
    provided, four main groups were identified: (i) e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers, (ii)
    On-to-Offline services (O2O), (iii) Search, Social and Chat, and (iv) Digital Content
    and Media.

    Figure 1 - Vietnam e- and m-commerce segmentation




                                                                               	  

    Figure 2 provides the breakdown of surveyed firms belonging to these core e- and
    m-commerce segments. 36% of these firms are e-Marketplaces or e-Tailers. 15% are
    engaged in On-to-Offline services (O2O). These types of consumer internet firms sell
    or promote physical products. 13% provide social media in the form of Search Engines,
    Social Networks, and Chat or Mobile Over-the-top (OTT) Applications. 11% of the
    surveyed firms are active in Digital Media and Mobile VAS.

    Support Services: A second grouping of firms was surveyed that provide payment,
    software and logistics services to the e-and m-commerce industry. Figure 3 provides
    an overview of this population of firms. Nine percent (9%) of those interviewed are in
    the e-Solutions and Logistics category, which includes third party providers that offer
    Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) and Logistics-as-a-Service (LaaS). 16% are involved in
    electronic or mobile payment services.




5
  Figure 2 - Breakdown of core                                                                                                              Figure 3 - Breakdown of segments that
  e- and m-commerce segments                                                                                                                support e- and m-commerce firms

         #	  and	  %	  of	  Firms	  Surveyed	  in	  the	  Core	  Segments	                                                                              #	  and	  %	  of	  Firms	  Surveyed	  in	  the	  Suppor9ng	  Segments	  

31	                                                                                     36%	     e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	                     Payment	  Services	           16%	                                                            14	  


                                                     13	                                15%	     On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	             e-­‐Solu9ons	  and	  Logis9cs	       9%	                                 8	  


                                                              11	                       13%	     Search,	  Social	  and	  Chat	  


                                                                 10	                    11%	     Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	  




         Source: IFC research

   Core e- and m-commerce Segments

   The study was designed to acquire firsthand knowledge about the various types
   of business models in practice, as well as to gain insights about market trends,
   infrastructure gaps, and innovations that are disrupting the conventional forms
   of e- and m-commerce. Table 1 below provides a breakdown of the types of core
   e-and m-commerce firms surveyed by their conventional business model type
   and segment.

         Table 1 - Breakdown of core segments by conventional business models
   Distribution of the surveyed firms in the core e- and m-commerce segment
   by their business model. This includes firms surveyed via personal interviews,
   telephone calls, and anonymous electronic surveys

                                                                                                                                  Segments
          Business                            e-Marketplaces                                 O2O Services                         Search,                        Digital Content                         Total
          Model                               e-Tailers                                                                           Social & Chat                  & Media
          B2C                                                                     9                                     6                                 1                                      4                      20
          C2C                                                                      7                                      1                              6                                       2                       16
          B2B2C                                                                   5                                      3                                1                                      3                        12
          Anonymous                                                               11                                     3                               3                                        1                       18
          Total                                                                 32                                     13                               11                                      10                      66

   Source: IFC research; includes 18 anonymous surveys that captured the segment but not the
   business model type

   Breakdown and insight into the business of the surveyed e- and
   m-commerce firms:

   The e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers segment encompasses local firms operating in
   a B2C, B2B2C, or C2C model. These firms include online retailers and group buying
   or deal sites that distribute demand-based and promotional merchandise. This
   segment also includes independent and supplier-oriented e-Marketplaces, such
   as electronic classifieds and auctions that enable individuals and merchants to




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6
    sell or trade items online. Firms in this segment operate across categories including
    electronics, home appliances, household goods, baby products, garments, and
    promotional vouchers or coupons. Most of these firms utilize the just-in-time
    inventory model coupled with a marketplace model and the majority of them
    provide integrated online payment acceptance.

    The On-to-Offline (O2O) segment includes mostly local B2C or B2B2C marketplaces
    that enable consumers to make online orders for tangible goods and services
    that are then delivered, picked-up, or redeemed through local partner or member
    shops with a physical presence. Examples of these firms include online travel and
    transportation booking engines, digital ticketing for movies and events including
    barcode scanning services upon entry, e-food and grocery delivery services, or other
    informational services that have an online and offline footprint.

    The Digital Content and Media segment consists of local firms that are dispersed
    among B2C, B2B2C, or C2C type models. These firms concentrate on the
    distribution of Mobile VAS and OTT content such as audio, video, and other media
    over the internet. Examples of specific content being distributed include virtual
    entertainment like games, music, videos, books, photos, news, and ring tones.

    The Search, Social and Chat segment is made up of Search Engines, Social Networks,
    and OTT third party applications that provide cross-platform instant messaging
    services. Within this category are domestic and multinational players both
    competing for market share. Although all firms in this segment faced regulatory
    hurdles and censorship, there is very significant consumer demand for Social
    Networks and Chat apps from domestic users.

    Figure 4 – e-Marketplaces/e-Tailer                                          Figure 5 - O20 Services segments
    segments
                                                      Deal	  Site	  and	  
                                                       Voucher	  
                                                         10%	  




                                                                                       News	  and	  	  
                                                                                    Educa@on	  Forums	  
                                                                                          22%	                                 OTT	  	  
                                                                                                                              Content/	  
                                           e-­‐Marketplace	                                                            m-­‐Entertainment/	  
          Online	  	                         (Auc:on/	                                                                      mVASP	  
                                                                                   Photo/Video	  	  
          Retailer	                           Classiﬁed)	                          Sharing	                                  56%	  
           57%	                                  33%	                                22%	  




                           ∑	  21	  Firms	                                                            ∑	  9	  Firms	  




7
Figure 6 - Digital Content                                                       Figure 7 - Search, Social
& Media segments                                                                 & Chat segments
                                                               e-­‐Grocery	  
                                                                    10%	  




     Social	                    Chat	  App/OTT	  
    Network	                     Messaging	                             e-­‐Financial	  
      43%	                                                              Management	                           Travel	  Booking	  
                                     37%	  
                                                                               20%	                                40%	  




                   Search	  	                                                         e-­‐Food	  	   e-­‐Book	  
                   Engine	                            Electronics	                   Ordering	   Readers	  
                    14%	                                Retailer	                       10%	            10%	  
                                                          10%	  
                  ∑	  8	  Firms	                                                           ∑	  10	  Firms	  


   Chat Apps vs. Network Operators

  As tension between Chat app service providers and network operators
  subsides, OTT Mobile Messaging apps have begun aggressively
  competing for market share in Vietnam.

  Chat apps have rapidly become mainstream in 2014. Even though Vietnam’s
  existing 3G network has supported users, OTT Mobile Messaging Services
  were on the verge of being banned in 2013. But millions of users have now
  downloaded Chat apps and begun to use them routinely. The OTT Mobile
  Messaging services are showing signs of offering both a social media and
  communication tool along with m-commerce functionality.
  Source: IFC research




Support services and technology providers

These firms provide payments, logistics and software or infrastructure platforms
that support e- and m-commerce firms. e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers are
becoming more focused on core services, shedding inventory, aggregating
products from vendors and outsourcing logistics and payments to third
parties for backend support. This generates opportunities for other specialized
support firms to offer technical and logistical services ranging from warehouse
management and order fulfillment to online payment integration and data
analytics for e-commerce portals. Table 2 provides a breakdown of the types of
supporting enterprises surveyed according to their conventional business model
type and segment.




                                                                                                                                        8
    Table 2- Breakdown of supporting segments by business models

    Distribution of the surveyed firms in the supporting segments by their conventional
    business model.
                                      Segments
    Business Model                   e-Solutions & Logistics   Payment Services   Total
    B2C                                                    -                  4           4
    C2C                                                    -                  -            -
    B2B2C                                                  -                  2            2
    SaaS                                                   5                  -            5
    LaaS                                                   3                  -            3
    e-Payment Gateway (SaaS)                               -                  6           6
    Anonymous                                              -                  2            2
    Total                                                  8                 14           22

    Source: IFC research; includes 2 anonymous online surveys received which captured the segment
    but not the business model type

    Breakdown of support service activities

    The e-Solutions and Logistics segment is split into Software as a Service (SaaS)
    and Logistics as a Service (LaaS) businesses that support core e- and m-commerce
    firms. They offer products and services that help generate IT and logistics cost
    savings, reduce time to market, and improve transaction processing. The SaaS
    firms support retail merchants and manufacturers by building an online presence
    and extending their customer base. Examples of these services include web
    developments equipped with shopping carts and payment mechanisms, customer
    management information systems, communication tools including business email,
    and online marketing.

    The LaaS firms enable businesses to outsource logistics to third parties. Their
    primary services include order processing, service desk and customer relationship
    management, automated product allocation, delivery of goods, invoicing, cash
    collection and fulfillment, inventory management, warehousing, consolidation, and
    supply chain management.

    The Payment Services segment is composed of online e-payment gateways and
    m-commerce payments startups. The gateways consist of payment processors
    that are hybrid SaaS firms offering electronic portals to enable card processing by
    merchants. The m-commerce firms are concentrating on m-wallets and mPOS.
    Digital wallet providers focused on nearfield communication (NFC) technology have
    not surfaced yet in Vietnam.




9
           Figure 8- Payment Services                                             Figure 9 - e-Solutions
           segments                                                               & Logistics segments

                                                     Micro-­‐	  
                                                     ﬁnance	  
                              Mobile	  	             9%	  
                                                                                                                                    	  
                              Wallet	                                                                                       e-­‐Adver(sing	  
                                                                                       Third-­‐party	  
                               25%	                                                                                               25%	  
                                                                                        Logis(cs	  
                                                                                          38%	  
                                                            e-­‐Payment	  	  
   Card	                                                    Gateway	  
                                                                                                            e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐
Associa?on	                                                     50%	  
                                                                                                           commerce	  
    8%	  
                                                                                                            Solu(ons	  
                                                                                                                  37%	  
             Mobile	  	  
              POS	  
              8%	                         ∑	  12	  Firms	                                               ∑	  8	  Firms	  


          Benefits from e- and m-commerce are permeating markets outside of
          HCMC and Hanoi and being felt by local entrepreneurs and customers
          across the nation

         SMEs are getting
         better at managing
         their businesses
         and targeting and
         acquiring customers.

         An SME selling
         accessories for
         computers and
         laptops in Ha Tay. He
         conducts most of his
         business online and sells
         at numerous websites
         including Lazada, Cho
         Dien Tu, Lamido and
         his own site. Selling online helps him reach customers in provinces he would not
         have reached otherwise. More importantly, he gains exposure to e-Marketplaces
         and e-Tailers who provide him with the tools and a platform to better manage
         his business. For example, Lazada, gives him weekly sales reports related to the
         highest selling products thus helping him to increase his profitability by building an
         inventory of desirable merchandise at suggested retail pricing that makes sense.
         Sales forecasting tools also help him to improve stock management.

          Source: IFC research




                                                                                                                                                  10
     Another SME Seller from Can Tho
     who is an Agent with VIMO, a mobile
     payment and distribution system. It
     essentially is a m-wallet platform that
     can handle fund transfers, bill payments,
     Mobile VAS sales, airtime top-up, cash
     withdrawal channels He and over 300
     of his sub agents (who pre-paid him)
     previously kept an inventory of scratch
     cards for recharging mobile air-time.
     He had to either get the scratch cards
     delivered to them or they had to go
     collect them. Now they can just sell
     Mobile VAS in real time virtually using
     VIMO and there is already a reduction of
     30% in scratch card sales. Digital mobile
     recharge through mobile payment
     platforms like VIMO is thus helping such
     merchants and agents with better
     cash flow management while also
     driving the overall adoption of non-cash
     transactions in Vietnam.

     Consumers are also gaining significantly
     from e- and m-commerce and innovative
     solutions like Mobivi, that make essential
     products affordable and bridge the
     distribution gap. This customer,
     who works in one of the garment
     factories in Tien Giang, stressed how
     the quality of life for him and his family
     had improved as a result of the products
     they are able to buy through Mobivi’s
     iCare program. Through an automatic
     monthly payroll deduction program,
     employers offer workers, primarily in
     factories, zero-interest 3 to 6 month
     installment payments for essential goods
     like refrigerators, washing machines,
     mattresses, or smartphones.

     He was able to buy a washing machine
     through iCare for which he otherwise
     would have had to save for a year. Since
     this was a very important purchase for his
     family buying it through Mobivi was very
     helpful.
     Source: IFC research




11
Timeline of market entry by e- and m-commerce firms in Vietnam

The first e- and m-commerce type firm within this survey in Vietnam was an
enterprise that built a local search engine in 1997. They were later involved in
developing other popular local search engines and social media applications, and
now focus on Digital Content and Media distribution. During the period 2001 to
2006, the number of e-Marketplaces focusing on C2C classifieds or auctions in
Vietnam has grown.

Electronic payment gateways entered the scene in 2006 with a second wave in
2010 to cater to the demand from e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers to integrate online
payment acceptance into their portals. M-commerce firms developing mobile
payment services, such as m-wallets and mPOS, launched publicly in 2014. Several
of them have already committed years of time and investment capital to determine
the most appropriate entry strategy and business model.

Search, Social and Chat platforms that launched between 2012 and 2014 began
attracting millions of users. Search Engines and Social Networks have been
instrumental in sourcing traffic for both online and offline merchants. OTT Mobile
Messaging services took off in 2013 and are only just beginning to develop traction
and aggressively market themselves as the regulatory threats to disrupt their
businesses faded. Over 80% of the e-Solutions and Logistics firms launched within
the last 4 years in response to growing market and infrastructure needs.

Figure 10 - Launch date of surveyed firms by segment


                                                                                           Cumula2ve	  number	  of	  ﬁrms	  per	  survey	  segement	  	  
                                                                                                   by	  year	  of	  start	  of	  opera2ons	  	  
                                             20	  


                                             18	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                           e-­‐Marketplaces	  /	  e-­‐tailers	  

                                             16	  


                                             14	  
 cumula2ve	  number	  	  of	  ﬁrms	  




                                             12	  


                                             10	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Payment	  Services	  
                                               8	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                e-­‐Solu2ons	  &	  	  
Source: IFC research (sample 44 firms)                                                                                                                                                                               Logis2cs	  
                                               6	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      On-­‐to-­‐oﬀ-­‐line	  services	  


                                               4	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Search,	  Socal	  	  
                                               2	                                                                                                                                                                                            and	  Chat	  
                                                             1	  
                                               0	  
                                                       1997	        1998	     1999	      2000	     2001	     2002	     2003	     2004	     2005	     2006	     2007	     2008	     2009	     2010	      2011	        2012	         2013	        2014	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
     B. Demographics of Participating Firms and their
     Consumers
     E- and m-commerce firms and selected clients were interviewed to better
     understand the demographics and behavior of users.

     Company Size and Launch Date

     Information about both start date            Figure 11 - Current # of employees and launch date
     and the size of the firm with respect
     to employees was available from
     21 surveyed firms. Three-quarters
     of this subset are Micro, Small, and
     Medium Enterprises (MSME). Within
     the MSME’s, 24% are medium-sized
     firms reaching up to 250 staffers. 52%
     are from micro or small businesses
     ranging from 1 to 100 people. 24%
     of the firms are large with over 250
     employees.

     With respect to start date, 29%
     launched between 2006 and 2010.
                                                    Source: IFC research, self-declared projections by 22 firms
     The majority of surveyed companies
     were young with an average operational time of less than 5 years. Figure 12 depicts
     that of the 22 responding firms, over half (51%) started up operations between 2011
     and 2014. 42% of those launched in the last two years and a quarter of them already
     have 250 or more employees.

     Gender of Users                                                   Figure 12 - Average age of users
                                                                       across core segments
     Across all segments, 11 surveyed firms provided
     information about the gender of their clients.
     Although this is a small sample, it does provide
     some useful insights. Overall, 52% of their registered
     users were male versus 48% female. Of this subset,                                       <25	  
     the Digital Content and VAS Providers, along with                                        14%	  
     Payment Service firms, reach males 20-30% more                             35-­‐40	  
     than females. This was attributed, in part, to high                                                25-­‐29	  
                                                                                 40%	  
     level of men using online and mobile gaming services.                                               13%	  
     On the other hand, operators of e-Marketplaces,
     e-Tailers and O2O services projected that they
     attracted 12% and 16% more female users respectively.                                     30-­‐34	  
     They added that women tended to shop for retail
                                                                                                33%	  
     items or book travel more so than their male
     counterparts.

     Age of Users

     Nearly three-quarters of the surveyed firms, primarily e-Marketplaces, Digital
     Content Providers, and O2O Services, said their average user was over 30 years old.
     40% of the entire sample population stated that their typical users’ age ranged from
     35-40 years. The next highest age range was from 30-34 with a 33% response rate.



13
Interviewees from the consumer insights survey were of a similar
demographic as there was an equal split between male and female research
subjects across the age group of 20-35.

This is a customer from the city of Da
Nang who uses Vexere, an online bus
and travel booking platform that enables
people to compare transportation services
and avoid long lines to purchase tickets for
example at the bus station. She feels that a
number of Vexere’s customers are female
as women are looking to find safe and
reliable transportation and ticketing
services like those provided virtually by
Vexere.
She is also an avid online shopper as
she thinks that going to stores is very
inconvenient (a number of other customers
also mentioned the same experience). She
prefers to shop online on sites like Mua
Chung, Hot Deal, Zalora, and Chon.vn. She
thinks that the prices that she finds online
are much cheaper..

                                   A customer of MoMo in Can Tho who works
                                   in a mobile phone shop. He highlighted
                                   how useful payment services like MoMo are
                                   for transferring money. This mobile app can
                                   also facilitate mobile air time top up, utility
                                   bill payment, remittances, and person to
                                   person payments. MoMo has a large agent
                                   distribution network that extends the
                                   reach of financial institutions. This is more
                                   important in rural areas during emergencies or
                                   blackouts where immediate access to cash is
                                   needed and the normal place to withdraw is the
                                   post office which closes at 5 p.m. MoMo agents
                                   are accessible during late hours and can make
                                   fund transfers immediately while it takes 3-4
                                   days through the post office.

                                   The service is also more affordable as the
                                   transfer fee via MoMo is about five times lower
                                   than alternatives.




                                                                                     14
     4. Survey Findings

     A. Geographic Reach
     Most e- and m-commerce firms concentrate on the urban population in
     major metropolitan areas. But there is evidence that firms are targeting
     areas outside the city where payments and logistics pose a greater challenge.

     One purpose of the research was to gain insight into the local demand for logistics
     and payment solutions by surveyed e- and m-commerce firms and their customers.
     This knowledge helped to reveal whether any services and innovations exist that
     are demonstrating potential to bridge gaps related to financial inclusion and access
     to a broader array of essential goods unavailable in less dense areas.

     With a rapidly evolving distribution network, there are at least 18 cities covered by
     major e- and m-commerce players. Of the core segments under review, 28 firms
     provided feedback about serving clients outside of the commercial hub of HCMC or
     the capital Hanoi as highlighted in Figure 13. These firms acknowledged that they
     are predominately urban centric yet are trying to expand the geographical scope of
     their businesses. These 28 survey respondents indicated that together an average of
     34% of their clients were outside the two biggest Vietnamese cities. They indicated
     that to expand further beyond these cities, they will need to overcome serious
     obstacles related to distribution, payment acceptance, and after-sales service.

     Figure 13- Major cities in Vietnam


        Population densities

        Two cities over 6 million
        •	   Hanoi
        •	   Ho Chi Minh City
        Three cities over 1 million
        •	   Hai Phong
        •	   Da Nang
        •	   Can Tho

        13 cities between 100,000 and 1 million
        •	   Thanh Hoa
        •	   Vinh
        •	   Dong Hoi
        •	   Hue
        •	   Tam Ky
        •	   Pleiku
        •	   Quy Nhon
        •	   Buon Me Thuot
        •	   Thuy Ha
        •	   Nha Trang
        •	   Da Lat
        •	   Rach Gia
        •	   Ca Mau



                                                            Source: IFC research, www.vietnamtourism.org.vn
15
Geographical distribution of clients of e- and m-commerce

For a deeper analysis, Figure 14 provides an indication of the geographical
distribution of clients by segment. It should be noted that the rest of Vietnam
refers to all areas outside HCMC and Hanoi. In practice clients are concentrated
in second and third tier cities and suburbs located within reach of in-house
or outsourced distribution services. A majority of providers across these core
segments are to some extent reaching this concentration of consumers in the
broader population. While it is not surprising to see higher rates of penetration
for digital services, chat and search, the reach of e-Tailers and e-Marketplaces
beyond the big cities (31% of clients) is noteworthy.

Figure 14 – % distribution of clients from HCMC, Hanoi, and the rest of
Vietnam for firms in the core e- and m-commerce segments
 100%	  

  90%	                                                                          19%	  
                        31%	  
  80%	                                               38%	  
                                                                                                            48%	  
  70%	                                                                                                                           Rest	  of	  Vietnam	  

  60%	                                                                                                                           HCMC	  &	  Hanoi	  

  50%	  

  40%	                                                                          81%	  
  30%	                 69%	                         62%	  
                                                                                                            52%	  
  20%	  

  10%	  

    0%	  
             e-­‐Marketplaces	  /	  e-­‐ Digital	  Content	  and	     On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	     Search,	  Social,	  Chat	  
                    Tailers	                     Media	  

Source: IFC research, self-declared projections by 28 surveyed firms

At the individual respondent level, some replies are worth mentioning. 1 Digital
Content and Media firm focused on mobile entertainment said 80% of their
business comes from outside the two main cities. The next highest level of
penetration outside HCMC and Hanoi was indicated by an e-Tailer at 45%. At
40% were an O2O firm specializing in travel bookings and a Digital Media firm
supporting photo and video sharing. Fourth was another e-Tailer at 34%. 3 firms
had 25% penetration in the rest of Vietnam including two e-Marketplaces doing
classifieds and an OTT Mobile Messaging app.

Three firms surveyed in the Search, Social and Chat segment demonstrated the
greatest reach with 48% penetration outside of HCMC and Hanoi. 1 of these
firms is a Chat App with 25% penetration in the rest of Vietnam. The other 2 are
anonymous social networks, one of which self-declared that all of their users are
from areas outside the major urban centers. 5 Digital Content Providers indicated
they have an estimated 38% penetration outside of the two major cities. They
distribute mobile entertainment products with mass appeal including digital
movies, music, video games, e-books, photos, ring tones, and news. 5 firms in
the O2O segment had the least penetration with just 19% of their clients coming
from other parts of Vietnam. This is representative of their target audience that
caters to people residing in major urban centers. 15 surveyed e-Marketplaces and
e-Tailers estimated that 31% of their clientele are from other locations beyond
the two primary cities.


                                                                                                                                                              16
     Support Services

     Payment and logistics firms follow the reach of the e-and m-commerce companies
     that they support. But while some of the firms in the core segment fulfill their
     own payment and logistics needs within the big cities, third parties are more often
     used to support sales and delivery in other areas. A total of 7 providers of Payment
     Services and e-Solutions and Logistics were surveyed in this section. Of them 3
     of the e-Solutions and Logistics providers estimated that 37% of their customers
     were outside of the key metro areas. These firms help merchants, irrespective of
     location, to develop and advertise their online presence. SaaS and LaaS firms are
     emerging to meet the growing need from both online and brick and mortar retailers
     who require customer relationship management, warehousing, order fulfillment,
     and payment collection. 4 firms in the Payment Services segment averaged 30%
     penetration outside of the primary cities. One of these firms in particular specializes
     in m-wallets and estimated that 90% of their users are based outside of HCMC
     and Hanoi. In contrast, the other 3 responding payment firms projected that 20%
     of their users were from the rest of Vietnam. As the Payment Services industry
     expands to include models such as mobile and digital wallets, merchants will be able
     to promote cashless payments and mobile VAS to the broader public.

     Interview quotes on geographical reach

     “Many kinds of products can be available to rural consumers. That is life changing for them.
     Urban dwellers want value for money the most while rural people want the widest range of
     products.”
     - Anonymous e-Marketplace

     “We’d be interested in rural if we knew how to target and service them effectively. After a
     national ad campaign the conversion was very low among rural areas so we are less focused
     on them.”
     - Anonymous e-Promotion site

     “Growth outside of big cities comes with better logistics (faster delivery, more products,
     warehousing), better Wi-Fi, mobile phone penetration with data services, and increased GDP.”
     - Anonymous e-Marketplace

     Source: IFC research




17
An interview with the logistics manager of GHN highlighted some of the key
factors which e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers need to address to expand reach.

1.	 Trust from end customers: As an example, Tiki has great packaging compared
    to other e-commerce companies so
    that creates a good impression and
    customers’ trust their brand which
    results in higher conversion and fewer
    returns.
2.	 Speed of delivery: Online shoppers
    are quick decision makers and change
    their mind very fast, so the faster that
    companies are able to deliver, the less
    chance they have of changing their
    mind
3.	 Handling returns and order
    cancellations: It is important to
    have a transparent return policy. For
    example Lazada’s policy is very clear
    on how things can be returned and
    the forms are already added to the
    delivery box. Customers can send it
    back through GHN or are given a time
    period for returns if dissatisfied for
    some reason.




Smartphone penetration will drive the geographic expansion of consumer
internet businesses

Reliable telecommunications infrastructure and high smartphone penetration
are enabling people to use their mobile devices to access e- and m-commerce
platforms regardless of their physical location. One e-Tailer stated that just
two years ago, over 90% of their customers were from HCMC and Hanoi. Now
that number has shrunk to 66%. Another online retailer expressed the need to
more actively target the broader population and determine what products and
services they need as shopping on mobile becomes more commonplace.

Figure 15 highlights the amount of traffic 31 surveyed firms received from
Personal Computers (PC) versus Mobile devices (cellular phones, handheld
devices, tablets). Firms in the e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers segment estimated
that 44% of their traffic comes via mobile devices. A majority of these
enterprises thought this number will surpass 50% by 2015 with the possible
introduction of 4G connectivity and affordable, bundled packages with data,
voice and SMS included. 5 firms in the Search, Social and Chat segment (3
Social Networks and 2 Chat Apps) estimated that 85% of their incoming traffic
is already via mobile devices. 3 of these firms said that 100% of their users are
accessing their platforms from mobile devices.




                                                                                    18
         Figure 15 – Estimated % of traffic origin – PC vs. Mobile Devices




         Source: IFC research (Sample 31 firms)


     B. Online Traffic and Transactions by Segment
     Frequency of Visits to e- and m-commerce sites

     The Digital Content and Media segment has the highest level of monthly
     visits, double that of the next closest segment, Search, Social and Chat

     Firms were asked about the frequency and volume of online visits. Those businesses
     with more user traffic have greater potential to promote and encourage non-
     cash payment acceptance. Figure 16 provides an overview of the amount of traffic
     by monthly visits averaged across 50 firms within the core e- and m-commerce
     segments. Traffic information was sourced from the surveyed firms that had
     publicly available data from reputable online analytics firms.

     Figure 16 - Estimated monthly visits by segment


          On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	  (11	  ﬁrms)	                             15.5	  
                                                                        1.7	  

       e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	  (29	  ﬁrms)	                                                       56.6	  
                                                                         2.8	  

          Search,	  Social	  and	  Chat	  (4	  ﬁrms)	                                                54.6	  
                                                                                   13.6	  

      Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	  (6	  ﬁrms)	                                                                                                                     153.2	  
                                                                                               30.6	  

                                                                0	                20	           40	     60	          80	          100	          120	     140	  
                                                                                                                                                                     Millions	  
                                       Total	  Monthly	  Visits	  by	  Segment	                       Average	  Monthly	  Visits	  by	  Firm	  


     Source: IFC Research; http://www.similarweb.com/, as of October 2014 (Sample: 50 Firms)




19
Six firms in the Digital Content and Media segment averaged over 30 million
monthly visits. 1 music portal amassed the largest number of visits with double the
average of the entire segment at over 60 million monthly visits. The next highest
frequency of visits was registered by a news and media forum and a photo/video
sharing app, both of which had approximately 40 million monthly visits each.

The Search, Social and Chat segment accumulated over 13 million monthly visitors
averaged across 4 participating firms. 2 separate Social Networks both had over 20
million monthly visitors each. Next in line was a local Search Engine with 6 million
monthly visitors. There is a big gap between these top two tiers and the remaining
segments in terms of the quantity of visits to their platforms.

The average monthly number of visits across the 29 e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers
was nearly 3 million. Online classifieds were popular with the most traffic going
to these types of e-Marketplaces with almost 13 million monthly visits. An online
fashion retail firm was second with 10 million monthly visits followed by another
online retailer operating horizontally across products with about 6 million visits
monthly.

The O2O businesses averaged 1.7 million monthly visits across 11 firms. A
promotional food site had the most monthly visits in this segment at nearly 4
million. This was followed by almost 1 million monthly visits to an online travel
agency. Third was an online event ticketing agency with over 300,000 monthly
visits.

Registered Users on e- and m-commerce platforms

The number of registered users varies across the core and supporting e- and
m-commerce segments. 33 firms provided self-declared projections of this data
as represented in Figure 17. The Search, Social and Chat segment has the most
registered users with almost 16 million on average across four respondents. A photo
and video sharing app eclipsed this with over 26 million users signed up. Two OTT
mobile messaging services estimated they have 12 to 14 million registered users.

Figure 17 - Average registered users by segment


               Payment	  Services	  (3	  ﬁrms)	                   2.3	  
                                                                    0.8	  

  e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	  (16	  ﬁrms)	                                                                   26.3	  
                                                                     1.6	  

        On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	  (5	  ﬁrms)	                                      10.1	  
                                                                      2.0	  

  Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	  (5	  ﬁrms)	                                                                27.6	  
                                                                                5.5	  

      Search,	  Social	  and	  Chat	  (4	  ﬁrms)	                                                                                                                        62.7	  
                                                                                                     15.7	  

                                                            0	                      10	                20	         30	             40	              50	         60	  
                                                                                                                                                                     Millions	  
                                       Total	  Registered	  Users	  by	  Segment	                            Average	  Registered	  Users	  by	  Firm	  


Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 33 surveyed firms




                                                                                                                                                                                          20
     Five digital Content Providers estimated they had 5 million registered users
     on average across them. A music and video portal led this segment with 22
     million users subscribed to music and video streaming services. Of the 16 firms
     in the e-Marketplaces/e-Tailers segment, they averaged 1.65 million users. This
     demonstrates the popularity of these virtual platforms as people are attracted to
     promotional sites, online retailers, and marketplaces offering classified or auctions.

     Three firms in the Payment Services segment provided information about their
     number of registered users. 2 are m-wallet businesses with between 40,000 and
     300,000 users who have registered and downloaded their applications. 1 is an
     anonymous survey respondent who self-declared that they are a Payments Provider
     with 2 million registered users.

     Search engines and Social Networks are the leading referral sources driving
     traffic to e-commerce players

     Traffic is referred to firms from a variety of sources. Across 18 surveyed
     e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers, 44% of their visitors discover them from Search
     Engines and 28% originate by directly entering the domain into a browser. O2O
     service firms rely chiefly on Search Engines that direct 43% of their traffic to them.
     Social Networks are becoming less relevant as a source of referrals to the more
     established, larger firms in the e-commerce industry. The Chat apps are discussing
     strategic alliances with local e-Tailers and online Marketplaces, potentially providing
     them with access to the tens of millions of users of mobile messaging.

     Figure 18 - Referral source of traffic to core e-commerce firms

                                                                   Search	  Engines	  	  	        Direct	  Browser	  Entry	          Social	  Networks	                Referrals	  from	  Other	  Sites	           Display	  Ads	  

                                                         50%	  
                                                                     44%	                                                                       43%	                                                    43%	  
                                                         45%	  
      %	  DistribuDon	  of	  Referral	  Source	  




                                                         40%	  
                                                         35%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30%	  
                                                                                 28%	  
                                                         30%	  
                                                                                                      24%	                                                           24%	  
                                                         25%	                                                                         21%	  
                                                         20%	                                                                                                                                                                  15%	  
                                                         15%	                                                                                             12%	                                                                          12%	  
                                                         10%	  
                                                                                             3%	  
                                                          5%	                                                  2%	  
                                                          0%	  
                                                                            e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	                                  Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	                                    On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	  

                                                                                                                                            Core	  e-­‐Commerce	  Segments	  


     Source: IFC Research; http://www.similarweb.com/, as of October 2014 (Sample: 18 Firms)




21
Interview quotes on referral sources

“Mobile chat applications are a growing source of C2C sales in addition to search engines and
social networks. Integrated payment options in mobile messaging is only a matter of time.”
– Anonymous Chat Platform

”It’s common to allocate advertising spend on each channel as we are prepared to pay a certain
amount for new customers. The problem is there are not enough product searches and it is
difficult to track click-chain at the moment. The actual transaction usually comes from a PC
after browsing on mobile and going from a search engine to a social network and then direct to
the site to buy.”
– Anonymous e-Marketplace
Source: IFC Research


Monthly Transaction Volumes

Two of the core e- and m-commerce segments have more than 100,000 monthly
transactions mainly within the primary urban zones.

Firms were also asked about their level of commercial transactions and sales (Figure
19). 25 surveyed firms provided information about the quantity of transactions made
by consumers that involve an electronic order, a payment, and fulfillment or delivery.
Digital Content and Media and e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers have the greatest
transaction volumes. Out of 3 Digital Content Providers, 1 indicated that they conduct
more than 100,000 monthly transactions. Another stated they process between
50,000 to 100,000 transactions monthly.

Figure 19 - % distribution of monthly transactions by segment.
Total sample size = 25.

                                                                                                                 100%	  
                                                                                                                100%	  
                                         100%	  


                                           80%	  


 %	  Distribu3on	  of	  Monthly	   60%	  
       Transac3ons	  Made	  
                                           40%	                   33%	  
                                                           33%	   33%	               36%	  
                                                                                       36%	            33%	  
                                                                                                        33%	                                                          33%	                             33%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                               29%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                               29%	  
                                                                                                                                             17%	  
                                                                                                                                             17%	                                                                 17%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   17%	  
                                           20%	     14%	  
                                                     14%	                                                                                                   14%	  
                                                                                                                                                             14%	  
                                                                                                                            7%	  
                                                                                                                            7%	  

                                            0%	  
                                                               0	  -­‐	  1,000	         1,000	  -­‐	  10,000	            10,000	  -­‐	  50,000	        50,000	  -­‐	  100,000	               >100,000	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                         >100,000	  
            e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	                         14%	                           36%	                                 7%	                             14%	                             29%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            29%	  
            Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	                   33%	                            0%	                                 0%	                             33%	                             33%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            33%	  
            On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	                          33%	                           33%	                                17%	                              0%	                             17%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                            17%	  
            Search,	  Social	  and	  Chat	                       0%	                          100%	                                0%	                              0%	                              0%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0%	  
                                                                                                 Monthly	  Transac3ons	  according	  to	  Volume	  and	  Segment	  	  


Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 25 surveyed firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             22
          Of the 14 respondents in the e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers segment, 4 manage over
          100,000 transactions per month. Of the 6 O2O firms, 1 of them processes over
          100,000 online orders per month. Another O2O firm handles up to 50,000 monthly
          transactions.

          OTT Mobile Messaging services are still competing to expand their Vietnamese
          user base. Chat apps have only just begun to venture into m-commerce by selling
          emoticons/stickers and video games. 1 firm replied that their monthly transaction
          volume is between 1000 and 10,000 sales of Mobile VAS and that this volume
          is growing. OTT Mobile Messaging services are positioned to be an innovative
          channel for merchants to advertise and accept payments. It is estimated that the
          top 3 players share over 30 million users. Chat app providers consulted in this study
          signaled that they are exploring how to sell and accept payment for Mobile VAS.
          One of the firms with over 10 million users indicated that they intend to promote
          items from e-Tailers on their platform to support the sale of retail merchandise.



          Chat apps are not just about messaging anymore

          There is intense competition amongst OTT service providers in Vietnam, driven by
          the potential to tap into tens of millions of people who are rapidly upgrading from
          feature phones to smartphones. Mobile phones represent their primary gateway
          to the web, which in turn opens up the door to e- and m-commerce. The broader
          population represents a new target consumer who can be provided with access to
          products and services. It may start with messaging or digital entertainment, but it
          can spread into online shopping, food delivery, booking bus tickets, mobile payments,
          or even financial management thus getting into the FinTech space.

          It seems likely that e-commerce firms will experiment in the m-commerce space
          by leveraging chat platforms and social networks. Vietnamese and multinational
          Chat apps like Zalo, Viber and Line have potential to emerge as competitive sales
          and distribution channels in the e- and m-commerce industry. The locally born Zalo,
          a product of Vietnam’s biggest consumer tech company VNG, could become much
          more than just messaging. Zalo’s sister companies encompass utility applications
          including a mobile browser, a local language keyboard, a music app, a video
          streaming app, a news aggregator, and an e-payment gateway, to name a few.

          Vietnam seems positioned to follow trends emerging across the Asian region and
          trail in the footsteps of WeChat and Line. Strategic alliances may enable the OTT
          service provider to become a platform not only for messaging, but for digital ads,
          in-app purchases, video games, flash retail sales, services like food delivery, movie
          tickets, and taxi bookings, and even payments. This also leaves room for untouched
          areas including location and cloud which represent huge potential.




      
 I.        	  	  	  12	  million	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  14.5	  million	  	  	  	  	  	  	  unknown*	  

          Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections for registered users; *LINE Vietnam figure is unknown




23
  Interviews with SME sellers demonstrated how they were using chat apps to
  be able to manage their business effectively.


   An SME seller from DaNang. She runs
   her own store for selling children’s clothes
   and has also just started selling online on
   MuaChung. She sources from more than
   10 suppliers from Hanoi and HCMC. Her
   suppliers share product details with her
   on Chat apps including Viber and Zalo.

   Without this it would have been more
   challenging for her to get new product
   details from the suppliers. Clothes are fast
   selling products and she orders frequently,
   even daily.

   All her payments to her suppliers are
   processed through bank transfer by
   going to a branch.


  Source: IFC Research




C. Payment Acceptance and Usage
Third Party Adoption of Payments by e- and m-commerce Firms

Thirty-three firms provided input related to the means of payment that they
currently accept. Figure 20 depicts the aggregated results across the core e- and
m-commerce segments. Cash on Delivery (COD) is the most common payment
method accepted accounting for 73% of surveyed firms (24 of 33 firms). It is popular
with businesses that want to avoid associated card transaction fees and whose
customers do not need credit cards. Local logistics firms reinforce use of COD
by providing inexpensive, efficient services, thus making it an easier option for
merchants to promote. It should be noted that currently no firms provide their
delivery representatives with a mobile POS to enable the acceptance of anything
but cash. As an alternative to COD, payment via the cash in office method is
accepted by 9 firms (27%).

Twenty-five of 33 firms have an integrated online payment function which enables
them to accept various online payments and in some cases store personal financial
information. Cards (credit, debit and ATM) processed by third party e-payment
gateways are commonly accepted (62% average across the three card types). Online
bank transfers are accepted by 52% of respondents (17 firms). Merchants habitually
open accounts across multiple banks to avoid paying fees since transfers between
accounts at the same bank are usually free. E-wallets are accepted by 10 of the
respondents (30%). Firms that accept this method are mainly more established,
reputable firms that have built customer trust and are capable of storing their
online shopping data, such as passwords, delivery addresses, credit card details, and
bank account information in a secure, online environment.


                                                                                        24
     Payment via SMS banking and pre-paid scratch cards that leverage the
     telecommunications networks are accepted by 6% and 9% of the firms respectively.
     Pre-paid cards are common as consumers can pay cash to an agent located in
     convenient corners across the nation typically in exchange for digital products
     such as music, games, videos, ring tones, and mobile top-up. SMS banking is not
     as popular. Survey participants indicated that this is due to high fees levied on SMS
     transactions.

     Figure 20 - Payment methods accepted by e- and m-commerce firms

                                                                   SMS	  Payment	           6%	        2	  


                                                                 Pre-­‐paid	  Cards	                 9%	   3	  


                                                                   Cash	  In	  Oﬃce	                               27%	          9	  
      Methods	  of	  Payment	  Acceptance	  




                                                                           e-­‐Wallet	                                    30%	             10	  


                                                         Online	  Bank	  Transfer	                                                                       52%	          17	  


                                                              ATM/Debit	  Cards	                                                                               55%	              18	  


                                                       Domes<c	  Credit	  Cards	                                                                                                  64%	             21	  


                                                   Interna<onal	  Credit	  Cards	                                                                                                         67%	              22	  


                                                             Cash	  On	  Delivery	  	                                                                                                              73%	             24	  

                                                                                                                      Number	  of	  Respondents	  that	  Accept	  these	  Payment	  Methods	  


     Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 33 surveyed firms



                          The case for mobile and digital wallets

                          Mobile Wallets are making a soft entrance into the e- and m-commerce scene
                          backed by partnerships between technologists, state and commercial banks,
                          and the telecom companies.

                          Within the payments landscape there is fragmentation among gateways, no clear
                          industry leader, and very small-scale evidence of customer adoption for any payment
                          methods aside from COD. Nevertheless there are currently at least 3 promising
                          m-wallet solutions being tested and commercially applied under the authority of
                          the State Bank of Vietnam. The main issue is consumers have no exposure to such
                          innovation that could simplify their shopping experience and provide them with
                          access to tools, VAS, and financial products that may enhance their livelihood.

                          The first-movers behind these pilot m-wallets could eventually disrupt the purchase
                          journey by introducing seamless payments and hardware with omni-channel
                          features to support the e- and m-commerce and retail market. These m-wallet
                          firms are partnering with banks and telecoms in the payments ecosystem to inspire
                          adoption by consumers and merchants. They are also gaining acquirer and developer
                          support and mobile POS enablement.
                          Source: IFC Research; Forrester Research Inc.




25
 VIMO, a venture of Peacesoft, supports digital payments mobile top-up

 VIMO’s representative in Can Tho feels
 the application has solved a big issue for
 agents as they do not have to buy inventory
 anymore. This is having a big impact on
 cash management by shifting from cash
 to non-cash transactions.

 Before, the biggest issue for agents was that
 they had to buy stock of pre-paid scratch
 cards intended for mobile air time recharge,
 negatively impacting their cash flow.
 Source: IFC Research




Payment acceptance across the core e- and m-commerce segments

A deeper analysis of the payment methods accepted by firms within the core
e- and m-commerce segments was conducted. Payment acceptance depends
on several factors including the business model, target audience, and distribution
system. Nevertheless, consumers are usually offered a variety of methods to pay,
including online and mobile alternatives to cash payments. The development of
such methods and the evolution of the payments landscape are being driven by
the e- and m-commerce actors themselves and not the telecom or ISP providers.

Eighteen firms in the e-Marketplaces and e-Tailers segment provided feedback on
payment acceptance. Cash payment is most popular with online retailers given
their risk-averse clientele and the affordability of COD and collection services.
Merchants tend to provide free COD services knowing that their customers
demand an easy, convenient, safe, and free delivery and payment solution. 17 of
the respondents (94%) accept COD without a delivery charge. Card payment
acceptance by the firms averages 69% across the three card types. 11 firms accept
online bank transfers (61%). E-Wallet is accepted by 6 firms (33%). Cash in Office,
where consumers visit a showroom or office to inspect products and pay in
person, is accepted by 6 of the firms (33%). In five instances firms only accepted
COD or online bank transfer as they felt there was no uptake with other payment
methods leaving them no incentive to accept alternatives until the situation
changes. In two cases domestic credit cards or ATM/debit cards were accepted
as these firms felt that processing international credit cards exposed them to
greater risk of liability to repay card owners in the event of fraud, which is difficult
to monitor.




                                                                                           26
     Figure 21 - Payment acceptance: e-Marketplaces/e-Tailers

                                                                                                   Payment	  Acceptance	  of	  e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	  Segment	  
                                                                                                                       (Sample:	  18	  ﬁrms)	  	  
                                                                         0	               2	              4	        6	             8	     10	         12	              14	     16	         18	  

                                            Cash	  on	  Delivery	             94%	                                                                                                          17	  

                                           ATM/Debit	  Cards	                  72%	                                                                                    13	  

                                Interna@onal	  Credit	  Cards	                67%	                                                                           12	  
       Payment	  Methods	  




                                    Domes@c	  Credit	  Cards	                 67%	                                                                           12	  

                                      Online	  Bank	  Transfer	               61%	                                                                  11	  

                                                        e-­‐Wallet	             33%	                                         6	  

                                                Cash	  in	  Oﬃce	             33%	                                         6	  

                                                SMS	  Payment	                 0	  

                                               Pre-­‐paid	  Cards	             0	  


                                                                                                     Number of respondents accepting these payment methods

     Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections

     Five firms in the Digital Content and Media segment shared information on
     payment acceptance. Three of the 5 (60%) accept Pre-Paid scratch cards. This has
     been the widely adopted form of payment for this category of firms. E-Wallets
     are accepted by 40% of the firms that are predominately seasoned, veteran
     m-entertainment distributors. COD is not common for these providers as the
     product being distributed is virtual and payment is typically executed online, on
     mobile, or at an authorized agent that collects cash.




27
Figure 22 - Payment acceptance: Digital Content & Media

                                                                                                 Payment	  Acceptance	  of	  Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	  Segment	  	  
                                                                                                                         (Sample:	  5	  ﬁrms)	  	  
                                                                                       0	                                   1	                      2	                   3	               4	  

                                                    Pre-­‐paid	  Cards	                      60%	                                                                                3	  

                                               ATM/Debit	  Cards	                            40%	                                                          2	  

                                                              e-­‐Wallet	                     40%	                                                          2	  
           Payment	  Methods	  




                                               Cash	  on	  Delivery	  	                    20%	                                 1	  

                                    InternaBonal	  Credit	  Cards	                          20%	                                 1	  

                                        DomesBc	  Credit	  Cards	                           20%	                                 1	  

                                          Online	  Bank	  Transfer	                         20%	                                 1	  

                                                     Cash	  in	  Oﬃce	                      20%	                                 1	  

                                                     SMS	  Payment	                          20%	                                 1	  


                                                                                                            Number of respondents accepting these payment methods

Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections
Figure 23 - Payment acceptance: Search, Social and Chat segment


                                                                                                         Payment	  Acceptance	  of	  Search,	  Social	  and	  Chat	  Segment	  
                                                                                                                             (Sample:	  4	  ﬁrms)	  
                                                                             0	                                     1	                      2	                       3	                 4	  

                          Interna0onal	  Credit	  Cards	                                                                  100%	                                                                 4	  

                                      Domes0c	  Credit	  Cards	                                               75%	                                                          3	  

                                            Cash	  on	  Delivery	  	                         25%	                       1	  
 Payment	  Methods	  




                                            ATM/Debit	  Cards	                                 25%	                       1	  

                                                 SMS	  Payment	                                25%	                       1	  

                                       Online	  Bank	  Transfer	                  0	  

                                                          e-­‐Wallet	               0	  

                                                  Cash	  in	  Oﬃce	               0	  

                                                Pre-­‐paid	  Cards	                0	  


                                                                                                     Number of respondents accepting these payment methods

Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections

With respect to the Search, Social and Chat segment, 2 Social Networks and 2 OTT
Mobile Messaging services provided feedback. All of them accept international
credit cards, and 75% accept domestic cards. A quarter of them accept ATM or debit
cards and SMS payment. None of the respondents accept COD. These findings
demonstrate how firms in this segment are offering integrated features of e- and
m-commerce and encouraging uptake of e-payments. This trend resembles the
recent market developments in China.



                                                                                                                                                                                                            28
     Figure 24 - Payment acceptance: On-to-Offline segment

                                                                                                           Payment	  Acceptance	  of	  On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Segment	  
                                                                                                                           (Sample:	  7	  ﬁrms)	  	  
                                                                         0	                       1	                2	             3	     4	          5	             6	             7	  

                                            Cash	  on	  Delivery	                                       100%	                                                                  6	  

                                Interna;onal	  Credit	  Cards	                                   83%	                                                          5	  

                                    Domes;c	  Credit	  Cards	                                    83%	                                                          5	  
       Payment	  Methods	  




                                      Online	  Bank	  Transfer	                                  83%	                                                          5	  

                                           ATM/Debit	  Cards	                          33%	                                2	  

                                                        e-­‐Wallet	                     33%	                                2	  

                                                Cash	  In	  Oﬃce	                     33%	                                2	  

                                                SMS	  Payment	                 0	  

                                               Pre-­‐paid	  Cards	             0	  



     Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections

     Seven firms in the O2O segment shared information about the means of payments
     they accept. All of them accept COD. 5 of the 7 firms (83%) accept International
     and domestic credit cards typically for transactions related to e-ticketing for travel,
     transportation, and events. ATM or debit cards, e-Wallets and Cash in Office are
     accepted by a third of these surveyed firms.


      Cash in Office and the omni-channel model

         Cash in Office, omni-channel models and companies going from online to
         offline

         Big Vietnamese companies are looking at omni-channel models where they
         complement their online store with an offline showroom to give Vietnamese
         consumers more choice. The brick and mortar shop builds brand presence,
         creates trust, and alleviates the insecurity customers feel with online buying.
         Unfortunately it does not help solve the payment problem in Vietnam where cash
         is king and credit card penetration is minimal. Customers are ok going to a store
         to pick up their goods and paying cash in person.

         Several Vietnamese retailers have experimented with the omni-channel model.
         The Mobile World (The Gioi Di Dong) and CungMua have already begun operating
         both physical and virtual storefronts. VatGia, another sizeable e-commerce
         player, already has a number of offline stores branded under the name CucRe.
         This is a new chapter in the consumer internet giant’s life. VatGia believes that
         its customers appreciate having the choice to shop in a real store and feel safer.
         Another online retail giant, Lazada, a Rocket Internet company, is exploring this
         strategy as they too see the benefits of getting a bigger slice of the consumer
         market.

         Finally there is Vingroup, a big real estate developer that operates a chain of
         commercial malls throughout Vietnam. This enterprise is committing between
         US$ $30 and $50 million to building their online, e-commerce presence to
         complement their offline footprint.

         Source: IFC Research




29
MuaChung is a good example that illustrates
how showrooming is appreciated by their
customers. Their store manager in DaNang
explained how returns and cancellations
are as high as 30%, however, they are able
to manage this by using their warehouse
as a showroom so customers can shop in
person, buy products and make returns
physically in the store.




Source: IFC Research




Interview quotes on payment acceptance outlook

“Online payments will increase with internet usage and as market education improves,
but COD will still dominate. More smartphones may bring more e- and m-commerce but
it will still be difficult to penetrate rural markets or reach unbanked people. Currently the
infrastructure is being built around COD.”
– Anonymous O2O Service

“We expect e-wallet payment to have 15% market share in 2015. “
– Anonymous Payment Service

“Mentality of Vietnamese consumers is to pay COD. Not sure why leading gateways haven’t
picked up yet. Some chat services could follow the path of WeChat but it is difficult to
predict.” – Anonymous e-Marketplace
“Payment will be expanded through pre-paid cards, payroll deductions, local banks, agent
networks, and mobile to collect cash.”
– Anonymous Chat Application

“The ideal future scenario is a simple payment screen with a seamless payment process
and SMS confirmation that’s quick and easy like Paypal. Couldn’t every bank be enabled
to accept all cards for e-banking in one interface? The banks can do the API transaction
with the sole gateway or switch, all financial info is stored by the bank and mapped to the
customer id and their card.”
– Anonymous e-Marketplace

Source: IFC Research




                                                                                                30
     Consumer Adoption of Payments Offered by Third Party Providers

         Payment methods commonly used by customers vary based on the type of
         products and services purchased in the e- and m-commerce market
     	
         Vietnamese customers have an array of payment methods at their fingertips, and
         what they use depends obviously on what they are buying. Even though COD is
         most popular with consumers of e-Tailers and O2O firms, the question remains
         whether any innovations are causing disruption or if other segments are gaining
         traction in the digital and online payments space. 24 firms in the core e- and
         m-commerce industry provided their perspectives on customer behavior when it
         comes to making payments once an order is placed online or via a mobile device.

         Figure 25 shows the breakdown by segment of customers that make cash
         versus non-cash payments. The penetration of non-cash payments across the
         e-Marketplaces, online retailers, and O2O businesses accounts for just 10%. Cash
         payments, especially for tangibles, are commonplace when purchases are made
         across these core segments. This behavior is encouraged because merchants
         provide free COD service and buyers are accustomed to inspecting orders prior to
         payment. In the case of garments, merchants will bring an assortment of sizes and
         colors to a customer’s doorstep for them to try on prior to purchase. Most survey
         respondents did not have a transparent return policy to alleviate the risk associated
         with returning or exchanging a product if the customer opted to do so. Additionally,
         the delivering agents did not offer a mobile POS primarily because credit card
         penetration is low in Vietnam and merchants prefer not to pay the transaction fees.
         Firms acknowledged that the majority of the non-cash payments came by way of
         online bank transfer.

         Two of the four core segments are making progress with respect to both non-cash
         payments and penetrating markets outside of the two biggest cities. The leading
         segment is the Digital Content and Media distributors with 75% of their users
         making non-cash payments. Customers typically use pre-paid scratch cards used to
         top-up mobile minutes in order to purchase games, ring tones, streamed content
         such as music, videos, and books, or to make remittances and utility payments. This
         segment also has the greatest penetration outside of urban areas as they distribute
         products through mobile phones.

         The Search, Social and Chat segment respondents estimated that 59% of their
         users make non-cash payments. This is led by the OTT Messaging services whose
         customers use credit and pre-paid scratch cards to currently buy video games,
         emoticons, movie tickets, and in-app purchases. The surveyed OTT Mobile
         Messaging providers shared that they are exploring how to expand their product
         lines, engage in omni-channel commerce, and automate payments by leveraging
         smartphones to be ahead of the curve as market patterns shift.




31
Figure 25 - % payment adoption by consumers – cash vs. non-cash payments
  Core	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  Segments	  




                                                        Digital	  Content	  and	  Media	                                  25%	                                             75%	  



                                                                       Search,	  Social	  and	  Chat	                           41%	                                               59%	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %	  Cash	  Payments	  
                                                         e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	                                                                    89%	                                           11%	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %	  Non-­‐Cash	  Payments	  

                                                                               On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	                                                  90%	                                        10%	  


                                                                                                                     0%	   10%	   20%	   30%	   40%	   50%	   60%	   70%	   80%	   90%	   100%	  
                                                                                                                        %	  Payment	  Uptake	  by	  Consumers	  -­‐	  Cash	  vs	  Non-­‐Cash	  Payments	  


Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 24 surveyed firms

Incentives Offered to Encourage Non-Cash Payment Adoption have had
limited impact so far
 	
 Of the total survey population, 30 firms provided feedback about whether they
 offer incentives to encourage non-cash payments. Of these respondents, three-
 quarters are online retailers who said they try to incentivize customers to pre-pay
 online as a means to reduce their operational costs, minimize order cancellations
 and streamline inventory management. Nevertheless, most of these e-Tailers felt
 that their incentive mechanisms are not enough to encourage uptake for online
 payment methods and that behavioral change will take time.

 Based on this, 57% of the companies surveyed said they give discounts to buyers to
 entice them to use e-payments. 33% of the respondents provide credits or points
 that can be applied to future purchases if a cashless payment method is selected.
 17% of the firms said they do not charge or pass on transaction fees to consumers
 and 14% waive delivery services charges for those who opt to pay online.

 Figure 26- Types of incentives offered to encourage users to pay online


                                                                                                               Free	  Delivery	               13%	                           4	  
                                            Incen>ves	  Oﬀered	  for	  Non-­‐Cash	  




                                                                                           Waive	  any	  Associated	  Fees	                 17%	                                   5	  
                                                         Payments	  




                                                                                                  No	  Incen>ves	  Oﬀered	                   27%	                                                      8	  


                                                                                           Credit	  for	  Future	  Purchases	                33%	                                                                    10	  


                                                                                                                    Discounts	                   57%	                                                                                                              17	  

                                                                                                                                        0	           2	               4	                6	     8	               10	          12	       14	       16	         18	  
                                                                                                                      %/#	  Firms	  in	  Core	  Segments	  that	  Incen>vize	  Non-­‐Cash	  Payments	  


 Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 30 surveyed firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               32
     Interview quotes on payment acceptance outlook

     “We offer a rewards scheme and run campaigns to give points if purchases are made with
     credit cards during a specific time period. The card associations can make up the discount
     offered and this results in significant uptake and is proving to be a good way to incentivize
     credit card usage.”
     – Anonymous e-Marketplace

     “There is no incentive to use pre-paid since you can’t inspect the goods and it is harder to
     get a refund. If your competitor offers COD, so do you as no one will buy your products
     otherwise.”
     – Anonymous e-Tailer




     Figure 27 - Consumer Trust Issues with e-Payments

     Firms felt that almost half of their consumers distrust e-payment methods

     Out of 30 firms who provided feedback on the
     trust issue associated with e-payments, 53%
     perceived that consumers do not worry about
     trust when making online payments. They
     added a caveat that this is contingent on the                    Do	  Not	  Trust	  
     reputation and brand of both the merchant                        	  e-­‐Payments	        Trust	  e-­‐
     and the third party provider. 47% felt their                              47%	           Payments	  
     users mistrust online payments because they                                                  53%	  
     lack confidence in the controls that safeguard
     their information that is shared online, such as
     financial and personal details.                  ∑	  30	  Firms	  

                                                              Source: IFC Research (Sample: 30 Firms)




     Interview quotes on trust issues

     “People are afraid of giving financial information over the internet as there is a massive
     trust issue. Firms can’t store personal financial information on their servers to enable one-
     click shopping so online transactions are perceived as being unsafe and complicated since
     customers are uncertain who has access to their info.”
     – Anonymous Payment Service

     “The State Bank should take a leading role in revolutionizing, standardizing, and regulating
     the online payments process. Payment gateways need to be defragmented, less complex,
     transparent, technically reliable and secure, and connected to the bank and credit accounts.
     Requires a network effect to educate consumers about the benefits and build confidence
     and trust in a system that is certified to store financial information and enable merchants to
     process everything locally and control the user experience.”
     – Anonymous e-Marketplace




33
A MoMo customer indicated that at first,
he did not trust the MoMo application

A customer of MoMo who is a University
student from Ha Tay.

He stated that “the first time I heard about
MoMo’s world cup competition last year, I
could not believe I would be able to get the
amount and I was very surprised when I
was able to get $15 USD cash as part of this
promotion.”

Incentives like these helped to convert him
to use this m-wallet. He also tried top-up
mobile air time services through MoMo after
that experience and now he is a regular user
who also uses MoMo for gaming top-ups.




Issues Expressed by e- and m-commerce Firms related to Non-Cash
Payments

The surveyed firms shed light on the issues related to payment acceptance for
merchants, processors, and customers in Vietnam. The question was posed to 48
firms across all the segments about what challenges currently face the payments
sector. Their perspectives are summarized in Figure 28.

Thirty-six of the 48 respondents (75%) said their primary concern with non-
cash payments is that there are low levels of customer adoption. The e- and
m-commerce firms, as well as the third party logistics and payment providers,
understand that consumer demand will drive mass adoption. Surveyed firms
recognize that even if the technology exists, the hurdle they all need to overcome
involves convincing people to use new methods. Some hinted that communication
campaigns can help educate the market. Others said banks could more proactively
inform clients that they needed to register their cards for online and digital
payments.

Half of the firms (50%) felt the transaction process is too complicated and not a
seamless, user-friendly interface even if the e-payment gateway is integrated into
their platform. They are also concerned that the process for dealing with customer
disputes and verifying online purchases in real-time is not straightforward.

Seventeen firms (35%) were concerned with security features that minimize
risks shared among e-commerce actors, banks, payment gateways, and card
companies. Firms expressed interest in being able to securely store customer
payment information and delivery preferences however they were not confident
in how providers ensure data encryption and fraud protection.




                                                                                     34
     Twenty-five percent (25%) believed that the cost to integrate the payment
     platforms into their business was too high and not worth the investment given
     the lack of user uptake. 21% of the firms were worried that the market is too
     fragmented and the variety of e-payment gateways was a cause for confusion that
     hinders customer and merchant adoption. 13% of the participating enterprises said
     the time to receive a reimbursement related to online payments was too long and
     they would prefer it to be easier and faster.

     Figure 28 –Non-cash payments Issues

                                                                                                                        No	  Issues	             2%,	   1	  
      Third-­‐Party	  Concerns	  related	  to	  Non-­‐Cash	  




                                                                     Reimbursement	  for	  Online	  Payment	  too	  Slow	                         13%	          6	  

                                                                                          Too	  Many	  Payment	  Providers	                                       21%	          10	  
                          Payments	  




                                                                                            Cost	  of	  Integra<on	  too	  High	                                      23%	         11	  

                                                                                                              Security	  of	  Data	                                                        35%	        17	  

                                                                                    Fees	  for	  Online	  Payment	  too	  High	                                                         35%	        17	  

                                                                                     Complicated	  Transac<on	  Process	                                                                                         50%	       24	  

                                                                                      Not	  Enough	  Customer	  Adop<on	                                                                                                                          75%	              36	  

                                                                                                                                           0	                5	               10	              15	          20	          25	           30	               35	              40	  
                                                                                                                                                                                 #	  of	  	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  Respondents	  	  


     Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 48 surveyed firms



     Interview quotes about issues with payments

     “As long as the banking system continues to push credit cards, e-commerce/ digital payment
     services will grow behind credit cards.”
     – Anonymous Payment Gateway

     “We tried different online payment providers but the integration is the biggest issue. Other
     issues include the numerous steps in the process that diminishes customer experience, data
     security concerns, and delayed payment reimbursement. It is not a seamless process and with
     each step the conversion rate drops. Top 10 reasons not to buy online are all trust related-
     COD bridges this trust gap.”
     – Anonymous e-Marketplace

     “The online payments lack reliability and trust. 1/3 of payments fail due to OTP codes, users
     cancel, incorrect info is entered by user, the process is too lengthy, or because of the provider.
     Many failed transactions and gateways or banks have no motivation to improve it.”
     – Anonymous Chat Application




35
“Payment fees to use cards are cost-prohibitive for merchants. The surcharge by telcos is
very high (30-50%) which is not accessible for all. If it were lower we would see more SMS
payment methods as everyone has phone.”
- Anonymous Digital Content Distributor

“Transaction failure rate is high. 30% failures occur because either the card is not registered
for online transaction, the 3D secure code is not entered, the issuing bank declines the
transaction, or the transaction times out.”
– Anonymous Payment Gateway




D. Distribution and Collection Services
E-commerce Order Fulfillment and Third Party Logistics Providers

The leading providers of third party logistics work with both established and
startup merchants with a growing need for efficient order fulfillment and
payment collection services

Since the COD service is so popular in Vietnam, the simultaneous delivery of goods
and collection of cash payments is critical and dependent on third party logistics
providers. As the online retail market has expanded, the demand for these services
has grown rapidly. In response, a niche group of e-commerce fulfillment service
startups have surfaced to support the receiving, processing and delivering of online
orders to businesses and end consumers. 3 of these providers launched in 2012 and
participated in this survey. Some have lengthy waiting lists from prospective clients.
This begged the question whether third party logistics firms could help merchants
expand their reach to less urban areas while also helping to educate the market
about digital and mobile payment solutions. Figure 29 shows the breakdown of 11
firms that shared information about how they manage their delivery and collection
services.

Three of the 11 firms (27%) administer their delivery and collection service in-house.
These respondents felt that since the delivery infrastructure is immature it would
be more cost effective to bear the shipping cost but cut out the middle man and
accept the cash payment directly. Despite this approach, they felt outsourcing
this function would be viable if cashless payment adoption increased. 4 of the 14
enterprises (36%) are running a hybrid model where they have an in-house team in
HCMC and Hanoi but outsource to all other destinations thus helping them achieve
greater scale than they could independently. The remaining 4 firms (36%) outsource
their entire fulfillment, delivery and collection operation. All of these respondents
expressed their desire to procure other logistical services including warehousing,
inventory management, supply chain management, and customer relationship
management services in the future.




                                                                                                  36
     The LaaS third party logistics businesses routinely meet end customers, deliver their
     goods, and collect cash payments. At the moment there is no m-commerce firm
     that has provided a practical, easy, widely adoptable payment method to leverage
     the deliveryman’s mobile phone to disrupt COD. However, there are some early-
     movers looking to introduce these innovations.

     Figure 29 – Common distribution methods
     (Sample: 14 firms)



                                             Deliver	  In-­‐
                       Outsource	   House	  to	  Big	  
                      Delivery	  and	   Ci4es	  and	  
                      Collec4ons	  to	   Outsource	  the	  
                       Third	  Party	           Rest	  
                            36%	  
                                                  36%	  
                                     In-­‐House	  
                                  Delivery	  and	  
                                    Collec4ons	  
       ∑	  11	  Firms	                 27%	  



     Interview quotes on delivery and cash collections

     “All delivery men have phones so let’s find a solution to payments using mobile devices. It’s
     safer and more secure if drivers are not handling cash.”
     – Anonymous Third Party Logistics Provider

     “We do delivery ourselves to cut out 2-3% fees. We bring different sizes and colors to the
     client so they can try it before they buy it. It’s a big challenge for operations but it’s good
     service. We can do this in the big city markets. If we don’t push rural areas we would not
     have motivation to switch to online payment.”
     – Anonymous e-Tailer




37
Returns and cancellations are a growing problem

Case in Point: Most e-shopping transactions are COD and cancellation rates
are high due to the lack of a sense of obligation by the consumer

Transaction cancellations and returns are a risky and unplanned operational
expense for both the merchants and the shipping companies. Firms try to minimize
and mitigate the cancellation risk by sending deliverymen with extra items or
various clothing sizes and colors to give buyers a choice at the door. Nevertheless,
customers cancel because there is no sense of obligation for the purchase. The
main third party logistics and shipping firms provide COD services for cut-throat
prices and they deal with double digit returns in shipments from their e-commerce
patrons. Survey participants revealed the rates for transaction cancellations by
consumers in Figure 30. 2 LaaS firms running delivery and collections for a majority
of the survey respondents stated that 13% of the transactions they manage are
cancelled prior to or upon delivery of the product. 6 e-Tailers said that 17% of their
transactions ordered online are ultimately cancelled or returned. 3 O2O service
providers said that 4% of the transactions made on their sites are cancelled.

Figure 30 - Rate of e-transactions cancelled by consumers
  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  




                                       On-­‐to-­‐Oﬄine	  Services	                          4%	     3	  
            segments	  




                                    e-­‐Solu:ons	  and	  Logis:cs	               13%	     2	  


                                    e-­‐Marketplaces/e-­‐Tailers	                                                    17%	     6	  


                                        %	  rate	  of	  transac:on	  cancella:ons	  or	  returns	  by	  consumers	  

Source: IFC Research (Sample: 11 Firms)



Issues related to Order Fulfillment and Cash Collections
There was consensus among surveyed firms that the key issues relate to the
difficulty to collect payments in non-urban areas, the risk of lost cash, and
the anticipated hike in COD service fees
With respect to the fulfillment of online orders and the collection of cash payments,
37 merchants responded with specific concerns as represented in Figure 31. Nearly
half of the respondents (49%) stated their issues were associated with mitigating
risks of cash going missing or theft. 17 of the firms (46%) said they are concerned
with the growing services costs associated with the COD process. At the moment
the provision of these services is cost effective but according to most respondents
they believe it is temporary and the pricing will adjust as suppliers catch up with the
overwhelming demand.




                                                                                                                                        38
     An additional 17 firms (46%) said their issues lie with the challenges of distribution
     and collections outside of the main urban zones. Nearly all the firms acknowledge
     the potential to reach non-urban customers, especially given the high penetration
     rates of both internet and mobile devices. Nonetheless, the supply chain and
     infrastructure is still developing and not capable of supporting the needs of the
     entire market at this time. 10 firms (27%) felt that the reimbursement timeframe
     to redistribute cash once collected takes too long and creates negative pressure on
     their working capital. 11% stated there were other problematic issues related to cash
     collection services, including the underdeveloped logistics infrastructure, difficulty
     to fulfill orders without outsourcing the delivery and collection service, the need
     for consumers to be at home to receive goods, and lack of compelling, non-cash
     alternatives to COD.

     Figure 31 - Order fulfillment and cash collection issues
        Concerns	  from	  Firms	  related	  to	  Order	  




                                                                                                          Not	  Concerned	                   2	             5%	  
          Fulﬁllment	  and	  Cash	  CollecRons	  




                                                                                                                         Other	                                  4	             11%	  

                                                                            Payment	  Reimbursement	  too	  Slow	                                                                                     10	      27%	  

                                                                  Diﬃcult	  to	  Collect	  Outside	  of	  Urban	  Areas	                                                                                                                17	         46%	  

                                                                                               Growing	  Service	  Costs	                                                                                                                   17	         46%	  

                                                                                   Risk	  of	  Missing	  or	  Stolen	  Cash	                                                                                                                      18	      49%	  

                                                                                                                                       0	             2	                4	           6	       8	          10	      12	     14	        16	           18	      20	  
                                                                                                                                                                                  #	  of	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  Respondents	  


     Source: IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 37 surveyed firms



       Interview with the Office Representative
       at GHN uncovered diverse issues for third
       party logistics

                GHN’s office representative in DaNang
                says, “It is definitely a risk for us that more
                e-commerce companies are building their
                own delivery teams. But this is challenging
                us to become even better and we are
                trying to become more technologically
                advanced by using PDA devices and real
                time updates”.

                GHN has a plan to build capacity to reach
                rural areas. They feel there are fewer brick
                and mortar shops in those locations but the
                demand is latent.

                Source: IFC Research



39
E. Industry Outlook
Challenges facing the e- and m-commerce Industry in Vietnam

Payments and logistics infrastructure are viewed as the biggest problems
facing the Vietnamese e-and m-commerce market, undermining potential to
reach the broader population

When asked about the major obstacles facing the e- and m-commerce industry
right now, 20 firms provided their perspectives as highlighted in Figure 32. Their
local market insight is critical to help identify what the gaps are, what local
providers are or are not doing currently, and if there are any innovative services
platforms that may have the potential to expand payment acceptance.

Of the 20 respondents, each was asked to select just one challenge they felt the
industry needs to overcome. 30% replied that the logistics infrastructure is the
greatest issue, followed by payment infrastructure which accounted for 25%.
Dependence on COD services and the consumers’ non-committal to fulfill orders
was seen by 20% as the greatest challenge. 10% of the respondents said that
after-sales service is challenging and will be increasingly difficult to implement
effectively to the broader market without significant enhancements in the logistical
infrastructure. Another 10% felt that the regulatory environment is not designed
to support or incentivize scaling businesses. 5% said that market adoption is a
challenge given how difficult it is for merchants and consumers to change their
habits and switch to easier, more modern methods for browsing, shopping, and
making payments online or via a mobile device.

Figure 32 - Perspectives on the challenges currently facing the e- and
m-commerce industry
 Challenges	  Facing	  the	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  




                                                                  Logis4cs	  Infrastructure	                                                                                                           6	     30%	  


                                                                  Payment	  Infrastructure	                                                                                         5	      25%	  


                                                                         Cash	  on	  Delivery	                                                                 4	       20%	  
                    Indsustry	  




                                                                       Regulatory	  Policies	                        2	       10%	  


                                                                       A6er-­‐Sales	  Service	                       2	       10%	  


                                                                         Market	  Adop4on	          1	     5%	  

                                                                                                                               #	  of	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  Respondents	  	  



Source IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 20 surveyed firms
Firms were asked to choose only one challenge they viewed most important.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
     Prospects for development of non-cash payment

     Firms in the core e- and m-commerce segments unanimously agreed that non-
     cash payments will become more widely used in the next five years and fuel their
     growth outside of the main urban zones. One large e-Tailer with tens of thousands
     of available products aspires to reach new local markets. But they are still trying to
     figure out how to market, distribute, and collect payments from these prospective
     customers. They felt the foundation for the technology is in place, consumers have
     smartphones with internet browsers thus enabling them to move beyond credit
     cards, but unfortunately other supporting services are not yet fully equipped to
     handle such growth.

      As illustrated in Figure 33, 23 out of 38 firms (61%) agree that non-cash payments
     will be common in 5 years. All agreed that to achieve this, there will need to be
     major improvements in the supply chain, warehousing, and payment services
     infrastructure in order to bridge the gaps. Some firms added that omni-channel
     payments adapted to Vietnamese consumers could become popular. Their view is
     that local habit is to inspect products prior to buying, and online stores are opening
     offline shops to cater to this. At the moment there is no seamless transition to
     in-store, online and mobile payments but if that emerges it could drive consumer
     adoption and rural expansion together.

     To further break this down, firms in the e-Solutions and Logistics, e-Marketplaces
     and e-Tailers, and Digital Content and Media segments overwhelmingly agreed that
     non-cash payments will be widely adopted by 2019. On the other hand, 67% of the
     O2O Service Firms and 80% of the Search, Social and Chat Platforms disagreed with
     that assumption. This attitude could foreseeably change if 4G launches in Vietnam
     and telcos focus on bundling services and looking for revenue from data packages.




41
       Figure 33- Will non-cash payments be widespread within the next five years?
!!!!
                                                                     Non,cash$payments$will$be$widespread$in$5$years$                   %$Agree$$
        Will%non3cash%payments%will%be%%                              (%$of$ﬁrms$by$segment$agreeing,$disagreeing)$$                    %$Disagree$$
            widespread%in%5%years%?%
         (%%of%all%ﬁrms%agreeing,%disagreeing)%
                                                      On,to,Oﬄine$Services$                                               67%$

                                                     Search,$Social$and$Chat$                                      80%$
                             Agree%
                Disagree% 39%%                    Digital$Content$and$Media$                                                            33%$
                               %
                  61%%
                           (15$ﬁrms)$
                    %                              e,Marketplaces/e,Tailers$                                                             30%$
                (23$ﬁrms)$
                                                   e,Solu1ons$and$Logis1cs$                                                                 25%$

                                                                                0%$       25%$              50%$                 75%$                  100%$




       Source IFC Research, Self-declared projections by 38 surveyed firms




       Interview quotes related to e and m-commerce challenges and industry
       outlook

       “e-commerce firms require underlying services not currently supplied in the current
       marketplace. The most in-demand services include customer relationship management,
       order delivery and fulfillment, inventory management and warehousing, after sales services,
       and payment mechanisms. The goal is to build the ecosystem so e-commerce can flourish
       online and offline. Idea to build consumer confidence in e-commerce and build trust in online
       payment services and data security. Merchants also need to build consumer confidence that
       they will deliver the product that consumers want, but now there is no guaranty or clear
       return policy.“
       – Anonymous e-Solutions Conglomerate

       “e-Commerce is in a war and the best thing to do in a war is to sell weapons.”
       – Anonymous Chat Platform

       “For consumers they put weight on product quality and customer service. The payment
       mechanism is just the enabler and the adoption is slow. Non-cash payment will need time
       to develop as the market is educated to buy things online and the logistics problem is solved
       for scale. To do this, first help major players provide a platform that is secure and reliable;
       secondly help banks work together to push rural people to be adopters. Banks need to be
       open to innovation and not only growing accounts and cards; and finally encourage the telcos
       to collaborate with content providers to incorporate bundled content (SIM, voice, data, ISP,
       Cable TV, and Digital Content like games, news, video on demand, books, etc.) on top of their
       services, reduce fees, and foster the adoption of non-cash payments.”
       – Anonymous Investor




                                                                                                                                                               42
     “COD requires a lot of work which always requires order confirmation via telephone. As
     an e-commerce company we need support from third party vendors to fulfill a simple
     transaction. We don’t run transaction and lost control of the user experience.”
     – Anonymous e-Marketplace

     “Some online marketplaces are moving offline to provide a more personal shopping experience
     and cater to consumer demand for physically seeing and inspecting goods. Offline companies
     are also moving online.”
     – Anonymous e-Marketplace

     “Would be a lot better to have just one Ministry looking after the Internet. The Security
     Ministry, Tech ministry, VECITA, and Culture ministry all influence the policy with many
     people telling them different things to do.”
     – Anonymous Social Network

     “The reality is Vietnam needs 5 years to introduce new payment services and educate people
     that paying online is better. The technology foundation is established and we need time to
     encourage people to use digital methods.”
     - Anonymous e-Tailer

     “2-3 years ago China sent goods to convenience stores where customers could pay and pick
     up their products. Then they just switched to credit cards completely and succeeded. Amazon
     in China is 50/50. I believe Vietnam in 5 years can switch to a new payment method.”
     - Anonymous e-Tailer




43
Interview quotes from Payment Service Providers

“Eventually there will be a centralization of payment gateways that will connect with an
external source to accept international cards and solve that problem. There will be new
methods of payment for the unbanked in the future. Cards, particularly ATM cards, will grow
faster than the e-wallet however there is potential for m-commerce and digital payments if
we can work to change consumer behavior. Invoicing will change next year and will begin to
all move online. We are raising awareness of e-commerce in rural areas to educate merchants
about how to engage users online and use the internet to help them buy and sell. That is
available now through online.gov.vn”
– Anonymous Public Official

“The domestic market is uneducated about e-commerce with cards. Banks need to educate
customers to apply and register ATM, debit, and credit cards for online banking and
e-commerce. We have a risk department for internal controls and fraud surveillance. There
is low risk with international cards (under 1% of total revenue of international cards has
fraud). ATM/domestic cards have no fraud risk with a One Time Password (OTP) and SMS
confirmation. “One click pay” is being tested by a leading e-gateway and merchant. We
can improve the functionality to be more seamless and user friendly. We can store financial
information with PCI-DDS certification.”
– Anonymous Payment Provider

“The license process is too bureaucratic and time consuming. The government is concerned
that e-wallets and m-commerce will directly compete with banks. We need more
endorsement from the public sector. Several companies have been granted trial licenses with
the State Bank and partnered with commercial banks to test payment innovations and work
to widen the distribution of financial products.”
– Anonymous Payment Service




                                                                                              44
     Interview with the MoMo Representative
     for CanTho highlighted policy level issues

     MoMo’s representative for Can Tho says “I
     wish the government would support us
     more for enabling bill payment of utilities
     across provinces. Right now we need to go
     and negotiate province by province for the
     same company which takes a lot of effort.”
     He also feels MoMo faces multiple issues in
     expanding their agent network and payment
     acceptance in rural areas including the
     following:
     •	   Volume of transactions is much lower
          thus cost of implementation is higher
     •	   Physical receipts need to be maintained
          for all transactions
     •	   Customers Trust: has to be gained by
          giving them incentives
     Source: IFC Research




45
5. Conclusions

The e- and m-commerce sector is still small in turnover but parts of it are               Prospects for
becoming routine across a broad cross-section of the population.                          e-payments are
E- and m-commerce are beginning to have mass appeal even for modest                       good
consumers. Meanwhile e-Marketplaces that enable small businesses to operate
beyond their vicinity are becoming key enablers of local business growth. Like in
China, these online to offline modes of operation could become very significant.
Already there are signs of pent up demand for more efficient logistics and payments
services.

Basic communication services such as Chat apps as well as social media like
photo sharing sites are gaining mass appeal.                                              Internet commerce
Alongside usability, cost and reliability seem to be determining factors in the choice    and media services
of services people use on the internet. Mobile is already a very significant entry        may, like in China,
point and could rise as network standards become upgraded. Services that overlay          begin to play a role
mobile and can be used at little or no additional cost will gain market share.            in payments

Payment and logistics are probably holding back the sector
The e-and m-commerce market is growing faster than the service providers,                 Service
creating a gap that has yet to be filled. The deployment of services demanded by          improvements
the industry, such as delivery networks, national inventory management, customer          in payments
relationship management, and payment mechanisms to facilitate m-commerce                  can accelerate
in remote areas are still significantly behind the growth curve. It will be critical to   e-commerce growth
manage the existing players and mitigate effects of the crowding of the ecosystem
as fast followers with emerging technologies overcome barriers to entry and look
to duplicate success stories.

Trust and Security issues need to be addressed
Consumer concerns about respect to payments include security breaches and                 Coordination needed
customer service problems. The payment provider’s security features are a strong          to help reach scale
determinant of their chances for success. They need to figure out how to minimize         of adoption
the risk of a data breach. The logistics firms need to ensure they secure the cash
collected during their deliveries. They can use m-wallets or mPOS to provide
consumers with an alternative to cash payments. The issue with consumers is they
have little exposure to this technology or knowledge of the merchant brand behind
them. The issue with merchants is they do not want to invest in adopting new
methods if customers do not express interest in using them.

Payment providers are gravitating towards online and offline integration
The trial and error period is underway for the market to figure out what                  Hybrid models of
commercial model will work best (e.g. omni-channel commerce, m-commerce                   e-and m-commerce
OTT mobile app model, online traditional e-commerce model) and the payments               will exert a strong
landscape (e-payments, mobile money apps/m-wallets, digital wallets). The rule for        influence on
payments is to be where the customers are. Businesses should enable customers             adoption
to choose their payment methods, and use them via the channels their customers
want to shop in, whether for in-store or online purchases. No seamless transition
to in-store, online, or mobile payments exists in Vietnam.




                                                                                                           46
     Annex




47
           A. Economy

      Selected Economic and market indicators
        Macro-Economic Indicators                                             Financial Inclusion
    I. Population 89.71 million (Urban 32%)                       Account at a formal financial institution 21%
   II. GDP $171.4 billion                                          (% age 15+)
 III. GNI per capita (PPP) $1,730                                 Account at a formal financial institution 11%
  IV. Annual GDP Growth 5.5% (2014E)                               (income, bottom 40%)
   V. Inflation 6.6%                                              Account used to receive wages 6%
  VI. Merchandise imports $113.8 billion                          Credit card 1% (% age 15+); Debit card
 VII. Household final consumption expenditure 5.2%                 15% (% age 15+)
VIII. Mobile cellular subscriptions 120M
          Source 2013 data World Bank Country Indicators        Source 2011 data World Bank Financial Inclusion Indicators
  	  



              Internet and Mobile Penetration Indicators                       Social Indicators
   I.         Internet penetration 39%                            Facebook penetration 22%
  II.         Mobile subscription penetration 145%                Social media penetration 38%
 III.         Mobile internet penetration as a % of total         Average time users spend on social media
              population 34%                                       daily 2H 23M
 IV.          Average time mobile internet users spend using      % of mobile users using social media apps
              mobile internet daily 1H 43M                         on their phone 58%
   V.         Number of active mobile broadband subscriptions     Smartphone penetration 20%
              17.6M                                               Smartphone users searching for info on their
 VI.          Percentage of mobile social as % of population       phone 97%
              18%                                                 Smartphone users researching products on
                                                                   their phone 95%
                                                                  Smartphone users who made purchases via
                                                                   their phone 60%
                                                                Source: 2014 Asia Digital Overview We are Social

          Source 2013 data World Bank Country Indicators
   	  




                                                                                                                             48
     B. Survey Research Population

     88 firms in Vietnam’s broad e- and m-commerce market were surveyed via
     personal interviews and the dissemination of an online survey. The full online survey
     questionnaire and interview guidelines are included in this annex. Table 3 shows the
     breakdown of interviewees and Table 5 includes the full list of firms interviewed.

     Table 3: Breakdown of Interviewees
     Primary	  Research	  Subjects	                                                       Role	                          #	  
     Firms	  in	  the	  Core	  e-­	  and	  m-­commerce	         Founder	  or	  C-­‐level	                 66	  
     Segments	  
     Payment	  and	  m-­commerce	  Firms	                         Founder,	  C-­‐level,	  Directors	       14	  
     e-­Solutions	  and	  Logistics	  Firms	                      Founder,	  C-­‐level,	  Directors	       8	  
                                                                   Total	  Primary	  Survey	  Participants	   88	  
     	  

     Secondary	  Market	  Research	  Subjects	                                           Role	                          #	  
     Vietnamese	  Commerce	  Ministry	                              Deputy	  Director,	  e-­‐commerce	        1	  
     Vietnamese	  e-­Commerce	  Association	                        Chairman	                                   1	  
     ICT	  Venture	  Capitalists	                                   Partners	                                   2	  
     ICT	  and	  e-­	  and	  m-­commerce	  Media	                Lead	  Journalists	  and	  Editors	      2	  
     	  




49
C. Overview of Customer and User Interviews

Table 4: Overview of customer and user interviews

                                                                                               # Company
                                                                              # Merchants/
    Name        Owned By      Description       # Customers   # Deliveryman                    Representatives      Total
                                                                              Agent/Seller
                                                                                               on location
  Muachung      VC Corp       e-marketplace      1 customer   1 deliveryman       1 SME        1 representative        4
                                                                                               for Da Nang area
    Vexere      Cyber-Agent   O2O bus tickets    1 customer                   1 bus operator                           2

    Vimo/       Peacesoft     m-Payments /                                       1 agent       1 person in charge      2
    mPOS                      POS                                                                 for Can Tho

    MoMo        mService      m-Payments        2 customers   1 salesperson     2 agents       2 – in 2 locations      7

    Mobivi      Various       Payment           2 customers   1 deliveryman         -             1 company            4
                investors     Service/market                                                    representative
  Giao Hang     Seedco        e-Solutions and                 1 deliveryman         -             2 company            3
 Nhanh (GHN)                  Logistics                                                         representatives
  Shipchung /   Peacesoft     e-Solutions and                                    1 Seller                              1
   Chodiendu                  Logistics
                                                                                                            Total     23




                                                                                                                            50
     D. List of Firms Interviewed




 	      This annex is available from IFC upon request.




51
    This annex is available from IFC upon request.



    E. Firm Snapshots and Key Bios




                Leading	  Vietnamese	  Consumer	  and	  Financial	  Technology	  and	  Logistics	  Firms	  
                                                    Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                    Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Consumer	  Internet	  Conglomerate	  
                                                    Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Multi-­‐dimensional	  -­‐	  Gaming,	  Music,	  Social	  
                                                                                                                    Network,	  Commerce,	  Communications,	  
                                                                                                                    Payments,	  Software	  
                                          	        Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2004	  
                                                    Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://www.vng.com.vn/	  	  
                                                    Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Hanoi	  
                                                    Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Consumer	  Internet	  Conglomerate	  
                                                    Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Multi-­‐dimensional	  –	  Marketplace,	  Commerce,	  
                                                                                                                    Retail,	  Lead	  Generation,	  Payments,	  
                                                                                                                    Subscription,	  SaaS,	  LaaS,	  Financial	  Technology	  
	          This annex is available from IFC upon request.
                                     	             Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2001	  
                                                    Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://peacesoft.net/	  	  	  
                                                    Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                    Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Third	  Party	  Logistics	  and	  Fulfillment	  Startup	  
                                                    Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Subscription,	  LaaS,	  Payment	  Collection	  
                                               	   Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2012	  
                                                    Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  https://giaohangnhanh.vn/	  	  
                                                    Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                    Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Third	  Party	  Mobile	  Payment	  Startup	  
                                                    Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Payments,	  Financial	  Technology	  
                                                    Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2007	  
                                	  
                                                    Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://www.momo.vn	  	  
                                                    Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                    Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Consumer	  Internet	  Conglomerate	  
                                                    Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Multi-­‐dimensional	  –	  Marketplace,	  Commerce,	  
                                                                                                                    Lead	  Generation,	  Payments,	  Omni-­‐channel	  
                                               	                                                                   Model	  
                                                    Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2006	  
                                                    Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://www.vccorp.vn/	  	  
    Source:	  IFC	  Research;	  CrunchBase;	  Wikipedia,	  TechinAsia,	  Twenty.vn,	  Starthub.vn;	  Stardibi.vn	  
    	  




                                                                                                                                                                                     52
     VNG	  
                                                          Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                          Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Consumer	  Internet	  Company	  
                                                          Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Gaming,	  Music,	  Social	  Network,	  Commerce,	  
                                                                                                                          Communications,	  Payments,	  Software	  
                                                          Founder:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Le	  Hong	  Minh	  
                                                 	  
                                                          Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://www.vng.com.vn/	  	  
     Company	  Details	  
     Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2004	  
     Employees:	  	  	  	  	  	  2000	  
     	  
     VNG	  Corporation	  (VNG)	  is	  a	  Vietnamese	  technology	  conglomerate	  that	  began	  with	  licensing	  games	  
     from	  China	  which	  evolved	  into	  a	  number	  of	  other	  categories.	  Their	  mission	  is	  to	  bring	  internet	  
     users	  meaningful	  experiences.	  VNG	  has	  developed	  various	  online	  products	  and	  utility	  applications	  
     focused	  on	  Digital	  Content	  and	  Online	  Entertainment,	  Social	  Networking,	  Communications,	  OTT	  
     Mobile	  Messaging,	  and	  e-­‐commerce.	  They	  disclosed	  that	  they	  earned	  over	  $90	  million	  in	  revenue	  in	  
     2012.	  	  
     Affiliated	  Products	  
 	   Zalo	  
        This  (mobile	  
                annex     messaging	  
                           is available app),	  
                                            from  	  ZingMe	  
                                                          IFC (  social	  request.
                                                                           network),	  ZingMP3	  (music	  streaming),	  123Pay	  (e-­‐
                                                                 upon
     payment	  gateway),	  123Phim	  (online	  movie	  booking),	  Laban.vn	  (browser),	  Laban	  Key	  (Vietnamese	  
     keyboard)	  


                                                                                                                                                      	  
     Investment	  
                                                  Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
                                                  Date:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2010	  
                              	                  Investor:	  	  	  	  CyberAgent	  Ventures	  
                First	  Funding	                Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
                    Round	                       Investors:	  	  IDGVV	  
                  Investors	  
                                                                                             	  	  	  	            	  
     News	  
     The new frontiers of Vietnam’s premier chat app: VNG’s Zalo	  
     Why did FPT just buy VNG’s dead ecommerce site for $500,000?	  
     Images	  




                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                            	  


53
Peacesoft	  
                                                                Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Hanoi	  
                                                                Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Consumer	  Internet	  Company	  
                                                                Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Marketplace,	  Commerce,	  Retail,	  Lead	  
                                                                                                                                Generation,	  Payments,	  Subscription,	  SaaS,	  
                                                                                                                                LaaS	  ,	  Financial	  Technology	  
                                            	                  Founder:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Nguyen	  Hoa	  Binh	  
                                                                Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://peacesoft.net/	  	  	  
Company	  Details	  
Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2001	  
	  
Peacesoft	  is	  a	  Vietnamese	  technology	  company	  and	  parent	  to	  several	  top	  performing	  businesses	  in	  
the	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  space	  including	  online	  shopping,	  online	  advertising,	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐payments,	  
and	  third	  part	  logistics	  and	  cash	  collection.	  The	  firm	  received	  a	  license	  from	  the	  State	  Bank	  of	  
Vietnam	  to	  launch	  an	  m-­‐wallet	  and	  a	  mobile	  POS	  in	  collaboration	  with	  several	  local	  banks	  and	  
telecom	  companies.	  	  
Affiliated	  Products	  
VIMO	  (m-­‐wallet	  and	  mPOS),	  NganLuong	  (e-­‐payment	  gateway),	  ShipChung	  (LaaS	  and	  COD	  delivery	  
site),	  AdNet	  (ad	  platform),	  ChoDienTu	  (e-­‐classifieds),	  ebay.vn	  (e-­‐auction),	  ProStore	  (SaaS)	  


                                                                                                                      	                             	                    	  
Investment	  
Multiple	  Funding	  Rounds	  	                Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
	                                                 Investors:	  	  IDG,	  SoftBank,	  ebay,	  MOL	  

             Investors	  
                                                                                                                                                                                  	  
News	  
NganLuong gives us a deep view into online payment in Vietnam
MOL gets 50% stake in NganLuong to take on online payments in Vietnam
Peacesoft targets to be e-commerce hub in Vietnam
eBay tries Vietnam after China bust	  
Images	  




                                                         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                       	  
	  




                                                                                                                                                                                         54
     Giao	  Hang	  Nhanh	  
                                                               Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                               Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Third	  party	  logistics	  and	  collections	  service	  
                                                               Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Subscription,	  LaaS,	  Payment	  Collection	  
                                                      	       Founder:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Luong	  Duy	  Hoai	  
                                                               Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  https://giaohangnhanh.vn/	  	  
     Company	  Details	  
     Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2012	  
     Employees:	  	  	  	  	  	  500	  
     	  
     Giao	  Hang	  Nhanh	  (GHN)	  is	  a	  Vietnamese	  third	  party	  logistics	  services	  startup	  focused	  on	  the	  e-­‐
     commerce	  sector.	  The	  company	  launched	  in	  response	  to	  the	  demand	  primary	  from	  online	  retailers	  
     needing	  support	  in	  the	  delivery	  and	  cash	  collections	  process.	  There	  are	  several	  thousand	  merchants	  
     on	  a	  waiting	  list	  as	  the	  demand	  exceeds	  the	  supply	  of	  capable	  LaaS	  and	  collections	  firms.	  GHN	  is	  in	  
     the	  process	  of	  building	  a	  supply	  chain	  solution	  capable	  of	  covering	  all	  of	  Vietnam.	  To	  minimize	  their	  
     risk	  associated	  with	  cash	  collections,	  the	  firm	  is	  exploring	  cashless	  solutions	  to	  offer	  customers	  at	  
     their	  doorstep.	  	  
 	   Investment	  
        This annex is available from IFC upon request.
                 First	  Funding	                   Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
                     Round	                          Investor:	  	  	  	  Angel	  investors	  
     News	  
     How GHN solves logistics in Vietnam’s growing e-commerce market
     GHN teaser video about its delivery and COD services	  
     Images	  




                                                                                    	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                            	  
     	  




55
MoMo	  
                                                      Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                      Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Third	  party	  mobile	  payment	  provider	  	  
                                                      Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Payments,	  Financial	  Technology	  
                                                      Founder:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Nguyen	  Ba	  Diep	  
                                  	  
                                                      Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://www.momo.vn	  	  
Company	  Details	  
Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2007	  
Employees:	  	  	  	  	  	  260	  
	  
MoMo,	  an	  M_Service	  subsidiary,	  is	  a	  Vietnamese	  technology	  startup	  that	  developed	  a	  mobile	  
application	  for	  money	  transfers,	  game	  top	  up,	  mobile	  top	  up,	  bill	  payment,	  remittances,	  and	  person	  
to	  person	  payments.	  They	  boast	  a	  large	  distribution	  agent	  network	  in	  Vietnam	  with	  the	  goal	  of	  
extending	  the	  reach	  of	  banks	  and	  cards	  to	  rural	  areas	  and	  change	  the	  consumer	  mindset	  from	  cash	  
to	  non-­‐cash	  payments.	  They	  have	  strategic	  partnerships	  with	  various	  banks,	  telecom	  firms,	  
processors,	  and	  card	  companies.	  MoMo	  has	  a	  temporary	  m-­‐wallet	  license	  from	  the	  State	  Bank	  of	  
Vietnam	  and	  a	  license	  to	  provide	  mobile	  money	  transfer	  services.	  Their	  slogan	  is	  “Power	  to	  the	  
People–Power	  at	  your	  Fingertips.”	  	  
Investment	  
Known	  Funding	  Round	                   Amount:	  	  	  	  USD	  $600,000	  
                                              Date:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2014	  
                                              Investor:	  	  	  	  Vietnam	  Business	  Challenge	  Fund,	  UK	  DFID	  
Other	  Funding	  Rounds	                  Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
                                              Investors:	  	  Goldman	  Sachs	  

             Investors	  
                                                           	  	  	  	                                        	  
News	  
Mobile money for the unbanked	  
Images	  




                                                                              	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                	  
	  




                                                                                                                                                                   56
     VC	  Corporation	  
                                                                    Headquarters:	  	  	  	  Ho	  Chi	  Minh	  City	  
                                                                    Description:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Consumer	  Internet	  Company	  
                                                                    Categories:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Marketplace,	  Commerce,	  Lead	  Generation,	  
                                                                                                                                    Payments,	  Omni-­‐channel	  Model	  
                                                  	                Director:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Vuong	  Vu	  Thang	  
                                                                    Website:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  http://www.vccorp.vn/	  	  
     Company	  Details	  
     Founded:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2006	  
     	  
     VC	  Corporation	  is	  a	  Vietnamese	  technology	  conglomerate	  focused	  on	  e-­‐marketplaces,	  online	  retail,	  
     digital	  media,	  online	  advertising,	  and	  electronic	  payments.	  VC	  Corp	  manages	  a	  large	  portfolio	  of	  
     websites	  that	  span	  the	  majority	  of	  Vietnam’s	  internet	  users	  across	  online	  forums,	  e-­‐commerce,	  
     social	  media,	  and	  ad	  networks.	  VC	  Corp	  launched	  an	  omni-­‐channel	  model	  to	  complement	  its	  online	  
     presence	  by	  opening	  physical	  stores	  to	  cater	  to	  consumers	  demanding	  to	  inspect	  orders	  prior	  to	  
     purchase.	  	  
     	  
 	         This annex is available from IFC upon request.
     Affiliated	  Products	  
     MuaChung	  (online	  retail),	  	  Rongbay/Enbac	  (e-­‐Marketplaces	  and	  classifieds),	  Admicro	  (online	  ads),	  
     SohaPay	  (e-­‐payment	  gateway),	  Ken14	  (online	  news	  platform)	  


                                                                                        	               	                                 	       	  
     Investment	  
     First	  Funding	  Rounds	                Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
                                                 Date:	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  2012	  
                                                 Investor:	  	  	  	  Intel	  Capital	  
     Other	  Funding	  Rounds	                Amount:	  	  	  	  undisclosed	  
                                                 Investors:	  	  IDGVV	  

                  Investors	  
                                                                                                           	  	  	  	     	  
     News	  
     Fshare expands international payment with Sohapay.com	  	  
     Intel Capital invests in VC Corporation	  
     Images	  




                                                         	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                              	  



57
F. Interview Guidelines

Section	  1	  –	  Company	  Information	  

a)	  When	  did	  your	  company	  launch	  and	  what	  is	  the	  business	  model?	  
b)	  What	  service	  does	  your	  company	  provide?	  
c)	  How	  many	  employees	  do	  you	  have?	  
d)	  What	  trends	  have	  you	  seen	  in	  the	  e-­‐/m-­‐commerce	  market?	  
e)	  What	  is	  your	  company’s	  status	  report?	  

Section	  2	  –	  Reach	  

a)	  Who	  are	  your	  target	  users?	  
b)	  What	  are	  the	  demographics	  of	  your	  users	  (age,	  gender,	  location)?	  
c)	  Does	  your	  company	  have	  mass	  appeal/	  the	  potential	  to	  reach	  rural	  areas	  in	  your	  opinion?	  
Section	  3	  –	  Traffic	  

a)	  Do	  you	  offer	  discounts	  for	  e-­‐shopping?	  
b)	  How	  many	  monthly	  users	  does	  your	  site	  register?	  
c)	  How	  many	  users	  have	  accounts	  on	  your	  site?	  
d)	  What	  percentage	  of	  your	  users	  access	  the	  site	  from	  a	  mobile	  device/	  PC?	  
e)	  What	  are	  the	  referral	  sources	  for	  your	  site?	  
f)	  Do	  you/	  how	  do	  you	  market/	  advertise	  your	  company?	  
Section	  4	  –	  Volume	  

a)	  What	  is	  your	  sales	  breakdown?	  
b)	  How	  many	  monthly	  transactions	  does	  your	  company	  register	  (nominal	  and	  $	  amount)?	  
c)	  What	  is	  your	  conversion	  rate?	  

Section	  5	  –	  Payments	  

a)	  What	  payment	  methods	  do	  you	  currently	  accept?	  
b)	  What	  percentage	  of	  your	  payments	  are	  cash/	  non-­‐cash?	  
c)	  What	  payment	  services	  are	  demanded	  by	  your	  customers?	  
d)	  What	  are	  your	  needs/	  desires	  in	  terms	  of	  payments?	  
e)	  What	  is	  your	  outlook	  on	  the	  e-­‐/m-­‐payments	  market?	  
f)	  What	  are	  the	  challenges	  and	  bottlenecks	  in	  that	  market?	  
g)	  Do	  you	  prefer	  customers	  to	  pre-­‐pay?	  
h)	  Do	  you	  agree	  that	  there	  is	  a	  significant	  user	  trust	  issue?	  
i)	  What	  are	  your	  suggestions	  to	  improve	  the	  payment	  environment?	  
j)	  Do	  you	  offer	  your	  users	  incentives	  to	  make	  online/	  mobile	  payments?	  
k)	  What	  are	  the	  main	  concerns	  with	  non-­‐cash	  payments?	  

Section	  6	  –	  Distribution/Delivery	  
a)	  How	  many	  monthly	  deliveries	  do	  you	  make?	  
b)	  What	  is	  the	  cancellation	  rate?	  
c)	  Do	  you	  deliver	  in-­‐house	  or	  outsource	  the	  delivery?	  
d)	  Are	  you	  satisfied	  with	  the	  delivery	  process?	  
e)	  What	  trends	  have	  you	  identified	  in	  the	  delivery	  market?	  
f)	  What	  problems	  do	  you	  anticipate	  with	  the	  collection	  of	  cash	  payments?	  
Section	  7	  –	  Challenges	  




                                                                                                                                              58
     Section	  7	  –	  Challenges	  

     a)	  What	  are	  the	  bottlenecks	  to	  doing	  business?	  
     b)	  Was	  gaining	  a	  license	  a	  difficult/	  painful	  process?	  
     c)	  Do	  you	  currently	  experience	  any	  issues	  with	  regulation/	  licensing/	  banking?	  
     d)	  What	  areas	  require	  improvement	  to	  ease	  any	  difficulties?	  
     e)	  What	  is	  the	  ideal	  scenario	  in	  terms	  of	  payments	  and	  ease	  of	  doing	  business?	  

     Section	  8	  –	  Payments	  (specifically	  for	  Payment	  Providers)	  

     a)	  What	  certification(s)	  have	  you	  gained?	  
     b)	  What	  are	  the	  biggest	  issues	  you	  face,	  e.g.	  customer	  trust,	  fraud,	  storing	  financial	  information?	  
     c)	  Are	  there	  firms	  present	  in	  the	  market	  that	  are	  capable	  of	  implementing	  security	  standards?	  
     d)	  How	  do	  you	  educate	  users	  on	  the	  application	  process?	  
     e)	  Are	  credit	  card	  fees/	  transaction	  fees/	  fixed	  fees	  too	  high?	  

     Section	  9	  –	  Conclusion	  
     a)	  Do	  you	  believe	  that	  non-­‐cash	  payment	  services	  will	  be	  widely	  adopted	  by	  your	  customers	  in	  the	  next	  5	  years?	  
     b)	  Can	  firms	  innovate	  or	  pivot	  to	  encourage	  uptake/	  adoption	  of	  a	  different	  payment	  service?	  
     c)	  Will	  you	  focus	  at	  all	  on	  m-­‐commerce?	  
     d)	  What	  needs	  to	  change	  in	  the	  market?	  
     e)	  Who	  are	  your	  primary	  investors?	  
     	  




59
G. Online Survey

1) Which of the following best describes your business?
	     a) E-Marketplace/ E-Tailer
	     b) Digital Content
	     c) Search Engine
	     d) Social Network
	     e) Chat Service
	     f) On-to-Offline Service
	     g) Payment Service
	     h) Other

2) Approximately how many monthly visits do you record on your site?
	     (Enter Number)

3) What is the average number of monthly transactions?
	    a) <1,000
	    b) 1,000 – 10,000
	    c) 10,000 – 50,000
	    d) 50,000 – 100,000
	    e) >100,000
	    f) Don’t Know/ NA

4) Approximately what percentage of your users access your site from a mobile
device?
	     (Enter Number, 0-100)

5) Approximately what percentage of your users are from Ho Chi Minh City and
Hanoi?
	     (Enter Number, 0-100)

6) Which payment methods do you currently accept?
	     a) Cash on Delivery
	     b) Cash in Office
	     c) International Credit Cards
	     d) Domestic Credit Cards
	     e) ATM/ Debit Cards
	     f) Online Bank Transfer
	     g) SMS Payment
	     h) E-Wallet
	     i) Don’t Know/ NA
	     j) Other

7) About what percentage of your users make non-cash (online and mobile)
payments?	
	     (Enter number, 0-100)

8) Do you offer the following incentives to encourage your customers to make non-
cash payments?
	     a) Discounts
	     b) Credit for future purchases
	     c) Free delivery
	     d) Waive any associated fees
	     e) None of these
	     f) Other
                                                                                    60
     9) What are your main concerns with non-cash payments?
     	    a) Too many payment providers
     	    b) Cost of integration too high
     	    c) Fees for online payment too high
     	    d) Reimbursement for online payment too slow
     	    e) Complicated transaction process
     	    f) Security of data
     	    g) Not enough customer adoption
     	    h) No issues
     	    i) Other

     10) What problems do you anticipate with the collection of cash payments?	
     	     a) Growing service costs
     	     b) Difficult to collect outside of urban centers
     	     c) Risk of missing or stolen cash
     	     d) Payment reimbursement too slow
     	     e) Not concerned
     	     f) Other

     11) Do you believe that non-cash payment services will be widely adopted by your
     customers in the next 5 years?
     	      a) Strongly Agree
     	      b) Agree
     	      c) Disagree
     	      d) Strongly Disagree

     12) What is the biggest challenge to e-/m-commerce?
     	     a) Logistics infrastructure
     	     b) Payment infrastructure
     	     c) Cash on Delivery
     	     d) Regulatory policies
     	     e) After-sales service
     	     f) Other




61
H. Additional Statistics on Surveyed Firms

Market Consolidation: M&A Activity

Of the firms interviewed, 63% were independently owned with no known investors.
30% of the interviewees were associated with an affiliate or sister enterprise. 7%
were conglomerates that owned more than one e- or m-commerce company.
Refer to Table 15 to review the list of firms and whether they have affiliates,
subsidiaries, investors, or are independently owned.

Figure 34 – Independently owned firms, those with a sister company, and
conglomerates with multiple subsidiaries




                                                  Firms	  with	  Subsidiaries	  or	  
                                32%	             Sister	  Companies	  

                                                  Conglomerates	  

             61%	  
                                 7%	             Individual	  ﬁrms	  




Source: IFC Research (Sample: 88 Firms)




M&A activity in the Vietnamese e- and m-commerce market

Consolidation is occurring in the Vietnamese marketplace

Six conglomerates own, wholly or in part, 24% of the 88 firms covered in this survey.
These enterprises are pursuing strategic acquisitions to expand their market share
into the broader e- and m-commerce space.

These firms are contributing to the development of a more mature market. As
they look for opportunities, this is setting the stage for early M&A from players that
want to create economies of scale, reduce operational costs and minimize risk.
The service infrastructure needed to support the next wave of growth is not ready
and therefore firms and angel investors are seeding capable startups. Some are
founding and building those businesses themselves to support their own needs. For
example, many of the e-Marketplaces that grew in size wanted to provide an online
payment solution. Given a lack of appropriate alternatives on the market at that
time, they engineered those businesses and launched on their own. This has created
fragmentation among online payment providers.




                                                                                            62
     Figure 35 - 24% of the 88 surveyed firms are owned by six conglomerates

                                                                           9%	  
         %	  of	  Ownership	  of	  the	  Pool	  of	  Surveyed	  




                                                                           8%	  
                                                                                       8%	  
                                                                           7%	  
                      Firms	  by	  Conglomerate	  




                                                                           6%	                      7%	  

                                                                           5%	  
                                                                           4%	                                       5%	  
                                                                           3%	  
                                                                           2%	  
                                                                                                                                     2%	            2%	  
                                                                           1%	  
                                                                                                                                                                     1%	  
                                                                           0%	  
                                                                                    Peaceso3	     VCCorp	          VNG	          DKT	         Tinhvan	     Vega	  Corp	  
                                                                                                                Vietnamese	  Conglomerates	  


     (Source: IFC Research)



     Investors with a stake in the e- and m-commerce market

     There are a variety of local and international investors with equity in mainly
     Vietnamese consumer internet companies and payment providers

     70% of the surveyed firms received foreign investment capital from one or more
     of the investors in Figure 36. These 17 investors have a direct stake in at least one
     of the firms in the survey population. IDG Ventures Vietnam (IDGVV), the largest
     local technology driven Venture Capitalist (VC), has a direct or indirect investment
     in 27 of the 88 surveyed firms (31%). CyberAgent Ventures, another VC with a
     sizeable portfolio in Vietnam, invested in 11 firms in the survey pool (13%). The bulk
     of the remaining investors identified in this Figure financed only one surveyed firm.
     Nevertheless, those single investments were made into firms that are the parent
     company of a portfolio of subsidiaries, thus giving the investor indirect access to a
     bigger footprint of consumer internet or payment firms in the market.




63
Figure 36 – Percentage of ownership of the pool of surveyed firms by investor


                                                                                                                                          %	  of	  Surveyed	  Firms	  Associated	  with	  a	  Speciﬁc	  Investor	  
                                                                                                                                                (IFC	  Research	  based	  on	  secondary	  publicaUons)	  
                                                                                                                                                                                	  
                                                                                                              0	                       5	                     10	                     15	                     20	         25	                        30	  
Investoors	  in	  the	  Vietnamese	  e-­‐and	  m-­‐commerce	  Market	  




                                                                                              IDGVV	                                                                                                                                   27	     31%	  
                                                                                      CyberAgent	                                                               11	     13%	  
                                                                                           Seedcom	                                       6	     7%	  
                                                                                     Intel	  Capital	                                    6	     7%	  
                                                                                      One	  Capital	           1	      1%	  
                                                                                                    FPT	                2	   2%	  
                                                                                  Rocket	  Internet	           1	      1%	  
                                                                                          Sumitomo	             1	      1%	  
                                                                                               Mitsui	                  2	   2%	  
                                                                                            Rakuten	            1	      1%	  
                                                                                            Experian	           1	      1%	  
                                                                                 Kusto	  Tiger	  Fund	        1	      1%	  
                                                                                   Unitus	  Impact	            1	      1%	  
                                                                                               SMBC	            1	      1%	  
                                                                                                   DFID	        1	      1%	  
                                                                                                   MOL	         1	      1%	  
                                                                                  Goldman	  Sachs	             1	      1%	  




Interview quotes with Investors or Acquirers

“Within the foreseeable future there may be strategic acquisitions with high valuations in
Vietnam’s e- and m-commerce market.”
     – Anonymous Conglomerate

“Market consolidation and acquisitions happen in an effort to purchase local insight,
suppliers, data, and customers looking to shop online.”
– Anonymous Investor

“The idea to acquire another site was because they were widely recognized and invested
millions in brand awareness.”
– Anonymous e-Promotion site




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    64
     Importance of Social Networks for Small Merchants more so than their
     Larger Counterparts

     20 of the firms from this study have over 100,000 likes on Facebook

     Social Networking is a common method utilized by early stage firms and small local
     retailers to develop their virtual footprint. Nearly all the firms have a presence on
     social networks. However this channel is becoming less of a driver of referrals to
     the more established medium to large sized marketplaces. Twelve of the surveyed
     enterprises have a half-million ‘likes’ and 5 firms have over one million ‘likes’. Digital
     content providers active in music downloads and photo sharing have attracted the
     most attention on Facebook with over 3 million ‘likes’ each.

     Figure 37 - Top Facebook Likes Among Surveyed Firms

                                                                                  Dienmay	                   0.11	  
                                                                                                               0.14	  
                                                                                         ebay	                 0.19	  
                                                                                                                  0.22	  
       Top	  20	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐Commerce	  Firms	  	  




                                                                              Nhom	  Mua	                        0.26	  
                                                                                                                           0.40	  
                                                                              Mua	  Chung	                               0.42	  
                                                                                                                            0.44	  
                                                                     The	  Gioi	  Di	  Dong	                                 0.56	  
                                                                                                                                  0.56	  
                                                                                           Tiki	                                   0.59	  
                                                                                                                                       0.72	  
                                                                   Zalo	  (part	  of	  VNG)	                                           0.74	  
                                                                                                                                              0.86	  
                                                                                     Lazada	                                                       0.95	  
                                                                                                                                                               1.18	  
                                                                                    Kenh14	                                                                      1.28	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3.22	  
                                                                                       HaiVL	                                                                                                                                                        3.65	  
                                                                                                      0	                 0.5	                   1	                  1.5	                  2	                  2.5	     3	            3.5	                4	  
                                                                                                                                                                         #	  of	  Facebook	  Likes	  (Millions)	  




     Source: IFC Research; Facebook website of individual firms; *see annex for description of firms




65
Figure 38 – Monthly Visits by Firms


        5giay	               5	  
      Lazada	                 5.7	  
     Coc	  Coc	                     6	  
       clip.vn	                         8.4	  
 Webtretho	                                    10	  
     Vat	  Gia	                                  12.9	  
     ZingMe	                                                      21.8	  
        HaiVL	                                                                                        38.7	  
     Kenh14	                                                                                               40.8	  
  Zing	  MP3	                                                                                                                                          62.3	  

                      0	                            10	                 20	            30	                     40	                         50	       60	                    70	  
                                                                   EsJmated	  Monthly	  Visits	  by	  Firms	  (in	  Millions)	  


Source: IFC Research; http://www.similarweb.com/, as of October 2014

Figure 39 – Registered users by firm in the core e- and m-commerce
segments


                    Tiki	                    0.4	  
           Vega	  Corp	                     0.6	  
                5giay	                          1.0	  
               Vatgia	                       1.5	  
            Cungmua	                          2.0	  
       Minh	  Chau	                                         5.0	  
             ZingMe	  	                                                               9.5	  
                Viber	                                                                                 12.0	  
             VC	  Corp	                                                                               12.0	  
                   Zalo	                                                                                                   14.5	  
   Zing	  MP3/VNG	                                                                                                                                                   22.0	  
                                      0	                               5	                        10	                                15	                     20	  
                                                                                                                                                                    Millions	  
                                                                Registered	  Users	  by	  Firm	  in	  the	  	  
                                                              Core	  e-­‐	  and	  m-­‐commerce	  Segments	  	  



Source: IFC Research; http://www.similarweb.com/, as of October 2014




                                                                                                                                                                                            66
This page has been left blank intentionally.
