Market Assessment of the Financial
Needs of Very Small, Small, and
Medium Enterprises in Tunisia
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




In partnership with: Canada’s Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and
Development, the Danish International Development Agency, Switzerland’s State
Secretariat for Economic Affairs, UKaid and Japan.
© International Finance Corporation 2014. All rights reserved.
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
Internet: www.ifc.org


The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this
work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly,
and when the reproduction is for educational and non-commercial purposes, without a fee,
subject to such attributions and notices as we may reasonably require.

IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness of the content included in this
work, or for the conclusions or judgments described herein, and accepts no responsibility or
liability for any omissions or errors (including, without limitation, typographical errors and
technical errors) in the content whatsoever or for reliance thereon. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The
World Bank or the governments they represent.

The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only and are
not intended to constitute legal, securities, or investment advice, an opinion regarding the
appropriateness of any investment, or a solicitation of any type. IFC or its affiliates may have
an investment in, provide other advice or services to, or otherwise have a financial interest in,
certain of the companies and parties (including named herein.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
IFC’s Corporate Relations Department, 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.
20433.

International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by Articles of
Agreement among its member countries, and a member of the World Bank Group. All names,
logos and trademarks are the property of IFC and you may not use any of such materials
for any purpose without the express written consent of IFC. Additionally, “International
Finance Corporation” and “IFC” are registered trademarks of IFC and are protected under
international law.
Table of Contents


	INTRODUCTION										4

I.	SCOPE OF THE STUDY									5

II.	   IMPORTANCE OF VERY SMALL, SMALL, AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES IN TUNISIA		   5

III.	LIMITED ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR VSSMES					6

IV.	GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS								7

V.	    SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PUBLIC AUTHORITIES				                    9

VI.	   SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS				                9




                                                                                  | 3
INTRODUCTION
This executive summary is based on an International Finance Corporation (IFC) market assessment of the financial
needs of very small, small, and medium enterprises (VSSMEs) in Tunisia.

IFC, as part of its program to improve access to finance in the MENA region and in close cooperation with Tunisian
public and private stakeholders and other international financial institutions, commissioned a market study to Ernst
& Young in order to identify the needs of VSSMEs in Tunisia. The study aims at enhancing access to finance and
improving Tunisian VSSMEs banking through:
• The evaluation of the existing gaps between the needs of VSSMEs and the existing offer of banking services,
• The identification of growth opportunities for financial institutions (FIs) in terms of VSSMEs market,
• The development of specific recommendations to government and financial institutions.


This study was conducted over eight months and was completed in June 2014.




4 |
I. SCOPE OF THE STUDY
Among the 602,200 companies that are listed in the National
Register of Enterprises (NRE) in Tunisia, only 800 stated that they
employ more than 200 people as of 2011. All others are considered
by the study to be VSSMEs. These businesses employ 580,000
people, which accounts for 56 percent of jobs in the private sector
(National Institute of Statistics, NIS) and around 40 percent of
Tunisia’s gross domestic product (French Embassy, 2010).
The conclusions and recommendations of this study are based on
information gathered from 1,412 companies through individual
face-to-face interviews as well as discussions with 17 financial
institutions, and 10 public institutions.
This study adopts the NIS definition of VSSMEs, which is based on
the number of employees and covers enterprises employing from 1
to 199 people.


II. IMPORTANCE OF VERY SMALL, SMALL,
AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES IN TUNISIA
The importance of VSSMEs for the economy is well known. Half of
commercial banks and nearly all leasing companies consider them
a priority market.
The government has put in place various mechanisms to promote
VSSME financial inclusion. It has done this mainly by reducing
the exposure of financial institutions serving this segment through
guarantees as well as financing and co-financing mechanisms. It
has also provided technical support to enterprises through sector
support programs.
VSSMEs are considered a priority market for half of commercial
banks and almost all of the leasing companies of the panel study.
All financial institutions, regardless of their strategic focus, already
serve VSSMEs. Financial institutions deliver a diversified range
of financial products, including short-term and long-term loans,
payment facilities, and deposit and insurance services. They have
been introducing more flexibility into their guarantees to ease access
to credit and leasing. Some have dedicated account managers for
small enterprises; others have created dedicated business units to
better serve smaller businesses.
Currently, around 71 percent of VSSMEs are banked; the ratio
reaches 100 percent for medium enterprises of more than 50
employees. According to estimates based on the Tunisian central
bank, 350,000 VSSMEs and micro-enterprises (58 percent of
the total) have outstanding bank loans that amount to 4 billion
Tunisian Dinars in addition to 1.7 billion Tunisian Dinars in leasing
contracts as of December 2012. Eighty percent of VSSMEs that
requested a loan succeeded in obtaining it.




                                                                           | 5
 III. LIMITED ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR VSSMEs
 However, access to finance for VSSMEs is still far from being fluid. Twenty-nine percent of surveyed VSSMEs have
 never tried to open a bank account, either in the name of the company or its owner. VSSMEs are financing working
 capital with treasury funds (75 percent), savings of the owner (40 percent), and supplier loans (34 percent). A few
 companies finance their operations in a different way: companies linked to a larger group (2 percent) have been
 conducting regular business relations with financial institutions, obtaining loans and other financial services.
 Gaps between the supply and demand of financial services for VSSMEs persist in (i) type and amount of funding
 available and (ii) diversity of financial services.


 • Type and amount of funding available:
      − There is a mismatch between the demand for short-term financing and the supply of loans that must be secured
        by collateral; 37 percent of VSSMEs declare a need for loans to finance their working capital.
      − There is a lack of funding in the early stages; only 14 percent of VSSMEs finance the set-up of their activities
        with a bank loan or lease.


 • Diversity of financial services:
      - Public authorities and financial institutions focus more on access to finance than other banking services, such as
        insurance, treasury instruments, debt recovery, and financial education. These services would help VSSMEs to
        improve their management and allow financial institutions to increase their profitability in this market.
      The gap between the product offerings of financial institutions and the financing needs of VSSMEs might be
      explained by VSSMEs’ lack of trust in the financial system, as many VSSMEs consider loans to be an additional
      source of risk rather than an opportunity.
      VSSME financial inclusion is limited by both the capacity of borrowers and financial institutions. The gap
      between financial institutions and the VSSME market is explained by a combination of mismatches between
      potential borrowers, financial institutions, and market infrastructure.


 VSSME FINANCIAL INFORMATION IS OFTEN INCOMPLETE OR UNAVAILABLE
 Financial institutions are often deterred by:
      −	a lack of transparency among VSSMEs (only 60 percent keep accounts and 33 percent have certified
        financial statements);
      −	a lack of financial projections (only 36 percent have a business plan and 50 percent would like to develop
        one); and
      −	the heavy reliance of VSSMEs on cash; (78 percent of supplier payments and 90 percent of salary payments
        are in cash).
 Also, VSSME median revenue (45,000 Tunisian Dinars) is far below the threshold used by financial institutions to
 define a small or medium enterprise, and very few VSSMEs (15 percent) wish to expand.


 FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS DON’T EXPLORE ENOUGH OPPORTUNITIES RELATED TO THIS
 MARKET SEGMENT
 Tunisian financial institutions weakly exploit the potential of the VSSME market and do not take sufficient
 measures to tackle the issues of information asymmetry. No Tunisian financial institutions (specialized institutions
 excepted) have implemented a tailored strategy for this market. Financial institutions consider VSSMEs to be a
 core part of the country’s economy, yet a risky one. Very few consider VSSMEs to be intrinsically interesting and
 profitable. Therefore, financial services provided to VSSMEs have remained traditional. They center on a range of
 relatively flexible standard products imitating retail and corporate products and offered via branch networks. The
 focus is placed on funding, which is granted according to a VSSME’s performance and financial risks as well as
 suggested guarantees. However, this method is not working for the 66 percent of VSSMEs that are not banked and
 are unable to show proof of valid accounting. Financial institutions are very aware of the limits of their current
 approach as it results in having to deal with the same limited number of bigger companies, given the difficulty of
 serving the majority of the market that is considered high risk.


6 |
EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE TRIES BUT FAILS TO
OVERCOME VSSME FLAWS AND DOES NOT FOSTER
INTEREST AMONG FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE VSSME
MARKET
Measures taken to reduce the asymmetry of information between
financial institutions and VSSMEs are insufficient. Actions that were
implemented to technically assist VSSMEs gave poor results.
National governmental initiatives to facilitate VSSME access to finance
through guarantee funds and public banks also showed limited results.
Only 12 percent of VSSMEs know about SOTUGAR, the Tunisian
Guarantee Company. Three percent have ongoing funding from the
Tunisian Solidarity Bank, and 1 percent has financing from the Bank
for the Financing of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises. This public
system of financial support is provided through a number of specialized
structures that are based upon a company’s size and activity as well
as the type of services it offers. Entrepreneurs are often lost between
the different structures and processes, which are cumbersome and
intimidating.
Finally, the tunisian central bank provides data on VSSME debt, but the
information remains largely untapped.



IV.GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
In order to address issues that are limiting the access of VSSMEs to
financial services, it seems necessary to pursue the existing efforts while
respecting three key principles:


1. INCORPORATE EFFORTS TO ASSIST VSSMEs INTO A
   MORE ORGANIZED AND COORDINATED NATIONAL
   STRATEGY
  VSSMEs are the focus of many organizations, including the
  government, financial institutions, and professional organizations.
  These groups should co-ordinate their efforts based on a common
  understanding, or even a common definition of VSSMEs, in order to
  match government initiatives and financial products. This would build
  a greater understanding of the market.


2. EXPAND EFFORTS TO ASSIST VSSMEs TO INCLUDE A FULL
   RANGE OF FINANCIAL AND NON-FINANCIAL SERVICES,
   BEYOND CREDIT
  Today, VSSME assistance efforts are oriented towards corporate
  finance. However, lending is only one of many financial services that
  VSSMEs need for their daily operations and growth. Furthermore,
  according to international experience, credit services are not sufficient
  to make the VSSME market a profitable one for financial institutions.
  Offerings should go beyond funding to cover further financial needs.




                                                                              | 7
3. ADDRESS THE DIVERSITY OF THE VSSME SECTOR
 The VSSMEs market is very heterogeneous, both in terms of needs,
 expectations, and risk levels. To better tailor their actions, financial
 institutions and Tunisian public authorities should segment this
 market into homogenous subgroups. This study proposes two types of
 segmentation.
 1. A marketing segmentation based on socio-economic criteria
 intrinsic to VSSMEs. It identifies homogeneous groups, based on
 business activities and ownership types. Eleven groups were identified,
 although each financial institution can decide to develop more.
 This segmentation allows financial institutions to develop targeted
 communications towards these groups, not only through advertising
 campaigns but also through product packaging and the organization of
 distribution channels.
 − Banks consider women entrepreneurs, young graduate entrepreneurs,
   and retailers as more attractive segments than banked VSSMEs due
   to their high potential. Thus, financial institutions should consider
   recruiting more of these clients and develop cross-selling products for
   them.
 − Wholesalers, importing and exporting VSSMEs, professionals,
   and vssmes linked to a larger entity are currently the most served
   segments. Financial institutions should build retention strategies and
   promote up-scaling and cross-selling amongst these clients.
 − VSSMEs that operate in sectors like small industry, handicrafts,
   accommodation and food services, are less banked, as are those in
   more remote areas and those who prefer Islamic banking products.
   Thus, efforts have to be undertaken to raise their financial inclusion
   level via standard financial products.


 2. A strategic segmentation based on the maturity level of VSSMEs. It
 aims to distinguish homogeneous groups in terms of potential income
 for financial institutions. It allows financial institutions to adapt
 their products, internal organization, and distribution network to the
 expected revenue of each segment. It would allow them, for example,
 to take a mass approach for the segment with low profitability
 (standardized products, low cost channels, automated customer
 services, management and risk tool evaluation, etc.), and a premium
 approach for the segment with high profitability (flexible products,
 dedicated relationship manager, etc.).
 The cross reference of these two segmentations allows the prioritization
 of the segments according to either government objectives or the
 competitive advantage of financial institutions.




 8 |
V. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
The government has already taken full measure of its role as a regulator and supervisor of financial
institutions and as a facilitator and promoter of entrepreneurship. Four recommendations for government
action are listed below.


1. DEVELOP A NATIONAL STRATEGY
  State efforts would gain efficiency if they were part of a formal concerted strategy that addresses a range of
  financial services and that is followed up by a frequent and organized reporting.


2. IMPROVE TRANSPARENCY
  In order to reduce information asymmetry between financial institutions and clients, the government should
  intervene at two stages. The first would see the state promote VSSME financial transparency (through
  support programs, tax reform, and other measures) and second would see it share information on VSSME
  debts and payments with financial institutions and service providers through a credit bureau.


3. EASE REGULATIONS FOR CREDIT ACCESS
  Interest rate and working capital credit ceilings are constraints that could be lightened and that may
  currently prevent financial institutions wishing to expand their offerings and financing to VSSMEs.


4. STREAMLINE THE GOVERNMENT’S ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURES TO SUPPORT
   VSSMEs
  Consolidate state organizations and instruments (including guarantee plans, co-financing, grant funds, and
  national agencies) in order to improve their impact and efficiency.




VI. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Financial institutions have a very important role to play. They can take several actions to enable themselves to
profitably serve the VSSME market, despite the existing information asymmetry.

Banks have been testing and implementing innovative approaches to serving this market in comparable
MENA countries. Key success factors include (i) a dedicated strategy (ii) a good understanding of the market,
proper segmentation, and differentiation between very small enterprises, small enterprises, and medium
enterprises, (iii) a strong commitment among top management towards VSSME clients that is directly reflected
in organizational charts, (iv) a comprehensive range of services tailored to VSSMEs, including the promotion
of non-lending products and commission revenues, (v) active use of low-cost channels of distribution, (vi)
risk-management based on the evaluation of entrepreneurs’ profiles rather than their guarantees and financial
statements, and finally (vii) an automated information system at the core of the process.


1. UNDERSTAND, SEGMENT, AND PRIORITIZE THE MARKET
  The VSSME market is too heterogeneous to serve with a single approach. It is necessary to better understand
  and segment VSSMEs, and to develop a specific strategy for the chosen segment. This survey identified
  multiple segments that could potentially be refined by financial institutions interested in this market.




                                                                                                                   | 9
2. BECOME A DAILY BUSINESS PARTNER
  Developing a comprehensive range of non–lending financial services is a key success factor to attract clients, manage
  risks, and increase the profitability of these customers. Financial institutions should go beyond their role of lenders to
  become solution providers and support VSSMEs in areas such as payroll management, procurement, risk prevention,
  marketing, and investment.


3. OPTIMIZE OPERATING COSTS
  Financial institutions can make VSSME segments profitable by adapting their procedures to the expected income
  generated by their VSSME clients through product standardization, customer relationship management, and the use
  of low-cost distribution channels. A strategic segmentation based on business revenue potential, carried out as part of
  this study, will help financial institutions better manage their costs and enhance their profitability.


4. REMODEL RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
  Innovative analysis and credit management techniques, based on the profile of the entrepreneur and his behavior
  rather than on the audited financial statements of the company, have allowed financial institutions in other countries
  to improve their market coverage while controlling their risks.


5. COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
  When it comes to VSSMEs, it is not only about delivering the right product to the right customer, but it is also about
  conveying the right information to the market.




 10 |
 About IFC
 IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution focused exclusively
 on the private sector. Working with private enterprises in about 100 countries, we use our capital, expertise,
 and influence to help eliminate extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. In FY14, we provided more
 than $22 billion in financing to improve lives in developing countries and tackle the most urgent challenges of
 development. For more information, visit www.ifc.org.



  /IFCmena
  @IFC_mena
    /IFCvideocasts
www.ifc.org/SocialMediaIndex
Xavier Reille
Financial Institutions Group
Advisory Services Manager
Europe, Middle East and North Africa
E-mail: xreille@ifc.org

Hermann Bender
Program Manager
Banking Advisory Services
Middle East and North Africa
E-mail: hbender@ifc.org

2005C Cornich El Nil, Nile City Towers,
North Tower,
Cairo, Egypt
Tel: +20 (2) 2461 9140/45/50
Fax:+20 (2) 2461-9130/60

ifc.org                                   October 2014
