IFC in the Middle East and North Africa
Fiscal Year 2014
Fiscal Year 2014 Overview   Financial Markets




 01                          02

Investing in Youth          Conﬂict-A ected States




 03                          04
Energy and Climate




 05
Landmark in Jordan               South-South Investments




 06                               07

World Bank Group Collaboration   Award Wining Projects




 08                              09
Key Numbers at a Glance




  10
Fiscal Year 2014 Overview
The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) are rich with economic potential but also face signiﬁcant challenges,
including political instability, unemployment, poor access to ﬁnance, and restrictive legislation.

IFC MENA is working to address these issues by supporting the region’s private sector through a combination of
investments and advisory services, helping to create jobs and drive sustainable growth.

In ﬁscal year 2014, IFC committed $2.2 billion in MENA, including $509 million mobilized from other investors, and
delivered an advisory program worth a total of $105 million spread over 96 projects.

We focused on improving access to credit for smaller businesses, reducing bureaucracy, supporting fragile and
conﬂict-a ected states, combating climate change, boosting infrastructure, and championing intra-regional, or
South-South, investments.




       Number of advisory projects
                                                                $2.2 billion
                                                                IFC's total commitments in
launched during ﬁscal year 2014.                                MENA during the 2014 ﬁscal year.




01
Financial Markets
Last year, we focused on increasing access to ﬁnance for the region’s micro, small, and medium enterprises, helping
them expand and create jobs. We also worked to empower young people and women so they could play a greater role
in the economy. During ﬁscal year 2014, IFC:

• Provided a $90 million guarantee to help Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank expand access to ﬁnance
in emerging markets;

• Committed $15 million to EuroMena III, a private equity fund that will support small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
in Egypt, Lebanon, and Jordan, giving them the chance to expand and create jobs;

• Provided a loan worth up to $2 million to FINCA Jordan, a leading Jordanian microﬁnance organization, to help boost
its lending to businesses run by women and expand its branch network, especially in rural areas;

• Assessed the credit registry of the Central Bank of Tunisia (BCT) and identiﬁed opportunities for the bank to better
use available data and expand access to ﬁnance. IFC’s support will help BCT strengthen banking sector supervision,
and o er data services that will help banks better manage credit risk;

• Helped establish regulatory frameworks for leasing in Afghanistan and helped the country's central bank to establish
credit and collateral registries to improve the investment climate. The collateral registry will create ﬁnancing opportu-
nities for SMEs that typically possess moveable property as their main asset;

• Signed an agreement with Bank al Etihad to help design a new banking model to identify and understand the needs
of SMEs in Jordan;

• Provided a loan of $20 million to Attawﬁq Micro-Finance, part of an eﬀort to help micro enterprises in Morocco and
drive economic development across the country;

• Supported Al Kuraimi Islamic Microﬁnance Bank in Yemen with a comprehensive set of capacity building measures,
including product diversiﬁcation, risk management and governance, strategic planning, and human resources;

• Helped the Bank of Palestine scale up its banking operations for SMEs in the West Bank and Gaza, especially those
owned by women;

• Commissioned a series of reports, Islamic Banking Opportunities Across Small and Medium Enterprises in MENA, to
better understand the demand for, and supply of, Islamic banking products in the SME sector. The reports show that
SMEs in MENA often face a struggle to get access to ﬁnance, but Islamic banking can form part of a solution to that
problem; and

• Published two in-depth studies on IFC’s role in creating jobs in Pakistan and Lebanon through ﬁnancial markets
investments. The key objective of the studies was to gain insight into the relationship between increased access to
ﬁnance and job creation among smaller ﬁrms.




02
Investing in Youth
Making sure that young people are included in private sector development is another key focus for IFC MENA.

Throughout the region youth unemployment is very high, but there is a gap between the demands of the labor
market and the practical skills of young people.

In ﬁscal year 2014, we expanded our E4E Initiative for Arab Youth, which improves the employment prospects of
young people from Morocco to Jordan.

The program shared expertise with the Moroccan Ministry of Tourism, the Tunisian Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) Federation, and Jordan’s leading ICT association, to ensure that technology graduates know what
prospective employers are looking for.

As part of E4E, IFC invested $8 million in Luminus Group, a vocational and technical training institution, to help build
the capacity of its colleges throughout MENA and provide young people with the skills they need.

We also invested $10 million in a new venture capital fund, Wamda Ventures I LP, that will focus on the technology
sector in the Middle East and North Africa and help young entrepreneurs thrive in a dynamic industry. The fund plans
to invest in up to seven small and medium enterprises across Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon, and help the expanding
technology sector in MENA catch up with other emerging markets.




         $10            Million Total IFC investments, in ﬁscal year 2014,
                  designed to help smaller technology ﬁrms across MENA.




 03
Supporting Fragile and Conﬂict-A ected States
The Middle East and North Africa are home to a number of fragile and conﬂict-a ected states facing severe political
and economic challenges. IFC is continuing its work in these countries, from rebuilding damaged infrastructure to
making strategic investments to boost the private sector and help build a solid foundation for shared prosperity.
During the last ﬁscal year, IFC:

• Made a total investment of $10 million (including $8.3 million in MIGA mobilization) in Naﬁth, a leading logistics
company, to help manage freight in four major Iraqi ports. This will help support cross-border trade and boost
economic development, while contributing to the development of a more diverse Iraqi economy, one less reliant on
the oil sector;

• Invested $14 million in a multi-use extended stay greenﬁeld property in Erbil to support much-needed business
infrastructure in the area;

• Committed up to $3 million as an equity investment in the West Bank’s Palestine Growth Capital Fund, managed by
the Abraaj Group, to help provide long-term ﬁnancing to a range of SMEs. IFC will also provide the fund with special-
ized advice on the best practice for improving sustainability;

• Worked with the Central Bank of Yemen to reform its credit reporting framework, part of wider eﬀorts to improve
the country’s ﬁnancial infrastructure, facilitate lending for smaller businesses, and boost economic growth;

• Helped the Bank of Palestine scale up its banking operations for SMEs in the West Bank and Gaza, especially those
owned by women, to drive economic growth. IFC will help the bank develop new products and services catering to
the needs of these small ﬁrms;

• Signed an agreement with Iraq’s United Bank for Investments (UBI) to boost cross-border trade and help smaller
businesses. The largest bank advisory project in the world will allow UBI to expand its network of international
partner banks and support the trade-related ﬁnancing needs of clients; and

• Helped West Bank authorities improve sanitation and waste management services for 840,000 people living in the
southern West Bank, where illegal dumping has become a major environmental hazard. The landmark agreement
will see a private sector consortium operating a modern landﬁll that should dramatically improve waste manage-
ment in the area.




04
Energy and Climate
We work to improve local infrastructure, help businesses become more energy e cient, enable the private
sector to develop renewable sources of power, and support ﬁrms at they cut greenhouse gas emissions. We do
this through a mixture of investments and advisory services, with a special focus on public-private partnerships
(PPPs).

Successful PPP transactions in infrastructure are essential to drive economic growth and restore market conﬁ-
dence in the region. We are therefore increasing our local presence to build strong client relationships, support
capacity building, and encourage the development of an appropriate enabling environment for PPPs. During
ﬁscal year 2014, IFC:

• Helped Fransabank Group extend ﬁnancial support to businesses and households to encourage them to adopt
clean energy and energy eﬃcient technology, reduce costs, and combat climate change. The $13 million ﬁnan-
cial package includes up to $4.5 million from the IFC-Canada Climate Change Program;

• Supported the UCH-II power plant, which represents the largest foreign investment in Pakistan's power
sector in 15 years. The facility will generate enough electricity to supply 6 million people;

• Invested in a new 50-megawatt wind farm in Sindh province in Pakistan to help meet a rising demand for
electricity and provide an extra 270,000 people with environmentally-friendly power every year. The wind farm
will also contribute to a massive reduction in greenhouse gases;

• Was selected as the lead advisor to attract private sector participation in Taif Airport and King Abdul Aziz
International Airport in Saudi Arabia, which will ease travel and improve economic integration;

• Supported multiple PPP pre-feasibility studies in the urban transport, solid waste, and telecommunications
sectors in Egypt;

• Helped the national power utility of Afghanistan select a private operator to manage its operations in Kanda-
har; and

• Continued to advise the Joint Services Council for Hebron and Bethlehem, following the selection of a private
operator for the Al Minya landﬁll in the Southern West Bank, in order to help the project reach fruition.




05
Landmark Wind Farm in Jordan
IFC MENA arranged a $221 million debt package to support the development of a pioneering 117-megawatt wind farm
in Jordan.

IFC will help the Jordan Wind Project Company build the plant in the southern governorate of Taﬁla, which will be
the country’s ﬁrst privately-owned renewable energy facility.

The project, which won the Renewables Deal of the Year award from Project Finance Magazine, will help boost
power supplies in Jordan, where demand for electricity is increasing at about 8 percent every year.

It is also expected to help curb greenhouse gas emissions, lessen Jordan's reliance on imported fossil fuels, and set a
precedent for future investments in renewable energy throughout MENA.

The project has helped pave the way for the government of Jordan to roll out a signiﬁcant program of wind and solar
projects, building investor conﬁdence along the way.

Following the agreement for Taﬁla, the government signed an additional 12 concessions that will provide over 200
megawatts of solar power in the ﬁrst stage of a three-stage program.

Many international ﬁnancial institutions are looking to continue their engagement in the Jordanian renewable
energy sector by ﬁnancing these concessions.

Taﬁla is a great example of how the private sector, the government, and international ﬁnance institutions can come
together to tackle everyday challenges like power shortages.




     117             megawatts Output of the IFC-supported Taﬁla wind farm,
                     which will help meet the increasing demand for power in Jordan.




06
Championing Economic Integration and
South-South Investments
MENA lags far behind the rest of the world in terms of economic integration and foreign investment. A pillar of
IFC's strategy is to reverse that trend by helping local companies expand throughout the region and into other
emerging markets. We do this by supporting regional champions, companies that have the ability to take their
expertise abroad, share their know-how, create jobs, and raise local standards.

Among other e orts during ﬁscal year 2014, IFC:

• Invested $100 million in ACWA Power, which will help the Saudi-based company signiﬁcantly increase the
amount of power it generates from renewable sources and meet a growing energy demand throughout MENA;

• Provided subordinated loans of $150 million to Bank Audi, the largest bank in Lebanon. The loans will expand
Bank Audi’s capital base and support its regional growth plans, strengthening economic integration between
developing economies and creating jobs; and

• Made a $35 million loan to Elif Plastik, Turkey’s largest supplier of ﬂexible plastic packaging, to help the
company expand into Egypt, create jobs, improve local know-how, and bolster supply chains.




              $640 million
               Total IFC commitments in 2014 to help investors in
               MENA expand into neighboring countries and other
               parts of the developing world.



07
World Bank Group Collaboration
During ﬁscal year 2014, IFC MENA continued to work closely with other members of the World Bank Group,
while improving cooperation internally between its investment and advisory services to boost the sustainability
of its projects. Collaboration of this kind is crucial to meet the region’s most pressing development needs.

•The World Bank and IFC prepared new partnership strategies in Pakistan and Morocco, and are launching prepa-
rations for new country partnership frameworks (CPF) in Egypt, Tunisia, and Lebanon which will guide the
group’s engagement in these countries for the next ﬁve years. The CPFs, which involve a diverse group of stake-
holders, will help determine development priorities for the World Bank Group.

• IFC and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development began a joint project in which the World Bank
supported the construction of Al-Minya landﬁll in the southern West Bank. The project will also support the
institutional development of the Joint Services Council for Hebron and Bethlehem, and help attract private
sector participation for the landﬁll’s operation and maintenance. This project is expected to beneﬁt 840,000
people in the Hebron and Bethlehem governorates, dramatically improve much needed sanitation services in
the area, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 13,400 tons over seven years.

• IFC and the World Bank aim to transform the power sector in Pakistan through policy reforms and the facilita-
tion of signiﬁcant investment in low-cost generation and renewable energy. IFC prepared an equity investment
in the power sector (expected to be committed in ﬁscal year 2015) while the World Bank is providing budget
support through development policy credits to support policy reforms in the sector.

• The Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise (MSME) Facility is a multi-donor technical assistance program, and a
major collaboration between the World Bank and IFC, which aims to improve access to ﬁnance for businesses
across MENA. In ﬁscal year 2014, the facility provided a wide package of technical assistance, advisory services,
and policy support. The facility has extended about 900,000 loans to MSMEs across the region and mobilized
$1.5 billion in investments from IFC and the IBRD since its inception.

• IFC MENA and the World Bank's Financial Infrastructure Development Project worked together in Yemen to
help the central bank reform its credit reporting framework, establish a new public credit registry, and expand
access to lending services.

• IFC MENA and IBRD the signed an agreement to help increase lending to smaller enterprises in Jordan. The two
agencies will support the Jordan Loan Guarantee Corporation as it scales up its lending operations, builds institu-
tional capacity, increases its outreach, and develops new ﬁnancial products.




08
Award Winning Projects
Several IFC MENA projects and clients were recognized for their achievements during the last ﬁscal year.

• Project Finance Magazine awarded the Renewables Deal of the Year prize to IFC's landmark renewable energy
investment in the Taﬁla Wind Farm in Jordan. It demonstrates IFC’s increased focus on combatting climate change
and supporting renewable energy projects across the Middle East and North Africa.

• IFC client Roshan, Afghanistan’s leading communications provider, was given a special commendation for Achieve-
ment in Information and Communications Technology at the 2014 FT/IFC Transformational Business Awards. The
commendation was in recognition of the company’s transformative business solutions and success in harnessing
the power of technology to address critical infrastructure gaps, including recently securing $65 million in ﬁnancing
from IFC to develop a 3G network in Afghanistan.

• Engro Foods, one of the largest dairy producers in Pakistan, was awarded top prize in the category of Achievement
in Inclusive Business Model amongst many other international contenders at the 2014 FT/IFC Transformational
Business Awards. Engro Foods was honored for its phenomenal growth and its success in encouraging empower-
ment activities for women, rural community development projects, and e ective use of technology.




09
Key Numbers at a Glance
Investment Services
Number of new projects: 63
Total Commitments: $2.2 billion
Mobilization: $509 million

IFC’s clients have:
• Facilitated 2.3 million MSME loans worth $14 billion
• Supported power generation to 2.8 million customers
• Supplied water to 1.8 million customers
• Provided healthcare to 3.8 million patients
• Supported 24,700 students
• Created 173,000 jobs

Advisory Services
Number of new projects: 96
Value of new projects: $105 million

IFC’s clients have:
• Facilitated 1,107,897 loans to MSMEs
• Provided $4 billion in ﬁnancing to MSMEs
• Provided 604,287 micro loans to women
• Opened 411,701 new bank accounts for customers

IFC has helped:
• Saved the private sector $74.4 million by supporting regulatory
reforms
• Settled 587 cases via alternate dispute resolution, releasing 296
million in funds
• Supported 1,083 businesses as they improved their performance




10
IFC Partner Helps Extend Access to
Housing Finance
Ibrahim Bakr is an Egyptian government employee, a proud family man, and owner of his own modest home in Dakahlya—-
in the heart of the Nile Delta region. However, until recently, life was not so straightforward for the 40 year-old father of
four. He was forced to live in tough conditions with his extended family in a rundown apartment building.

"Living conditions were really hard, and I was short on money. I wanted to move away quickly from the family house, but I
couldn’t a ord to... a loan sounded like a very good solution," said Ibrahim.

With the support of Dakahlya Businessmen's Association for Community Development (DBACD), a leading microﬁnance
institution (MFI) in Egypt and key IFC partner, it was easy for Ibrahim to get a loan of 20,000 Egyptian pounds ($2,800). That
was all he needed to ﬁnish building his own house on a patch of inherited land, and signiﬁcantly raise his standard of living,
as well as that of his wife and children.

"The process was so simple,” said Ibrahim. “And it only took me a week to apply for the loan and then receive it."

DBACD was founded in 1995 and has risen to become one of the largest MFIs in Egypt. As of December 2013, the association
had reached 115, 000 active borrowers—over half of whom are women—with a portfolio of 220 million Egyptian pounds
($31.5 million).

Since 2012, IFC has been helping DBACD move into housing microﬁnance (HMF)—an important untapped market in a coun-
try with immense demand for a ordable housing, but sorely lacking any sort of serious mortgage ﬁnancing. Indeed, the
government estimates that about 560,000 families need new homes every year, but only 90,000 units are supplied.

Most existing banks and MFIs in Egypt simply have not provided the kind of loan products and services required to help build
or renovate homes. In Egypt, the the public sector has historically been the only provider of low income housing. But it has
not been able to meet demand and, as a result, many low income families turn to poor quality informal housing. The
construction or refurbishment of this informal housing is usually paid for by money borrowed from family or friends, since
very few people have access to the ﬁnancial services that can lift them out of poverty.

IFC’s support was instrumental in helping DBACD develop a type of loan that could appeal to people like Ibrahim, who want
to buy an a ordable property or to upgrade/improve conditions in an existing home. In particular, IFC was able to leverage
its global expertise in housing ﬁnance, including a recent success story in Afghanistan.

With grant funding of $245,000 from IFC, DBACD has been able to conduct a market research survey, hire a local engineer
to help develop a housing technical guide and train their loan oﬃcers, and bring in an HMF practitioner from IFC’s partner
in Afghanistan (First Microﬁnance Bank). They began pilot-testing the new product at the end of 2013, and already over 500
families have beneﬁted from new housing loans. This is expected to increase dramatically in the coming years.

Today, by helping extend access to credit to the people that need it most, IFC is helping to develop a viable housing sector
in Egypt, one which creates jobs, improves overall health, strengthens the ﬁnancial sector, provides a sense of ownership to
the populace, and helps further develop institutions that provide beneﬁts across many sectors of society.

The project is part of the World Bank Group MSME Technical Assistance Facility in MENA. The Facility is supported by the
Canadian Department of Foreign A airs, Trade and Development, the Danish International Development Agency, Japan,
Switzerland’s State Secretariat for Economic Aﬀairs and UKaid.
Regional Hub                                                   Stay Connected
Cairo, Egypt                                                     /IFCmena
                                                                 @IFC_MENA
Mouayed Makhlouf
Director, Middle East and North Africa                             /IFCvideocasts
                                                               www.ifc.org/SocialMedia Index
Luke Haggarty
Regional Head IFC Advisory Services

Nile City Towers, North Tower, 24th Floor 2005C
Cornich El Nil, Ramlet Boulac, Cairo, Egypt
T: + 20 (2) 2461-9140 / 45 / 50
F: + 20 (2) 2461-9130 / 60
ifc.org                                         October 2014
