Using Rewards Programs to
Recognize and Incentivize Court
Performance



   Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia
                               World Bank Group




Using Rewards Programs to Recognize
  and Incentivize Court Performance



            Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia

   The work of the MDTF-JSS is made possible by the generous contributions from
 the Swedish International Development Agency, the Swiss Agency for Development
   and Cooperation, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the
                   Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Slovenia.

                                www.mdtfjss.org.rs
In an effort to boost court performance, the Serbian Judiciary and the World Bank
have designed a rewards program that taps into positive competition to promote
justice for citizens and businesses.

Why Rewards Matter

There is a wealth of research on the role of incentives in public sector performance,
including how institutions can boost performance by rewarding their staff.1 Much depends
on context, but there are some key lessons from the literature:
    1.	 Non-financial rewards can be more powerful than cash;2
    2.	 Group rewards encourage team player behaviors, especially among smaller
        teams;
    3.	 Rewards provide extra motivation to undertake socially desirable acts and other
        ‘good’ behavior;
    4.	 Rewards for ‘most improved players’ motivate lower and middling performers,
        whose contribution is critical to lifting sector-wide performance;
    5.	 Rewards provide extra motivation when combined with recognition from senior
        figures and visibility among peers and the public.

In public institutions around the world, doctors, teachers and tax collectors are each
responding to incentives offered through carefully-designed rewards programs. So why
have courts not adopted similar programs?
1 See for example: No margin, no mission? A field experiment on incentives for public service delivery, Journal
of Public Economics, Volume 120, December 2014, pp1-17. Awards unbundled: Evidence from a natural
field experiment, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Volume 100, April 2014, pp44-63. Pay for
Performance Incentives in Low and Middle Income Country Health Programs, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 18932, April 2013; Incentives in the Public Sector: Evidence from a Government
Agency, Institute for the Study of Labor Discussion Paper No. 6738, July 2012.
2 See also, The World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society and Behavior, World Bank, 2015.
                                                      1
Courts and Rewards
Courts have generally been slow to adopt lessons on incentivizing public sector
performance. Traditionally, leaders have relied predominantly on compliance with
rules to motivate their judges and staff. (Submit this report! Deliver this judgment! Meet
this deadline!) Judiciaries also draw on altruism to motivate their ranks. (Serve our
citizens! Uphold the rule of law!) Leaders in judiciaries have tended to shy away from
rewards programs on the basis that judges and staff should not be offered inducements
to do what is required of them by law.

Some progress has been made over the last decade, as many judiciaries have
developed performance frameworks with targets and monitoring tools that would
be familiar in new public management approaches. Often though, the implementation
of these frameworks has continued to focus on compliance. (Submit more reports!
Meet these targets!) Rarely have frameworks been linked with positive reinforcement or
complemented by rewards programs for courts that meet or exceed their desired targets.
When targets are met (and when they are not), the goal posts are moved, and courts
are required to comply with a new set of rules. Rarely are the people who do the work
recognized for their efforts in the process.




                                            2
Courts will need to catch up to other sectors in this regard if they hope to escape the
pitfalls of a compliance-based performance system. Here, Serbia is at the forefront
of innovation among judiciaries worldwide. With support from the Multi-donor Trust
Fund for Justice Sector Support in Serbia administered by the World Bank,3 the Supreme
Court of Cassation of Serbia launched its inaugural Court Rewards Program in October
2016.

Design of the Rewards Program
The Serbia Court Rewards Program is designed to motivate first instance courts to
improve their efficiency and productivity in processing cases. In this, the inaugural
year, the Supreme Court issued two categories of awards:

    1.	 The largest improvement in backlog reduction per judge and;
    2.	 The largest improvement in the number of resolved cases per judge.

By focusing on first instance courts, the program aims to improve the court experience for
citizens and businesses on the front line of justice service delivery. By targeting ‘most
improved’ courts, the program aims to lift average court performance across the country and
improve consistency of justice overall. By measuring performance on a ‘per judge’ basis,

3 The MDTF-JSS is a sector-wide development program that aims to strengthen justice sector capacity in
Serbia. the MDTF-JSS improves aid effectiveness and donor coordination across the sector through the
implementation of a coordinated work program, administered by the World Bank and financed by pooled
contributions from Serbia’s development partners, namely the Swedish International Development Agency, the
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of Slovenia. For more information, see www.mdtfjss.org.rs.


                                                     3
the program controls for variation in court size, so smaller courts with fewer judges have an
equal chance of success.

The choice of prizes is also designed to incentivize court performance. In each category,
the 1st prize is 5,000 EUR, the 2nd prize is 3,000 EUR, and the 3rd prize is 2,000 EUR. The
prize amounts were determined based on purchasing power in Serbia and the MDTF-JSS’s
procurement history and experience in the local market. The amounts were deemed to be
sufficiently attractive to motivate behavioral change, but not so lucrative as to generate
perverse incentives. Winning courts can choose to spend their prize money on either: ICT
hardware (computers, monitors, printers, scanners, servers etc.); office equipment (desks,
chairs, shelves, clocks, legal texts etc.); or court beautification (paint, plants, signage, repairs
etc.)

The prize winning process also aims to foster teamwork and continual improvement.
Presidents of the winning courts are required to confer with their team when choosing
how to spend their reward. They are also asked to explain in a short questionnaire how
their choice of prize will further improve performance of their court. Rules have been put in
place to ensure that prizes are used for the benefit of the court as a whole. Certain items
are prohibited, such as laptops, tablets and mobile phones for fiduciary concerns, and
consumables for sustainability concerns. The project’s implementing unit is responsible for
procuring the prizes centrally. However, in other contexts, this could be done through the
relevant procuring authority, such as the Ministry of Justice or Council.




                                                  4
The integrity of the process is critical to its success. Winning courts were decided based on
objective data from case management systems and tested and verified by the Supreme
Court and the Bank. To demonstrate the transparency of the process, the scores and results
are available online for peers to review.4

The ceremonial aspect of bestowing an award cannot be underestimated. Prizes were
awarded during Serbia’s Annual Conference of Judges at a gala ceremony. Representatives
of the Supreme Court and the World Bank spoke of the importance of improved court
performance, and the President of the Supreme Court took the opportunity to emphasize
to the winners – and their peer judges – the Supreme Court’s expectations for the coming
year. Awards were issued by President Milojevic, together with commemorative plaques that
were personally designed by him. Alongside the prizes themselves, the ritual signals the
seriousness of the reward program and reinforces its key messages.

The ceremony was attended by all of the country’s judges, as well as dignitaries, international
partners and the media. The message from the Supreme Court President was clear: teams
who strive to improve will be rewarded for their efforts.

The Results
In the 2016 inaugural round, the six winners of the Court Rewards Program were the Basic
Courts in Niš, Lebane, Leskovac, and Novi Sad, and the First, Second and Third Basic
Courts in Belgrade.

This list of winners is interesting in itself. The winning courts represents a mix of large courts
in big cities and small courts in rural towns, in both the north and south of the country. These


4 See http://www.vk.sud.rs/sites/default/files/attachments/KriterijumizaNagradjivanjeSudova_ResenoStarih.pdf
and http://www.vk.sud.rs/sites/default/files/attachments/KriterijumizaNagradjivanjeSudova_UkupnoReseni.pdf.
                                                    5
courts are led by Court Presidents of mixed genders and varying ages. This suggests that,
at least in Serbia, improvement of court performance is not dependent on location, size
or resources. According to the Serbia Judicial Functional Review 2014, stakeholders report
that the most likely determinant of a higher performing court is the managerial skills of the
court president and his/her core team of senior administrators.5 These findings can further
inform programing in the justice sector.

In 2016, Basic and Higher Courts in Serbia resolved 162,328 cases, including 35,130
backlogged cases that were older than two years. That’s 21,109 cases more resolved
than in 2015. Many thousands citizens and businesses had their disputes adjudicated in the
winning courts. With this results program, the Supreme Court hopes that these numbers will
grow.

Leveraging rewards through peer learning
To leverage the impact of these rewards on peer judges across the Serbian judiciary, the
Supreme Court is hosting meetings in each of the four appellate regions in Serbia bringing
together judges in each region to discuss court performance, efficiency and productivity,
rewards and next steps. These meetings provide an opportunity for others to learn from
the winning courts and to spur on further improvements across the court network. It also




5 See http://mdtfjss.org.rs/en/serbia-judical-functional-review#.WCXI-kIrLX4, Governance and Management



                                                      6
provides the opportunity for the Supreme Court to boost morale and remind winning courts
not to become complacent in their performance.

As an additional resource, the Court Presidents of the winning courts have been interviewed
about their ‘recipe for success’ on national TV.6 Their awards were also highlighted in local
media, on social media networks and via blogs.7 By showcasing good practices, the winners
signal to the general public that court performance is improving, while also signaling to
peer judges what it takes to win a much-coveted award.

Judiciaries across Europe are interested in learning about Serbia’s experience. As an initial
step in regional peer learning, the Supreme Court and High Judicial Council of Serbia are
presenting their Court Rewards Program to the Western Balkans Regional Network of
Judicial Councils in November 2017. Lessons will also be shared with international peers in
a range of forums, including the 2017 Conference Excellence on a Global Scale, organized
by the International Association of Court Administrators.

Conclusion
Though traditionally not used in the judiciary, rewards programs can be an effective tool in
incentivizing court performance. Creating such a program is relatively easy. Based on
Serbia’s experience, what this initiative most needed was a judicial leadership committed to
improving performance in a fair and transparent manner. Beyond that, all that was needed
was a small and sustainable budget, thoughtful logistical planning and some brainstorming
among professionals about what best motivates performance in a given context. Such an
initiative would rarely require legislative change in any jurisdiction.

These courts are not the only winners. The ultimate winners of improved court performance
are Serbian citizens and businesses who want – and deserve – fast and fair justice
when they come to court to resolve their disputes or enforce their rights.

The design and rollout of the Serbia Court Rewards program was made possible through
collaboration between the Supreme Court of Cassation of Serbia, the High Judicial Council
of Serbia, and internal collaboration between the Governance Global Practice and the
Development Economics and Research Group of the World Bank, with the support of the
Serbia country team. The rewards program has now been formally adopted in the Supreme
Court’s Book of Rules and will be expanded in coming years.

For more information about incentivizing court performance, feel free to contact the World
Bank: Ms. Georgia Harley (gharley@worldbank.org) and Ms. Srdjan Svircev (ssvircev@
worldbank.org).




6 See for example, http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2016/10/21/serbia-launches-court-rewards-
program.
7 See for example, http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2016/10/17/and-winner-is-serbia.


                                                    7
www.mdtfjss.org.rs
