Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT FOR STANDARD-SETTING					                                                                4
B. ADOPTION OF ISa											5
C. STANDARD-SETTING PROCESS FOR NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS			                                                        7
D. OTHER ASPECTS OF THE STANDARD-SETTING PROCESS					                                                                 9
Additional information										10




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the governance arrangements, procedures and
capacity for setting auditing standards in a jurisdiction, covering (a) the adoption of International Standards on
Auditing (ISA) where applicable, and (b) national auditing standards. The questions are based on examples of good
practice followed by international standard-setting bodies. The questionnaire is structured as follows:



  A. Institutional environment for
  standard-setting

  B. Adoption of ISA


  C. Standard-setting process for national
  auditing standards

  D. Other aspects of the standard-setting
  process




How should the questionnaire be completed?

•	 This questionnaire should be completed by the body responsible for setting auditing standards in the jurisdiction.
•	 Where applicable, state the legal instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.




                                                                                                                             3
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                        Organization



Date of preparation                                            Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                      Address




Job Title(s)                                                   Email




A. INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT FOR STANDARD-SETTING

1. Please indicate which body is responsible for setting auditing standards in the jurisdiction and whether this
authority has been established by law or regulation.




2. Please describe the membership/composition of the standard-setting body.




3. Please describe the process for selecting/appointing members (including ex-officio members) to the standard-
setting body, including any required qualifications.




                                                                                                                              4
                                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




4. Please describe the sources of funding for the standard-setting body and the amount of its annual budget (e.g.,
subsidies from government, revenues from commercial activities, in-kind contributions etc.).




5. Describe the process for determining, implementing and reporting on the work program of the standard-
setting body.




6. Is the standard-setting process subject to independent oversight? If so, please indicate which body is responsible
and briefly describe the oversight activities performed.




7. Do the auditing standards issued or adopted by the standard-setting body have legal standing in the jurisdiction
(i.e. are auditors1 required by law to comply with the standards)?




B. ADOPTION OF ISa

8. Have International Standards on Auditing (ISA) as issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards
Board (IAASB) been adopted by the national standard-setting body? If so, please indicate (i) whether ISA have been
adopted in law, (ii) whether ISA have been reissued as national standards, and (iii) the year of ISA currently in use.




1
  Note that the term ‘auditor’ here refers to professional accountants that are licensed to perform audits that are required by law, also known as
‘statutory auditors’.
                                                                                                                                                     5
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




9. If ISA have been adopted, please indicate whether the original standards as issued by the IAASB have been
modified in any way for use in the jurisdiction (e.g., “carve-outs”, additional requirements, and options prohibited).




10. Where modifications to ISA have been made, please indicate which standards have been modified and briefly
describe the modification(s) and the rationale.




11. Where ISA have been adopted but the standards in use are not those currently in issue by the IAASB, please
describe the process to make the standards current.




12. Where ISAs have been adopted in full (i.e. without modifications), please describe the process for approving (or
“endorsing”) new standards issued by, or revisions to existing standards approved by, the IAASB.




13. Have the international quality control standards been adopted in the jurisdiction, in particular, the International
Standard on Quality Control 1 Quality Control for Firms that Perform Audits and Reviews of Financial Statements
and other Assurance and Related Services engagements? If so, please describe the process for approving (or adopting
or “endorsing”) the standards if different from that of ISA.




                                                                                                                              6
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




14. Please indicate whether standards for other assurance engagements and related services issued by the IAASB
have been adopted in the jurisdiction. If so, please describe the process for approving (or adopting or “endorsing”)
the standards if different from that of ISA.




C. STANDARD-SETTING PROCESS FOR NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS

15. Where full and current ISA have not been adopted, how often are national auditing standards updated?




16. Where full and current ISA have not been adopted, indicate which (if any) of the following form part of the
process for issuing new national auditing standards and/or revisions to the standards, selecting all that apply:

        Conducting research and producing                                Issuing standard (or revised standard as
        discussion papers                                                applicable)

        Developing and issuing draft standards                           Issuing interpretation guidance

        Public consultation period                                       Issuing implementation guidelines

        Publication of responses                                         Post-implementation reviews
        Other (please explain)




17. If discussion papers are produced as part of the development process for new/revised standards, briefly
describe the process.




18. If drafts for new/revised standards are circulated prior to issuance, describe this process.




                                                                                                                               7
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




19. If there is public consultation for draft standards, please indicate the following:
                                                                  Comments
  a. The length of the consultation period for:
  	     i. Discussion papers
  	     ii. Draft standards
  b. Whether consultation is open to the general public



  c. If consultation is only with certain stakeholders,
  please specify which.


  d. Whether public consultation is a statutory
  requirement.



20. If guidance to facilitate interpretation of the standard is produced, describe this process.




21. If guidelines on implementation of the standard are produced, describe this process.




22. If post-implementation reviews are performed following issuance of the standard, describe this process.




                                                                                                                               8
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




D. OTHER ASPECTS OF THE STANDARD-SETTING PROCESS

23. Is English the business language in the jurisdiction? If not, and ISA have been adopted, please indicate the
following:
                                                                 Comments
 a. Which version of ISA is being used, noting the
 year and date of translation.

 b. Name of the body which performs the translation
 and its sources of funding

 c. Average time taken for the translated standards to
 be issued.


24. Please briefly describe the dissemination process of new and/or revised standards to the profession and to
stakeholders such as academia, businesses and the wider public (e.g., publications, conferences, workshops etc.)




25. Does the national standard-setting body contribute to the international standard-setting process of the IAASB?
For example, by participating in working groups, responding to public consultations etc. Please briefly describe.




                                                                                                                              9
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.9 Auditing Standard-Setting




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                            10
