Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.7 AUDIT REGULATION, QUALITY ASSURANCE & PUBLIC OVERSIGHT
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT FOR AUDITORS							4
B. QUALITY ASSURANCE & AUDIT OVERSIGHT SYSTEM						9
C. QA REVIEW PROCEDURES, APPROACH AND COMMUNICATION OF FINDINGS			                                                    11
D. QUALITY ASSURANCE INSPECTORS								13
E. INVESTIGATIONS AND SANCTIONS								14
Additional information										15




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the regulatory environment for auditors1 in a
jurisdiction and the extent of quality assurance and oversight that takes place. In the ROSC Accounting & Auditing
diagnostic assessment, quality assurance (QA) refers to the system in place in a jurisdiction to monitor compliance
of the work performed by independent auditors with applicable auditing, ethical and other professional standards
via on-site inspections and other activities.

QA inspections and other activities may be carried out by a separate audit firm (a peer review system), a professional
accountancy organization (which in some circumstances has been delegated this responsibility by a government
body or regulator), or by an audit regulator independent of the accountancy profession. This questionnaire applies
irrespective of the type of QA system in place.

Questions are based on the Core Principles for Independent Audit Regulators issued by the International Forum of
International Audit Regulators (IFIAR)2 and Statement of Membership Obligations 1, Quality Assurance as issued by
the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). The questionnaire is structured as follows:



    A. Regulatory environment for auditors


    B. Quality assurance and audit oversight
    system

    C. QA review procedures, approach and
    communication of findings

    D. Quality assurance inspectors


    E. Investigations and sanctions




How should the questionnaire be completed?

•	 Section A, relating to the overall regulatory framework for auditors should be completed by the body responsible
   for certifying/licensing auditors.
•	 Sections B, C, D, and E should be completed by the body with responsibility for conducting QA (where
   different).
•	 Where applicable, state the legal instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.




1
 Refer to the introduction in Section A for the definition of “auditors”.
2
  The Framework for Audit Quality (2014) issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
(IAASB) was also used for reference.
                                                                                                                                          3
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




[For completion by the body responsible for certifying/licensing auditors]


Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                                              Organization



Date of preparation                                                                  Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                                            Address




Job Title(s)                                                                         Email




A. REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT FOR AUDITORS

The International Accounting Education Standards Board (IAESB) defines a professional accountant as “an individual
who achieves, demonstrates, and further develops professional competence to perform a role in the accountancy
profession and who is required to comply with a code of ethics as directed by a professional accountancy organization
or a licensing authority”3. This definition includes individuals with the authority to sign the audit opinion/auditor’s
report (referred to in some jurisdictions as a ‘statutory auditor’ or ‘engagement partner’). However, recognizing that
there may be additional/different requirements for an individual to have the authority to sign the audit opinion/
auditor’s report, such individuals are referred to as “auditors” throughout the diagnostic tool. Individuals who meet the
definition of a professional accountant but who do not have this authority are referred to as “accounting professionals”.

Note that throughout the diagnostic tool the term “audit” refers to a statutory audit of financial statement which is
defined here as an independent audit of general purpose4 financial statements mandated by law or regulations issued
by an institution with the legal authority to establish such requirements. In this regard, “auditors” are individuals or
firms which are licensed or certified to perform statutory audits.




3
 Handbook of International Education Pronouncements (2015).
4
 General purpose financial statements are those prepared to meet the needs of a variety of users of financial
statements as opposed to those prepared a particular stakeholder group.
                                                                                                                                            4
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




1. Please complete the following table, indicating whether the titles in the list have reserved functions (i.e. activities
which can only be performed by titleholders) granted by law or regulation. If so, for each title, briefly describe the
reserved function(s) and indicate the corresponding authority (e.g., legal instrument, regulation or institution)
which established the reserved function.
  a. Statutory auditor
  Please also specify:
  	      i. If a license/ certification is required
  	      ii. The issuing body (if applicable)
  	      iii. Length of time for which the license/certification is valid
  Reserved Function(s)                                                                   Established by?




  b. Professional accountant in public practice5
  Reserved Function(s)                                                                   Established by?




  c. Professional accountant in business
  Reserved Function(s)                                                                   Established by?




  d. Chief Accountant
  Reserved Function(s)                                                                   Established by?




  e. Book-keeper
  Reserved Function(s)                                                                   Established by?




5
  The definition of a professional accountant in public practice in this diagnostic tool draws from the definition of a professional accountant from
the IAESB as stated in the introduction to section A, and adds the requirement from the Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (2015) that
the individual is employed (irrespective of functional classification e.g., audit, tax or consulting) by a firm that provides professional services.
This term is also used to refer to a firm of professional accountants (International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants)
                                                                                                                                                       5
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




  f. Accounting Technician
  Reserved Function(s)                                              Established by?




  g. Other (please explain)



  Reserved Function(s)                                              Established by?




2. Please provide a brief overview of individuals/firms who are licensed to conduct statutory audits in the
jurisdiction:
                                                              Comments
  a. Number of auditors (including those employed by
  audit firms)

  b. Number of audit firms, of which:
  	    i. Domestic
  	    ii. Foreign (including those associated with 	
  	    international networks, if applicable)

  c. Number of partners in audit firms


  d. Number of sole practitioners


  e. Number of commercial enterprises subject to
  statutory audit requirements (e.g., banks, listed
  companies, etc.)


3. Are licenses/certificates for auditors required to be renewed? If so, please describe the frequency and the criteria
to be met for renewal.




                                                                                                                                  6
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




4. Is there mutual recognition of the auditor license/certification with other countries? If so, please briefly describe.




5. Does the regulatory/licensing authority for auditors recognize foreign accountancy qualifications? If so, please
indicate the following:
  a. The foreign accountancy qualifications recognized in the jurisdiction.




  b. Number of auditors with recognized foreign accountancy qualifications in the jurisdiction.




  c. The education, experience, examination, residence and/or other requirements which an applicant holding a
  foreign accountancy qualification must satisfy if applicable (e.g., completion of examinations related to local
  tax, business law etc.)




6. Please indicate the following regarding audit firms in the jurisdiction:
  a. Are audit firms required to be registered as a specific legal form of company? If so, please specify
  	     i. the legal form(s) of company
  	     ii. whether the legal form(s) provide for limited or unlimited liability




  b. If audit firms must meet a minimum capital requirement and, if so, indicate the amount.




                                                                                                                                  7
                           ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




  c. Any professional indemnity insurance requirements. If applicable, please briefly describe and indicate
  whether these requirements are compulsory.




7. Can auditors be held liable while acting in a professional capacity? If so, please indicate the following:
                                                                     Comments
  a. If auditors are allowed to cap or restrict their
  liability (e.g., in the engagement letter)



  b. If there is a legal cap on the liability of the auditor
  (indicate the law/regulation)



  c. If liability is borne by the individual auditor, the
  audit firm, or both




8. Are non-audit services (e.g., tax advice, limited assurance reviews etc.) subject to regulation? If so, please describe
how these services are regulated.




                                                                                                                                   8
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




[For review by the QA body as defined in Section B below]

Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                                                Organization



Date of preparation                                                                    Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                                              Address




Job Title(s)                                                                           Email




B. QUALITY ASSURANCE & AUDIT OVERSIGHT SYSTEM

Quality assurance (QA) refers to the system in place in a jurisdiction to monitor compliance of the work performed
by auditors6 with applicable auditing, ethical and other professional standards via on-site inspections and other
activities. QA can be conducted using different systems: including by professional accountancy organizations
(PAOs); by a public body; or by an independent audit regulator which may also have oversight responsibility for the
profession. The term QA body is used throughout this questionnaire to refer to the organization conducting QA and
applies irrespective of the system in place. Questions relating specifically to oversight of the accountancy profession
are also included here to avoid duplication, as in some jurisdictions, both QA activity and the oversight function are
performed by the same body.


9. Is there a quality assurance system in place for auditors? If so, please describe the roles, responsibilities and
authority of the system; indicating the year that the system was established and the applicable legal instrument.
If QA is conducted by more than one body, please describe the activities performed by each (use the additional
information page at the end of the questionnaire if necessary).




10. Please describe the source(s) of funding for the QA body and the amount of its annual budget for quality
assurance activities.




6
  As defined in the introduction to section A, the term “auditors” refers to individuals and firms which are licensed
or certified to perform audits that are required by law.
                                                                                                                                            9
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




11. Is the QA body independent from audit firms and/or external influences? If so, please explain how independence
is maintained.




12. Is the QA body required to report on its activities? If so, please indicate to whom it reports (e.g., audit oversight
body, parliament or legislative authority). Please also explain the types of information reported, and the frequency of
reporting (annually, quarterly, etc.).




13. Is there a body with regulatory/ public oversight authority over auditors? Please indicate whether the oversight
body is separate from the QA body.




14. If there is a body with regulatory/ public oversight authority over auditors, is it a member of the International
Forum of Independent Audit Regulators (IFIAR)?




15. Is the body with regulatory/ public oversight authority over auditors required to report on its activities? If
so, please indicate to whom it reports (e.g., parliament or legislative authority). Please also explain the types of
information reported, and the frequency of reporting (annually, quarterly, etc.).




                                                                                                                                 10
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




C. QA REVIEW PROCEDURES, APPROACH AND COMMUNICATION OF FINDINGS

International best practice principles such as IFIAR’s Core Principles for Audit Regulators and IFAC’s SMO 1 Quality
Assurance recommend that the following are taken into consideration when planning for and conducting QA
reviews/inspections.

    • Scope of the QA system - At a minimum, QA reviews should be mandatory for all firms performing audits of
    public interest entities7 (PIEs) (IFIAR Principle 1). IFAC’s SMO 1 requires mandatory QA reviews for all firms
    performing audits of financial statements, with priority given to firms that audit PIEs.

    • Selection criteria - When determining which audit firms should be selected for QA review, risk-based factors
    should be taken into consideration while ensuring that there is a minimum established frequency for reviews
    (IFIAR Principle 9). The typical minimum cycle is every three years for firms that audit PIEs and every six years
    for other audit firms (IFAC SMO 1).


16. Where QA is conducted of auditors, please describe how the QA body determines which auditors should be
reviewed (e.g., risk-based approach, cyclical, mixed-approach, etc.)




17. Where a cyclical approach is adopted, please indicate the review cycle for (i) auditors of PIEs and
(ii) other auditors.




18. Are there guidelines/requirements on the number of QA reviews that should be performed (e.g., minimum
requirements on the number of PIE audit firms to be inspected each year or the number of individual audits to be
inspected at each firm)?




7
  Public interest entities are typically companies such as listed companies, banks and insurance companies Please
use the definition of PIE, or equivalent, applicable in the jurisdiction, and include the definition in the response.
                                                                                                                                            11
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




19. Are there requirements on the scope and coverage of QA review procedures (e.g., compliance with national/
international auditing and quality control standards8, code of professional ethics, reviews of entire audits or areas of
higher risk only, evaluating the quality of judgments, independence of audit firms, etc.)? If so, please describe.




20. Are there guidelines on the review techniques to be used by the QA body (e.g., questionnaires to firms, desktop
review, face to face interviews, sample review of audit work papers, inspection manuals or guidebooks, protocols,
consultation with stakeholders such as regulators who may have conducted their own reviews, etc.)? If so, please
describe and provide copies of tools such as manuals and checklists.




21. Is there a mechanism for measuring the results of the QA activity (e.g., pass/fail, grading system etc.)? If so,
please describe the metrics used and the protocols in place to ensure consistency in grading.




22. Please describe how the results of QA reviews are communicated to the auditors. For example, is there a written
report with findings, recommendations and action plans?




23. Is there a follow up process to determine whether findings have been remediated?




24. Does the QA body engage with audit committees to discuss review findings?




8
 QA procedures should include compliance reviews of ISA 220 Quality Control for an Audit of Financial Statements and
ISQC 1 Quality Control for Firms that Perform Audits and Reviews of Financial Statements, and Other Assurance and
Related Services Engagements in particular.
                                                                                                                                         12
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight


D. QUALITY ASSURANCE INSPECTORS

25. Please indicate the number of inspectors or reviewers who conduct QA.




26. Are there minimum experience/competences required to be an inspector/reviewer (such as number of years of
audit experience, size or quality of firm where they acquired the audit experience, etc.)?




27. Is there a process to ensure that inspectors or reviewers conducting QA have sufficient industry/sector
knowledge and experience (e.g., agriculture, banking, construction, insurance, long-term contracts, manufacturing
and oil and gas)?




28. Please describe the process for recruiting, training, evaluating, compensating, promoting, and otherwise
rewarding inspectors.




29. Are inspectors permitted to be current practitioners in the audit profession? If not, is there a cooling-off period
prior to becoming an inspector?




30. Is there a process for ensuring independence of inspectors and/or managing conflicts of interest? If so, please
describe.




                                                                                                                                 13
                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




E. INVESTIGATIONS AND SANCTIONS

31. Please describe the consequences (if any) for auditors that receive a low score in the QA review.




32. Does the QA body have authority to require a firm to take corrective action on findings of non-compliance? (e.g.,
to require additional training/CPD or to impose disciplinary actions such as fines or loss of licenses). Please describe.




33. Are the outcomes of QA reviews applied to improve education, training or CPD requirements for the profession
in general?




34. Are other types of reviews conducted of the work of auditors (e.g., after a major fraud or as a result of
whistleblowing)? If so, please describe.




35. Is there an appeals process for disciplinary action?




36. Under what circumstances can an investigation be initiated against auditors?




37. Are there known cases of actual or alleged audit failures in the last five years? If so, please describe.




                                                                                                                                 14
                         ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.7 Audit regulation, QA & Public Oversight




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                                15
