Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.4 FINANCIAL SECTOR – INSURANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. OVERVIEW OF THE INSURANCE SECTOR								4
B. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR INSURANCE COMPANIES				                                                       5
C. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE			                                                        8
d. AUDIT COMMITTEES										10
E. FILING/ PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS						                                                                  11
F. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING					                                                              12
G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE									13
Additional information										14




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the financial reporting requirements for insurance
companies in a jurisdiction in addition to or instead of the requirements for commercial enterprises2 in general.
Unless otherwise stated, the term “insurance company” refers to both insurance and reinsurance companies.

There are also questions in relation to the monitoring and enforcement capacity of the local insurance supervisor
in respect of financial reporting of insurance companies specifically. Questions are based on the internationally-
recognized Insurance Core Principles issued by the International Association of Insurance Supervisors3. The
questionnaire is structured as follows:



    A. Overview of the insurance sector


    B. Financial reporting requirements for
    insurance companies

    C. Statutory audit and other forms of
    independent assurance

    D. Audit committees


    E. Filing/publication of financial
    statements

    F. Monitoring and enforcement - financial
    reporting

    G. Corporate Governance




How should the questionnaire be completed?

•	 This questionnaire should be completed by counterparts from the insurance supervisory body.
•	 Where the response to a question is the same for insurance companies as for commercial enterprises or for listed
   companies4, please state this.
•	 If there are additional requirements or expected good practices for insurance companies specifically, state the
   legal instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.




1
  Unless otherwise stated, the term “insurance company” refers to both insurance and reinsurance companies
2
  Refer to responses provided in Module B Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises
3
  These include ICP 7.7, Reliable and transparent financial reporting, ICP 7.8, External audit and ICP 20 Public Disclosure
4
  Refer to responses provided in Module B Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed Companies
                                                                                                                                             3
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                        Organization



Date of preparation                                            Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                      Address




Job Title(s)                                                   Email




A. OVERVIEW OF THE INSURANCE SECTOR


1. Please provide the following information on the insurance sector in the jurisdiction.
                                                                 Comments
 a. Number of insurance companies
 	    i. Life
 	    ii. Non-Life
 	    iii. Reinsurance

 b. Total premium value for each of the last three
 years (please indicate whether stated on gross written
 or net written basis) and as a percentage of GDP


 c. Insurance sector growth rate for each of the last
 three years

 d. Please state the number (or proportion) of
 insurance companies which are
 i.	foreign-owned
 ii.	 domestic, privately-owned
 iii.	state-owned/controlled

 e. Are there domestic insurance companies listed on
 the stock exchange (locally or overseas)? If so, please
 indicate the number of listed insurance companies
 and the stock exchange(s).




                                                                                                                               4
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




2. Name the insurance supervisor and describe its authority (e.g., comprehensive inspection, compliance and
enforcement powers), indicating the law or other instrument which establishes its authority.




3. Briefly describe the key responsibilities of the insurance supervisor in respect of financial reporting (e.g.,
development of/contribution to prudential standards, audit oversight).




4. Please indicate the source(s) of funding of the insurance supervisor, noting the percentage contribution from each
source.




5. Is the insurance supervisor required to report on its activities (e.g., issue an annual report)? If so, please indicate
the law or other instrument which establishes the requirement and whether this report is made available to the
public.




B. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR INSURANCE COMPANIES


6. Please describe the specific financial reporting requirements for insurance companies in addition to, and/or in
lieu of, those applicable to commercial enterprises, listed companies and/or banks. If the requirements for insurance
companies are exactly the same as for any of the aforementioned companies, please state this at the start (e.g.,
“same requirements as for banks”). Where requirements only apply to a category of insurance company (e.g., listed
insurance companies) or there are exemptions, please indicate this. In all instances, please state the law or regulation
that establishes a requirement (use the ‘Additional Information’ page at the end of this questionnaire if necessary).

    a. Are IFRS required for the general purpose5 consolidated financial statements of insurance companies? If not,
    please indicate:
    	     i. which accounting standards are required
    	     ii. if IFRS is permitted




5
 General purpose financial statements are those prepared to meet the needs of a variety of users of financial statements as
opposed to those prepared for regulatory or other purposes e.g., prudential reporting for the insurance supervisor.
                                                                                                                                             5
                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




b. Are IFRS required for the legal entity financial statements of insurance companies? If not, please indicate:
	     i. which accounting standards are required
	     ii. if IFRS is permitted




c. Where IFRS are required, please indicate whether it is the full and current version of the standards as issued
by the IASB or indicate the version and year.




d. Where IFRS are not required, are there specific financial reporting requirements for the financial statements
of insurance companies? If so, briefly describe these (e.g., for unearned premiums, claims valuation, actuarial
estimates, impairment of reinsurance assets etc.)




e. Are general purpose financial statements required to follow a specific presentation (e.g. standardized format,
chart of accounts)? If so, please describe.




f. Please indicate the deadline for submitting annual financial statements and indicate to whom they are
submitted.




g. Are insurance companies required to prepare a management report/ management discussion and analysis in
the annual report? If so, please briefly describe the requirements.




h. For insurance companies which are part of a group, are all material entities in the group structure required
to be disclosed?




                                                                                                                            6
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




  i. Are interim or other periodic financial statements required? If so, please describe:
  	      i. the requirements (for both legal entity and consolidated statements where applicable)
  	      ii. the filing/publishing deadlines
  	      iii. whether an audit or limited review must be conducted
  	      iv. whether the statements are publicly disclosed.




7. If the record-keeping and data integrity requirements for insurance companies differ from those of other
commercial enterprises, please explain briefly what the differences are.




8. Has the insurance supervisor issued specific reporting guidelines to be used to prepare regulatory/prudential
financial reporting? If so, please indicate whether these guidelines/requirements are in addition to, or instead of, the
accounting standards used for the general purpose financial statements.




9. Are insurance companies required to disclose significant differences between general purpose financial statements
and prudential/regulatory reporting, particularly those relating to differences in valuation practices?




10. Are there any inconsistencies between insurance regulations covering financial reporting requirements, and the
provisions of other laws and regulations in the country? If so, please briefly describe the inconsistencies and indicate
which regulation(s) or requirement(s) take precedence.




                                                                                                                                7
                                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




C. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE


Note that throughout the diagnostic tool, the term “audit” refers to a statutory audit of financial statement which is
defined here as an independent audit of general purpose financial statements mandated by law or regulations issued
by an institution with the legal authority to establish such requirements. In this regard, “auditors” are individuals or
firms which are licensed or certified to perform statutory audits.

11. Are the financial statements of insurance companies subject to an annual statutory audit? If so, please indicate
the legal instrument or regulation that establishes this requirement.




12. Please indicate which body sets the auditing standards used in the audits of insurance companies.




13. Are full and current International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) as issued by the International Auditing and
Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) adopted in the jurisdiction and required to be followed for the audits of
insurance companies? If not, please indicate which auditing standards are used.




14. If ISA have not been adopted, please indicate whether the local auditing standards or insurance regulations require
that audits of insurance companies cover the following6. Select all that apply and briefly describe the requirements.
                                                                                         Requirements
              Determination and adequacy of technical
              provisions (e.g., claims incurred but not
              reported)

              Run off results in relation to provisions for
              (i) incurred and (ii) future losses

              Management of capital (including regulatory
              capital requirements, policies and processes
              for managing capital)

              Investment portfolio


              Asset liability management


              Reinsurance


5
    These areas are based on the guidance on the financial information which insurers should disclose as outlined in ICP 20: Public Disclosure
                                                                                                                                                 8
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




        Assessment of technical performance (i.e. loss
        ratio, expense ratio, combined ratio)


15. Please complete the following table, in respect of requirements regarding the tenure of auditors of insurance
companies. For each requirement, state the applicable/law regulation which establishes the requirement.
                                                                 Requirements
 a. Is rotation of the audit partner required? If so,
 state the frequency of rotation.

 b. Is rotation of the audit firm required? If so, state
 the frequency of rotation.

 c. Is a ‘cooling-off ’ period for the auditor (partner or
 firm) required? If so, state the length of time.

 d. Describe any other requirements in respect of the
 tenure of auditors of insurance companies.


16. Further to the requirements for auditing commercial enterprises in general, are there additional requirements/
conditions from the insurance supervisor to audit an insurance company (e.g., are specific skill sets or technical
competences such as actuarial knowledge required)? If so, please describe.




17. Is there a list of approved auditors of insurance companies?




18. Do auditors face any restrictions on providing non-audit services to insurance companies they audit?




19. Indicate the powers of the following with regard to auditor appointments and terminations.
                                                                 Requirements
 Annual general meeting of shareholders


 Audit committee


 Board of directors


 Other (please explain)

                                                                                                                               9
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




20. Does the insurance supervisor have the power to reject the appointment of an auditor of an insurance company
or to terminate the appointment?




21. Does the resignation/termination of the auditor need to be reported to the insurance supervisor? If so, please
describe the procedure.




d. AUDIT COMMITTEES


22. Please describe the requirements for insurance companies, indicating the applicable law or regulation which
establishes the requirement.

 a. Is there a requirement to have an audit committee?




 b. Does the law or other regulation prescribe requirements for the composition of the audit committee (e.g.,
 number of independent directors etc.)? Please briefly describe




 c. Please briefly describe the key responsibilities of the audit committee in respect of financial reporting.




 d. Please describe the competences required in order to serve as an audit committee member (e.g., experience/
 knowledge of financial reporting, actuarial knowledge, underwriting experience etc.)




 e. Is the audit committee required to report to the shareholders on an annual basis?




                                                                                                                              10
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




E. FILING/ PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


23. Are insurance companies required to make their financial statements and other relevant reports available to the
public? If yes, please indicate what is made publicly available from the list below. Select all that apply.

      Statement of Financial Position (or balance sheet)                Statement of changes in equity

      Income statement (or profit and loss statement)                   Notes and disclosures

      Technical account                                                 Auditor’s report

      Statement of cash flows                                           Management discussion and analysis
                                                                        (or management report)
Other (please explain)




Exemptions (please explain)




Deadline for publication




24. Please indicate where financial statements can be accessed by the public. Select all that apply. If there is a cost for
accessing financial statements, please indicate the cost.
        Internet (please indicate where e.g. website
        of the insurance supervisor, insurance
        company’s website)

        In person at the companies’ registry (please
        explain)

        Newspaper

        Official gazette

        Other (please explain)




                                                                                                                                11
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




F. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING


25. Does the insurance supervisor review financial statements of insurance companies? If so, please complete the
following table:
                                                             Comments
  a. Is there a dedicated unit with responsibility for
  reviewing the financial statements (e.g., checking if
  financial reporting and disclosure requirements are
  met, reviewing auditor’s reports, etc.)?

  b. Name of the monitoring unit(s)


  c. The number of staff dedicated to the monitoring
  activities and the required competences (e.g.,
  financial reporting expertise, actuarial knowledge,
  underwriting experience)

  d. A brief description of the monitoring mechanisms




26. If the insurance supervisor performs a review of financial statements of insurance companies, describe the
supervisory measures and sanctions where violations of financial reporting requirements occur? Please indicate all
possible supervisory measures and sanctions (administrative, civil and criminal), as they may relate to the insurance
company itself, its directors, managers, and auditors.




27. Please list major cases where enforcement action has been taken over the past five years, if any, for breaches of
financial reporting requirements by insurance companies.




28. Are auditors of insurance companies required to inform the insurance supervisor ex-ante if they do not intend to
issue a ‘clean’ (i.e. unqualified) audit opinion?




                                                                                                                               12
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




29. What supervisory measures, if any, are triggered on the part of the insurance supervisor if an insurance company
receives anything other than an unqualified audit opinion (e.g., qualified audit opinion, disclaimer, adverse opinion,
matter of emphasis etc.)?




30. Please complete the following table in relation to the powers of the banking supervisor and auditors of banks,
indicating the law or other regulation which establishes the requirement:
                                                                                        Requirements
    a. Are there protocols in place for the insurance
    supervisor to engage with auditors of insurance
    companies, either directly or indirectly?

    b. How often does the supervisor meet with the
    auditors?

    c. Does the supervisor have the power to establish
    the scope of external audits?

    d. Does the supervisor have the power to require
    production of any documents relating to the
    regulated insurance company from the auditor (e.g.,
    management letter)?




G. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE


31. Is there a code of corporate governance7 or similar with which insurance companies are required or encouraged
to comply? If so, is compliance with the code voluntary or on a “comply or explain” basis?




32. In addition to the financial reporting requirements established by law or regulation described in previous
sections, does the code of corporate governance require or encourage further /different financial reporting practices
(including audit requirements) for insurance companies? If so, briefly describe.




7
 Note that the code of corporate governance here refers both to a separate statutory code or regulation issued or recognized
by the insurance supervisor.
                                                                                                                                            13
                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.4 financial sector – Insurance




33. What are the consequences (if any) for non-compliance with the code of corporate governance?




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                             14
