Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
Module A - Accounting & Auditing Standards

A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis
TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION											3
2. APPROACH FOR ASSESSING NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS					3
3. CHECKLISTS FOR ASSESSING KEY DIFFERENCES WITH ISA					                                                             5
A. OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS						5
B. COMMUNICATION WITH THOSE CHARGED WITH GOVERNANCE					7
C. FORMING AN OPINION AND REPORTING ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS				                                                       9
D. COMMUNICATING KEY AUDIT MATTERS								12
E. MODIFICATIONS TO THE OPINION IN THE INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT			                                                13
F. EMPHASIS OF MATTER PARAGRAPHS AND OTHER MATTER PARAGRAPHS			                                                       14
ANNEX: REPORTING ON DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS AND ISA 	 16




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                                            ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




1. INTRODUCTION


To a great extent, the quality of financial reporting depends on the quality of the A&A standards on which the
reporting and auditing requirements are based. The objective of the Auditing Standards Analysis is to compare the
national standards used to conduct audits of historical information with International Standards on Auditing (ISA)1
with a view to capturing significant differences (where applicable) in order to provide counterparts with concrete
suggestions for improving national standards and aligning them to the extent possible with international standards.

When should teams perform this exercise?

The Auditing Standards Analysis is normally required if the country:
       a) has developed its own national auditing standards and these are widely known to be different from ISA;
       b) uses an older version of ISA (i.e. the most current version of ISA has not been officially accepted by the local
       standard-setter); or
       c) uses ISA as the basis for developing its national auditing standards, but the local standard-setter has made
       modifications (including omissions or “carve-outs”) to ISA.

Where full and current ISA have been adopted without modification, this analysis is not needed.



2. APPROACH FOR ASSESSING NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS


This section has been designed to assist ROSC A&A teams in assessing key areas of divergence between national
auditing standards and ISA. Several general principles and five specific topics were identified as providing the most
effective and relevant basis for assessing the quality of auditing standards as part of a ROSC A&A.

The five specific areas correspond to recently issued/revised ISAs (which take effect from December 15, 2016),
with the assumption that national auditing standards are less likely to diverge with ISA given the wide adoption of
Clarified ISAs (i.e., ISAs issued in 2009 following the revision project conducted by the International Auditing and
Assurance Standards Board)2.

Moreover, through discussion with local experts and country counterparts, and using professional judgment,
the ROSC A&A team should determine whether additional areas should be included in the Auditing Standards
Analysis, i.e., whether standards other than those listed are particularly relevant to the country and may significantly
differ from ISA. This could include, for example, quality control for an audit of financial statements (ISA 220),
auditing accounting estimates (ISA 540), or audits of group financial statements (ISA 600). Teams should also note
whether the jurisdiction has adopted International Standard on Quality Control 1 Quality Control for Firms that
Perform Audits and Reviews of Financial Statements and other Assurance and Related Services engagements.




1
    As issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB)
2
    According to the IAASB, as of November 2015, Clarified ISAs have been adopted in over 110 countries

                                                                                                                                                3
                                                         ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




Six areas/standards to analyze

     1. Overview of National Auditing Standards


     2. Communication with those charged with
     governance (ISA 260)

     3. Forming an opinion and reporting on
     financial statements (ISA 700)

     4. Communicating key audit matters in the
     independent auditor’s report (ISA 701)

     5. Modification to the opinion in the
     independent auditor’s report (ISA 705)

     6. Emphasis of matter paragraphs and
     other matter paragraphs (ISA 706)


The review of audit quality assurance reports in module C.2,3 as well as discussions with the audit regulator and
roundtables with the profession, will be useful sources of “intelligence” for teams to:
(i) get a sense of the quality of the national auditing standards as designed, and
(ii) gauge whether issues such as lack of appropriate audit documentation are due to design deficiencies in the
standards or to other causes.


How should teams perform this exercise?

•	 Teams should first complete each of the sub-sections, providing yes/no responses or selecting applicable items
   from a checklist, as indicated.
•	 Based on the responses to the questionnaires, teams should prepare a schedule outlining the areas identified
   where national auditing standards differ from ISAs, and noting whether the difference is likely to significantly
   affect the quality of audits conducted and/or a user’s understanding of the auditor’s report.
•	 The results of the analysis should then be discussed with the national standard-setter, experts from the
   profession, and other relevant technical counterparts for validation.
•	 Lastly, teams should summarize key differences and include the summary in the ROSC A&A report. Guidance
   on what to include in the report is provided in the annex.




3
    Applicable to jurisdictions where audit QA exists.
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




3. CHECKLISTS FOR ASSESSING KEY DIFFERENCES WITH ISA


A. OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS


1. Please indicate whether national auditing standards include the following key concepts:4

a. Procedures on client continuance and ethical requirements                                                        Covered by national
                                                                                                                                          YES
including independence                                                                                              standards? (Y/N)

Note significant differences with ISA




b. Establishing and documenting an overall audit strategy                                                           Covered by national
                                                                                                                    standards? (Y/N)      YES

Note significant differences with ISA




c. Developing an audit plan                                                                                         Covered by national
                                                                                                                    standards? (Y/N)      YES

Note significant differences with ISA




d. Audit risk assessment procedures (e.g., taking into account the                                                  Covered by national
                                                                                                                                          YES
entity’s environment and internal controls; identifying and assessing                                               standards? (Y/N)
the risks of material misstatement)

Note significant differences with ISA




e. Determining materiality                                                                                          Covered by national
                                                                                                                    standards? (Y/N)      YES

Note significant differences with ISA




4
    These concepts are derived from the ISAs relating to audit risk and strategy (300s) and appropriate audit documentation (500s).
                                                                                                                                                  5
                                           ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




f. Nature, timing and extent of audit procedures (i.e. tests of controls,              Covered by national
                                                                                                                 YES
substantive testing, sampling)                                                         standards? (Y/N)

Note significant differences with ISA




g. Direction, supervision and review of audits                                         Covered by national
                                                                                                                 YES
                                                                                       standards? (Y/N)

Note significant differences with ISA




h. Sufficiency and appropriateness of audit evidence                                   Covered by national
                                                                                                                 YES
                                                                                       standards? (Y/N)

Note significant differences with ISA




i. Documentation of audit evidence                                                     Covered by national
                                                                                                                 YES
                                                                                       standards? (Y/N)

Note significant differences with ISA




j. Quality control for firms that perform assurance and related services               Covered by national
                                                                                                                 YES
engagements (ISQC 1)                                                                   standards? (Y/N)

Note significant differences with ISA




                                                                                                                               6
                                            ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




B. COMMUNICATION WITH THOSE CHARGED WITH GOVERNANCE


The International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) established a framework for firms conducting
audits of historical information to communicate specific and significant matters with those charged with governance
of an entity. As noted in the standard, governance of an entity is often the collective responsibility of a body such as
a board of directors, supervisory board, partners or equivalent. The standard applies to all audits, with particular
considerations applicable to the audits of listed entities.

The following terms are used as defined in the IAASB’s Handbook of International Quality Control, Auditing, Review,
Other Assurance, and Related Services Pronouncements (2015):
• Those charged with governance – the person(s) or organization(s) with responsibility for overseeing the strategic
direction of the entity and obligations related to the accountability of the entity, including oversight of the financial
reporting process.
• Management – the person(s) with executive responsibility for the conduct of the entity’s operations. For
some entities, management includes some or all of those charged with governance e.g., executive members of a
governance board or an owner-manager.

2. Please indicate if ISA 260 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national auditing standard which
addresses communication between the auditors and those charged with governance.

ISA 260
Adopted in full?                                                National Standard




3. Are the following objectives of the auditor defined in national auditing standards? Select all that apply.

      Objectives of the auditor

        To communicate clearly with those charged with governance the responsibilities of the auditor with
        respect to the audit and provide an overview of the planned scope and timing of the audit

        To obtain from those charged with governance information relevant to the audit


        To provide those charged with governance with timely observations arising from the audit that are
        significant and relevant to their responsibility to oversee the financial reporting process

        To promote effective two-way communication between the auditor and those charged with governance


        Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                                7
                                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




4. Are auditors required to communicate the following matters to those charged with governance? Select all that apply.

      Matters to be communicated – all companies

        The auditor is responsible for forming and expressing an opinion on the financial statements that have
        been prepared by management with the oversight of those charged with governance

        The audit of the financial statements does not relieve management or those charged with governance of
        their responsibilities

        Overview of the planned scope and timing of the audit, including significant risks identified by the
        auditor

        How the auditor plans to address the significant risks of material misstatement due to fraud or error

        How the auditor plans to address areas of higher assessed risks of material misstatement

        The auditor’s approach to internal control relevant to the audit

        The application of the concept of materiality in the context of an audit

        The auditor’s views about significant qualitative aspects of the entity’s accounting practices, including
        accounting policies, accounting estimates and financial statement disclosures

        Significant difficulties (if any) encountered during the audit

        Circumstances that affect the form and content of the auditor’s report (if any)

        Other (please describe)




5. Are auditors of listed entities required to communicate the following matters to those charged with governance?
Select all that apply.

      Matters to be communicated – listed entities

        A statement that the engagement team (and others in the firm as appropriate), the firm, and when
        applicable, network firms have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence

        All relationships and other matters between the firm, network firms, and the entity that in the auditor’s
        professional judgment may reasonably be thought to bear on independence

        Total fees charged during the period covered by the financial statements for audit and non-audit
        services provided by the firm and network firms to the entity and components controlled by the entity

        Safeguards applied to eliminate identified threats to independence or reduce them to an acceptable level

        Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                              8
                                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




6. Indicate which (if any) of the following criteria are requirements for the communication process between auditors
and those charged with governance. Select all that apply.

           Requirements for communication

              The form, timing and expected general content of communication

              The auditor should evaluate whether the two-way communication has been adequate; if the
              communication has not been adequate, the auditor is required to evaluate the effect, if any, on the
              assessment of the risks of material misstatement and the ability to obtain sufficient appropriate audit
              evidence

              Matters required to be communicated are retained in the audit documentation

              Other (please describe)




C. FORMING AN OPINION AND REPORTING ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


The IAASB recently issued revised standards regarding the requirements for the auditor’s opinion and report on
financial statements. ISA 7005 (revised) aims to provide consistency and comparability in auditor reporting and
to increase the value and relevance of the auditor’s report to users of financial statements. The following terms are
used as defined in the Handbook of International Quality Control, Auditing, Review, Other Assurance, and Related
Services Pronouncements (2015):
• General purpose financial statements – financial statements prepared in accordance with a framework designed
to meet the common financial needs of a wide range of users.
• Unmodified opinion – the opinion expressed by the auditor when concluding that the financial statements are
prepared in all material respects with the applicable financial reporting framework.

7. Please indicate if ISA 700 (revised) has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national auditing
standard which addresses the form of the auditor’s opinion and reporting on the financial statements.

    ISA 700
Adopted in full?                                                                         National Standard




5
    ISA 700 (revised) is effective for audits of financial statements for periods ending on/after December 15, 2016
                                                                                                                                                   9
                                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




8. Please indicate if national auditing standards prescribe the following with respect to forming an opinion on the
financial statements. Select all that apply.

         Auditor’s opinion

            The auditor is required to form an opinion on whether the financial statements are prepared in all
            material respects in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework

            In order to form the opinion, the auditor is required to conclude on whether reasonable assurance has
            been obtained that the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, fraud or error

            The auditor’s opinion is based on sufficient audit evidence obtained during the engagement

            The opinion takes into account whether uncorrected misstatements are material, individually or in
            aggregate

            Qualitative aspects of the entity’s accounting practices are taken into consideration by the auditor in
            forming the opinion

            The auditor evaluates the relevance of an entity’s accounting policies and whether the policies are
            consistent with the applicable financial reporting framework

            The auditor assesses whether the accounting estimates made by management are reasonable

            The auditor considers whether the information presented in the financial statements are relevant,
            reliable, comparable and understandable and include adequate disclosures

            Auditors provide an unmodified opinion if the conclusion is that the financial statements are prepared
            in all material respects in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework

            Other (please describe)




9. Please indicate if national auditing standards prescribe the following with respect to the auditor’s report on the
financial statements. Select all that apply.
         Auditor’s report6
            The auditor’s report is required to be in writing

            The report is required to have a title which clearly indicates that it is the report of an independent auditor

            Auditor’s opinion

            The first section of the auditor’s report includes the auditor’s opinion




6
  Note that the section in the auditor’s report of listed entities with respect to key audit matters is discussed subsequently in this
questionnaire.
                                                                                                                                                  10
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




Auditor’s opinion

The opinion section includes the following:
  i. The name of the entity whose financial statements have been audited
  ii. Statement that the financial statements have been audited
  iii. The title of each statement comprising the financial statements
  iv. Reference to the notes of the financial statement, including the summary
  of significant accounting policies
  v. The date of, or period covered by, each financial statement

Basis of the opinion

The basis of the opinion section follows the “Opinion” and states the following:
  i. That the audit was conducted in accordance with national auditing standards
  ii. References to the auditor’s responsibility
  iii.	A statement that the auditor is independent of the entity according to ethical requirements
  iv. A statement that the auditor believes the audit evidence obtained is sufficient and appropriate to
  provide a basis for the opinion

The report addresses going concern

A statement of management’s responsibilities for the financial statements including those responsible
for the oversight of the financial reporting process

Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements including statements of the auditor’s
objectives, description of an audit and the auditor’s requirement to maintain professional skepticism

Name of the engagement partner

Signature of the auditor

Auditor’s address

Date of the auditor’s report

Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                     11
                                           ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




D. COMMUNICATING KEY AUDIT MATTERS


The IAASB recently issued a new standard regarding the communication of key audit matters in the auditor’s report
of the general purpose financial statements of listed companies. ISA 701 takes effect for the audits of financial
statements on/after December 15, 2016. Key audit matters are defined in the IAASB Handbook (2015) as those
matters which in the auditor’s professional judgment were the most significant in the audit. Key audit matters are
selected from matters communicated with those charged with governance.

10. Please indicate if ISA 701 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national auditing standard
which addresses the communication of key audit matters in the auditor’s report on the financial statements of listed
companies.
ISA 701
Adopted in full?                                               National Standard




11. Does the concept of “key audit matters” exist in national auditing standards? If so, indicate whether the following
requirements of ISA 701 are applicable. Select all that apply.

      Key audit matters - Selection

        Areas of higher assessed risk of material misstatement or significant risks

        Significant auditor judgments relating to areas in the financial statements that involved significant
        management judgment including accounting estimates

        The effect on the audit of significant events or transactions that occurred during the period

        The auditor determines which of the matters were the most significant during the audit and these are the
        key audit matters

        Other (please describe)




12. How are “key audit matters” required to be communicated according to national auditing standards? Indicate
whether the following requirements of ISA 701 are applicable. Select all that apply.

      Key audit matters - Communication

        The auditor is required to describe each key audit matter using an appropriate subheading as a separate
        section of the auditor’s report

        A statement to the effect that the matters were addressed in the context of the audit of the financial
        statements as a whole and does not provide a separate opinion is required

        Description of the key audit matters are to include a reference to the related disclosures in the financial
        statements where applicable

                                                                                                                              12
                                            ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




      Key audit matters - Communication

        A statement as to why the matter was considered to be one of the most significant is required

        Indicate how the matter was addressed in the audit

        A statement is required if a key audit matter was not included, for example, if law or regulations preclude
        public disclosure, or if the adverse consequences outweigh the public interest benefits

        Other (please describe)




E. MODIFICATIONS TO THE OPINION IN THE INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT


ISA 705 prescribes the information to be included in the auditor’s report where the auditor concludes that a
modification to the audit opinion is required. As with the new and revised standards regarding the auditor’s opinion
and reporting, ISA 705 takes effect for audits of financial statements on/after December 15, 2016. The following term
is used as defined in the IAASB Handbook (2015):
• Pervasive – a term used to describe the effects (or possible effects) on the financial statements of misstatements
that are undetected due to an inability to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence. Pervasive effects on the
financial statements are those that in the auditor’s judgment (i) are not confined to specific elements, accounts or
items; (ii) if confined, represent or could represent a substantial proportion of the financial statements; or (iii) in
relation to disclosures, are fundamental to user’s understanding.

13. Please indicate if ISA 705 (revised) has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national auditing
standard which addresses modification of the auditor’s opinion on the financial statements.

ISA 705
Adopted in full?                                                National Standard




14. Indicate whether modification to the auditor’s opinion is required under national auditing standards under the
following circumstances. Select all that apply.

      Modification to the auditor’s opinion

        The conclusion on the basis of the audit evidence obtained is that the financial statements as a whole are
        not free from material misstatement

        The auditor is unable to obtain sufficient and appropriate audit evidence to conclude that the financial
        statements as a whole are free from material misstatement

        Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                               13
                                           ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




15. Indicate the circumstances in which the auditor is required to express a qualified opinion under national auditing
standards. Select all that apply.

      Criteria for a qualified opinion

        The auditor having obtained sufficient audit evidence concludes that misstatements, individually or in
        aggregate are material, but not pervasive to the financial statements

        The auditor is unable to obtain sufficient and appropriate audit evidence on which to base the opinion
        but concludes that the possible effect on the financial statements could be material but not pervasive

        Other (please describe)




16. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

  Is the auditor required to express an adverse opinion under national auditing standards                        YES
  when having obtained sufficient audit evidence, concludes that misstatements, individually
  or in aggregate are both material and pervasive to the financial statements?

  Is the auditor required to disclaim an opinion under national auditing standards when                          YES
  unable to obtain sufficient audit evidence on which to base the opinion and concludes that
  the possible effects on the financial statements of undetected misstatements, if any, could be
  both material and pervasive?

  Is the basis of opinion section of the auditor’s report required to include a description of the               YES
  modification?




F. EMPHASIS OF MATTER PARAGRAPHS AND OTHER MATTER PARAGRAPHS


ISA 706 prescribes how auditors should communicate matters which are fundamental to user’s understanding of
financial statements. The following terms are used as defined in the standard:
• Emphasis of matter paragraph – a paragraph included in the auditor’s report that refers to a matter appropriately
presented or disclosed in the financial statements that in the auditor’s judgement is of such importance that it is
fundamental to users’ understanding
• Other matter paragraph – a paragraph included in the auditor’s report that refers to a matter other than those
presented or disclosed in the financial statements that in the auditor’s judgement is relevant to users’ understanding
of the audit, the auditor’s responsibilities or the auditor’s report.

17. Please indicate if ISA 706 (revised) has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national auditing
standard which addresses emphasis of matter and other matter paragraphs in the auditor’s report.

ISA 706
Adopted in full?                                               National Standard




                                                                                                                              14
                                            ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




18. Does the concept of an “emphasis of matter paragraph” exist in national auditing standards? If so, indicate whether
the following requirements of ISA 706 are applicable. Select all that apply.

      Emphasis of matter paragraph
      The auditor would not be required to modify the opinion as a result of the matter.

      The matter has not been determined to be a key audit matter to be communicated

      The paragraph should have a clear reference to the matter being emphasized and to relevant disclosures

      The paragraph refers only to information presented or disclosed in the financial statements

      Other (please describe)




19. Does the concept of an “other matters paragraph” exist in national auditing standards? If so, indicate if the
following requirements of ISA 706 are applicable. Select all that apply.

      Other matters paragraph
      The matter is not prohibited to be communicated by law or regulation

      The matter has not been determined to be a key audit matter to be communicated

      Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                               15
                                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




ANNEX: REPORTING ON DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NATIONAL AUDITING STANDARDS AND ISA


After completing the questionnaires, ROSC A&A teams should:
• Prepare a schedule of the key areas of divergence between national GAAP and ISA based on the responses
received and using professional judgment.
• Provide a description of each key difference identified and then outline the potential impact of the difference to a
user’s understanding of the general purpose financial statements. If no differences have been identified, this can be
stated in the table.
• Discuss the key differences identified with the national standard-setter and other recognized local experts in
financial reporting.
• Summarize the key differences in the ROSC A&A report. If a number of issues have been identified, teams
should consider including a detailed table in an annex to the report. The narrative in the report should include
comments from the national standard-setter with the rationale for the difference.

Schedule of key areas of divergence between national auditing standards and ISA for inclusion in the ROSC
A&A report

A. Overview of national auditing standards – All Relevant ISA
Description of key difference(s) national auditing standards                          Significance/ potential impact on auditor’s report (*)
v. ISA (*)




B. Communication with those charged with governance – ISA 260
Description of key difference(s) national auditing standards                          Significance/ potential impact on auditor’s report (*)
v. ISA (*)




C. Forming an opinion and reporting on the financial statements – ISA 700
Description of key difference(s) national auditing standards                          Significance/ potential impact on auditor’s report (*)
v. ISA (*)




D. Communicating key audit matters – ISA 701
Description of key difference(s) national auditing standards                          Significance/ potential impact on auditor’s report (*)
v. ISA (*)




* Should be drafted succinctly, bearing in mind readers of the report will include individuals with limited expertise in ISA.
                                                                                                                                                16
                                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.2 Auditing Standards Analysis




E. Modification to the audit opinion – ISA 705
Description of key difference(s) national auditing standards                          Significance/ potential impact on auditor’s report (*)
v. ISA (*)




F. Emphasis of matter and other matter paragraphs – ISA 706
Description of key difference(s) national auditing standards                          Significance/ potential impact on auditor’s report (*)
v. ISA (*)




* Should be drafted succinctly, bearing in mind readers of the report will include individuals with limited expertise in ISA.
                                                                                                                                                17
