 Reviewing the Impact of
Capacity Building in GFDRR
         OVERVIEW
Acknowledgments
Abigail Baca, Andrea Zanon, Barbara Minguez Garcia, Bouke Ottow, Fouad Bendimerad, Fernando
Cortes, Francis Ghesquiere, Francis Nkoka, Iwan Gunawan, Jared Mercadante, Jolanta Kryspin-
Watson, Laisa Obando, Luis Tineo, Maite Rodriguez, Manuel Alfredo Lopez Menjivar, Marc Forni,
Margaret Arnold, Michel Matera, Mikio Ishiwatari, Oscar Anil Ishizawa Escudero, Philip Karp,
Prashant Singh, Prema Gopalan, Ruby Mangunsong, Saurabh Dani, Swarna Kazi.




The report was developed by the University College London’s (UCL) City Leadership Initiative (CLI) and Institute for
Risk and Disaster Reduction (IRDR). The UCL team was led by Michele Acuto, Research Director and Professor in
Diplomacy and Urban Theory, and included Ilan Kelman, Joanna Faure Walker, Louisa Barker, and Zehra Zaidi. The
report was developed in collaboration with the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), with
support from Andres Gonzalez Flores, and the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice (GSURR), with
support from Federica Ranghieri.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of the authors. The text in
this publication may be reproduced for educational or nonprofit uses — in whole or in part, and in any form — without
special permission, provided acknowledgement of the sources is made. No use of this publication may be made
for resale or other commercial purpose without prior written consent from the authors. All images remain the sole
property of the source and may not be used for any purpose without written permission from the source.

Notes: Fiscal year (FY) runs from July 1 to June 30; all dollar amounts are in US ($) unless otherwise indicated.



Design: Miki Fernandez/ULTRAdesigns, Inc.




Cover photo: Turkmenistan, data processing and analysis. Photo credit: World Bank
 Reviewing the Impact of
Capacity Building in GFDRR




          December 2016
ii / Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR




                                   Table of Contents

                                   p1	    Report Overview

                                   p4	    Current Landscape: Stocktake Analysis Overview

                                   p6	    Current Practices: Case Study Overviews

                                   p8	    Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building

                                   p16	   Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan




World Bank Group President Jim
Yong Kim visits Colegio de Alto
Rendimiento in Chontabamba,
Peru. Photo: Domingo Giribaldi /
World Bank
                                                                                                    1




                                                                                      Report Overview



T
     he Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) devotes a signifi-
     cant proportion of its resources—up to 24 percent—to capacity-building efforts. In
     line with its mission, this is aimed at boosting the capacity of developing countries
to better understand emerging disaster risks, reduce their vulnerabilities to natural haz-
ards, and adapt to climate change. Capacity-building activities are generally integrated
into GFDRR projects to support the overall objectives, rather than standalone projects.

However, despite the level of investment, capacity building is often considered secondary to
larger activities. To date, some of GFDRR’s capacity-building activities have been perceived
as scattered by clients, partners, and colleagues at the World Bank. Moreover, there is little
systemic knowledge about the effectiveness and long-term impact of capacity-building
activities within GFDRR or, more generally, within the broader disaster risk management
(DRM) community. It appears, even anecdotally from current practice, that GFDRR could
better leverage the impact of capacity building.

In order to address this analysis and practice gap, this study assesses the effectiveness of
capacity building across the GFDRR portfolio. The report evaluated projects active in fiscal
years 2014 and 2015 (FY14 and FY15), focusing on “human capacity building – developing
and sharing knowledge and skills, as well as consensus and network building. This study
is composed of a stocktaking exercise and the development of in-depth case studies. This
approach offers a baseline methodology to more strategically capture the role of capacity
building in GFDRR, and more broadly, DRM operations.

This report is aimed at a two-fold audience: (i) the World Bank and GFDRR, to encourage
better planning and strategic thinking about the value of capacity building; (ii) GFDRR’s
Consultative Group and DRM community more generally, to highlight the critical role of
capacity building in enhancing the effectiveness of operations.

At an operational level, three key questions underline the study and frame its
recommendations:

1.	 Planning. How can capacity building be effectively planned?

2.	 Management. How can the impact of capacity building be identified and managed?

3.	 Sustainability. How can capacity-building activities be designed to have a lasting
    impact?

After a summary of the analysis underpinning the report, these three questions are answered
with operational recommendations. This section is of use both for program managers [e.g.
Task Team Leaders (TTLs)] and grant making facilities (e.g. GFDRR) in order to determine
which operational steps and considerations can lead to the most effective and valuable
activities.
2 / Report Overview


                      The following section outlines actionable scenarios for next steps GFDRR can take to improve
                      the value of its capacity-building efforts. Each scenario includes a menu of interventions to
                      choose from and implement. These scenarios include: (i) maintaining an already effective
                      status quo, making slight adjustments to strengthen GFDRR’s role as an effective facilitator
                      of capacity-building activities—Scenario one; (ii) developing a more carefully planned
                      approach that better captures the value added by capacity building and makes GFDRR a
                      more strategic enabler of activities in the field—Scenario two; or (iii) GFDRR becomes a key
                      provider of capacity-building activities—Scenario three.


                      An Actionable Plan on Capacity Building
                      The report advocates for the second scenario proposed, which is “Moderate Action.” The
                      study shows that the current status quo already is effective and capable of adding important
                      value to GFDRR funded activities. The authors, nevertheless, suggest small additional
                      steps to enhance the status quo, becoming more strategic about capacity building. In this
                      scenario, GFDRR is seen as cementing and enhancing its current function as an enabler,
                      albeit not a direct provider, of capacity-building activities. The interventions under scenario
                      two opt for a more strategic approach, with greater resources and staff time allocated that
                      could further increase the value added. Under this scenario there are four areas of strategic
                      intervention that could significantly enhance the impact of capacity building in GFDRR
                      supported projects: enhancing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) for capacity building;
                      supporting better dissemination of best practices and lessons learned; coordinating and
                      facilitating training and e-learning on DRM; and providing specific guidance, training, and
                      resources for project leaders (e.g. TTLs) to support a well-designed approach to capacity-
                      building activities.


                      The Study and its Methods
                      The study underlying this report included an initial “stocktaking” review of capacity-
                      building activities. This exercise was conducted across a database of 300 GFDRR projects,
                      active during FY14 and FY15, to highlight trends, challenges, and areas for further research.
                      In addition, a set of 10 case studies, selected in terms of geographical location, as well as
                      a variety of project typologies (grant size, length and GFDRR pillars of engagement) were
                      analyzed. (See Annexes A and B in the full report)

                      Both the case studies and the stocktaking inform the answers to the three “key questions”
                      and “next steps” scenarios outlined at the end of the document.
                                                                                       Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 3



Defining Capacity Building




T
           here is a lack of consensus about the operational definition of “capacity building;”
           the phrase hides a vast landscape of activities, ideas, and engagements. A
           World Bank Institute (WBI) report on Capacity Development (2009)1 noted that
           most definitions are very broad, making it difficult to evaluate the outcomes
of such work or understand its impact. Definitions can encompass “technical” (tools
and infrastructures), “financial” (investments), and “human” (knowledge and skills)
capacity. Using this broader definition, an Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) report
(2012)2 determined that GFDRR “has been, first and foremost, a capacity-building
program, which has accounted for 81% of project commiments.” While important to
make a case for capacity-building assessments, this assessment might need refinement
in focus to offer more directly-applicable operational reccomendations.

For this study, capacity building has been defined as the process of developing
and strengthening the skills, instincts, abilities, processes, and resources that                                        Capacity building has
organizations and communities need to adapt and manage and reduce disaster risks.                                        been defined as the
As such, this report focuses on human capacity. Interestingly, when asked to define                                      process of developing
capacity building, the TTLs who were interviewed also focused upon human capacity.                                       and strengthening
                                                                                                                         the skills, instincts,
The research team identified capacity building as activities that contribute to one                                      abilities, processes
or more of the following3: (1) raising awareness; (2) enhancing skills; (3) improving                                    and resources that
                                                                                                                         organizations and
consensus; (4) fostering coalitions/networks; and (5) facilitating decision making. In
                                                                                                                         communities need to
order to better assess the value of capacity building, operations have been classified as                                adapt and manage/
the following activity types: (1) knowledge products; (2) short-term learning; (3) long-                                 reduce natural
term learning; (4) consultations with stakeholders; (5) campaigns; and (6) knowledge                                     disaster risks.
exchange, fostering partnerships, and network development.

The project has taken into account two types of capacity-building impact: impact on
the project’s delivery (shaping the way the project is planned and carried out), and the
impact of the project on beneficiaries and partners (shaping the project’s outcomes
and their effectiveness). In this sense capacity building is, therefore, not always a
main goal of a project; rather it can be deployed to enable a project’s objective, acting
as a tool to support other goals.



1
 	 WBI (2009) The Capacity Development Results Framework: A strategic and results- orientated approach to
    learning for capacity development, http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/gfdrr_gpr.pdf http://siteresources.
    worldbank.org/CSO/Resources/228716-1369241545034/The_Capacity_Development_Results_Framework.pdf
2
 	 IEG (2012) GFDRR Global Program Review, volume 6, issue 2. http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/gfdrr_gpr.pdf
3
  	 Drawing from the WBI (2009) Capacity Building Results Framework.
4



Current Landscape: Stocktake Analysis Overview


                        T
                               he study began by taking stock of the landscape of GFDRR engagements in order to
                               understand the overall scope of capacity-building activities.4 Following are the key
                               take-away lessons from this exercise:
Figure 1. Average
Percentage of Funding   •	How much does GFDRR invest? Twenty-four percent of the GFDRR active portfolio
for Capacity-building       in FY14 and FY15 was allocated for capacity building5. However, as discussed in the case
Activities Built into       studies (appendix B), the majority of projects had a significantly higher percentage of
GFDRR Grants Across         capacity building than was indicated in the budget5. Capacity building accounting for $33
the FY14 and FY15           million (24 percent of GFDRR funding) is, therefore, a conservative estimate.
Active Portfolio
                        •	Is capacity building a project driver? There are few projects that are driven by
                            capacity building; only a small portion of GFDRR projects dedicate more than 50 percent
                            of their budget towards these activities. The majority of capacity-building activities are
              24%           supplementary to broader DRM objectives.

                        •	Where are most capacity building-driven projects? The selection of projects
                            driven by these activities are mostly housed within the former GFDRR capacity-building
                            program, created in 2010 in cooperation with the WBI. The program focused on
                            supporting the development of DRM training courses, including a number of e-learning
                            courses. 6 As part of the program’s strategy, partnerships were formed with prominent
                            players in developing countries for course delivery and marketing.

                        •	How does capacity building align to GFDRR? The largest expenditure, and over
                            half the total budget for capacity-building activities, lies in pillars one (risk identification)
                            and two (risk reduction).

                        •	 Why do small projects count? Small projects (in budget size) tend to have substantial
                            capacity-building commitments (41 percent of the projects with over 50 percent of their
                            budget dedicated to capacity building are small in grant size).

                        •	What are key capacity-building activities? The most common capacity-building
                            activities are short-term learning activities and the development of knowledge products.
                            Out of the 300 projects 177 (59 percent) reported having at least one short-term learning
                            activity, and 94 projects (31 percent) reported the development of knowledge products.

                        •	Who benefits from capacity building? The primary beneficiaries of capacity-
                            building activities include government and institutional counterparts (191 and 109 of the
                            300 projects, respectively). The third most common beneficiaries are community groups
                            (63 projects), followed by DRM professionals or technicians as the next most common
                            (50 projects). A smaller proportion of projects are aimed at benefiting the private sector
                            (15 projects) or the wider DRM community (16 projects).

                        4
                         	 The full stocktake is available in annex A in the full report.
                        5
                         	 It is important to note that capacity-building budget per project was calculated using a proxy. Capacity building is
                           not accounted for in a separate project line, therefore, the proxy was calculated by adding the budget line “logistics”
                           (training, workshops, conference facilities and stakeholder consultation) with “dissemination costs” (translation,
                           editing, and publication).	
                        6
                         	 See Annex C in the full report for a list of GFDRR supported training & e-learning courses.
                                                                      Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 5




Figure 2. Total Capacity-building Expenditure Across the FY14 and FY15 Active Portfolio Disaggregated by Pillar (in US$ millions)

PILLAR 1                    PILLAR 2                   PILLAR 3                    PILLAR 4                   PILLAR 5
Risk                        Risk                       Preparedness                Financial                  Resilient
Identification              Reduction                                              Protection                 Recovery




     $9.46                      $8.91                       $5.31                       $3.12                      $4.22
      29%                        27%                        16%                         10%                         13%




                                                       Cross-Cutting
                                                           $1.51
                                                            5%

Figure 3. The Number of Different Capacity-building Activities Across the FY14 and FY15 Active Portfolio

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
  50
   0
        Knowledge        Short-term        Long-term       Consultations       Network          Campaigns              Not
         products         learning          learning                         development                             specified
6



Current Practices: Case Studies Overview
This section outlines some of the key findings from the 10 case studies to take a deeper dive in the current capacity-building
practices of GFDRR projects. The full case studies provide greater depth and can be found in Annex B in the full report.


 1   	 Central America Probabilistic Risk Assessment (CAPRA)                                         4   	 Facilitating Policy Dialogue
                                                                                                           in Haiti
Long-term engagement. The CAPRA                The “Knowledge Manager.” The World                    Convening power. The DRM specialist
initiative was rolled out in Central and       Bank knowledge manager, a role not                    funded by this grant was able to
South America from 2008 -2016 in three         frequently included within GFDRR-                     successfully leverage the World Bank’s
main phases. In the first and second phases,   supported initiatives, was crucial to                 convening power to facilitate coordination
World Bank specialists played a central role   integrating key lessons learned into the              between ministries and international donors
in generating risks maps.                      project design. The knowledge manager was             and partners.
Balancing local ownership and technical        responsible for interviewing the trainees
                                                                                                     Knowledge notes. In the project plan,
support. In the third phase, there was         and reporting back on recommendations
                                                                                                     funding was allocated to create knowledge
a reduction in World Bank involvement          and lessons learned.
                                                                                                     notes. The knowledge notes captured the
in order to encourage local ownership,                                                               experience of mainstreaming DRM into
sustainability and institutional capacity                                                            sector policies.
building. This objective needed to be
balanced with providing the necessary
amount of technical support to participants.




                                                                                                      Haiti


                                                                  El Salvador, Nicaragua
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                     1      2
                                                                                           Honduras, Guatemala




                                                                                                 3    Peru

 2   	 South-South Cooperation                  3   	 Peru Safer Schools
       in India, Honduras and                  Rely on previous experiences. Part of
       Guatemala                               this initiative’s success can be attributed to
Rely on local communities. The                 utilizing learning from other projects. When
sustainability of community-based capacity-    creating new plans and tools, the project
building projects was enhanced by working      assessed what knowledge was needed and
with and through existing community            how existing expertise could be strategically
organizations and networks.                    incorporated to support the process.
Peer support. Peer-to-peer learning            Integrate capacity building into
networks, and a training of trainers           institutions. Capacity building is effective
approach were key to accelerate and            when it is linked to an existing institutional
scale up capacity-building and resilience      process and integrated into existing networks
initiatives.                                   and projects, in this case a government-led
                                               census of school infrastructure.
                                                                                       Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 7




      6      	 Resilient Cities in MENA                  7   	 Urban Resilience                         8   	 Resilient Recovery and
     Supporting small enterprises. DRM                         in Bangladesh                                  Financial Protection in the
     capacity building can occur through                Link across sectors. The institutional                Philippines
     supporting small-scale private enterprises         foundation established to deliver project      Train the trainers. From the group of
     Repeated interactions. To deliver long-            outputs—including an advisory committee,       training participants, “training leaders”
     term results for DRM, repeat interaction,          scientific consortium, and focus groups—       were assigned who were responsible for
     involving the same participants, is effective.     effectively built relationships across         evaluating the learning of their peers and
                                                        government departmental silos.                 provide feedback to organizers. Adjustments
     Flexible project management. enables                                                              were made accordingly, resulting in a
     activities to be planned responding to the         E-learning and flexible engagements. The
                                                        use of e-learning tools gave participants      responsive and effective program. The
     participants’ needs.                                                                              training of trainers was crucial to scaling up
                                                        with full-time jobs much-needed flexibility.
                                                        However, no progress indicators were           and sustaining the initiative.
                                                        developed, and therefore, the impact on        Review capacity-building needs. A
                                                        government staff learning cannot be easily     capacity review before the training ensured
                                                        determined.                                    that the workshops were relevant to
                                                                                                       participants’ needs.

                                                                                                        9   	 Mainstreaming DRM in
                                                                                                              Indonesia
                                                                                                       Broad local ownership. Local ownership
                                                                                                       of technical assistance outputs, such as
                                                                                                       the disaster risk financing strategy, was
                                                                                                       encouraged by engaging a number of
                                                                                                       stakeholders throughout the life cycle of the
                                                                          10   Japan
                                                                                                       project.
     Lebanon
         6                                                                                             Know your (local) partner. WBI worked
 6                                         Bangladesh                                                  with the National Agency for Disaster Risk
Egypt                                       7                                                          Management (BNPB) to build its capacity
                                    2                                                                  to share knowledge with local and district
                                   India                            8   Philippines                    agencies, as well as an international
               6
               Djibouti                                                                                audience. WBI conducted a review of
                                                                                                       BNPB’s capacity, ensuring that it had the
                                                                                                       human, technical, and financial resources to
                                                                    9   Indonesia
                                                                                                       sustain the knowledge exchange program.
     5
                                                                                                       10 	   Learning from Mega Disasters
                                                                                                       Create value that is relevant at the local
         5   	 Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) and Recovery Framework                            level. Adopting a participatory process in
               in Malawi                                                                               order to select the content and design, and
     Government staff turnover and                      DRM champions. DRM champions were              to create the knowledge notes ensured that
     sustainability. A degree of institutional          identified, and proved to be key actors        they were of value to the targeted countries.
     capacity was lost between the 2012 and             in carrying forward skills between the         Sustaining (virtual) engagements. The
     2015 PDNA training, due to government              different interventions. These champions       online community of practice was an
     staff turnover. However, the development           also provided knowledge for the future and     effective means of scaling the knowledge
     of a multi-stakeholder network, including          helped to share the methodology with a         exchange in order to transfer the lessons
     non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and          wider audience.                                to a wider audience. However, despite the
     international institutions, enabled a means                                                       growth in membership, the withdrawal of
     of sustaining a significant proportion of                                                         World Bank engagement after the grant
     institutional capacity.                                                                           end date led to a decrease in member
                                                                                                       participation.
8



Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building
Operational Recommendations for Project Managers and
Grant-making Facilities


                      R
                            esearch findings from the report not only speak to the value added from capacity
                            building to GFDRR operations, but also to the important need to better plan, monitor,
                            and evaluate its contribution to broader DRM efforts. In particular, the case studies
                      and stocktake analysis highlight a series of answers to the three core questions set out in
                      the introduction:

                      (1)	 How can capacity building be effectively planned?
                      (2)	How can the impact of capacity building be identified and managed?
                      (3)	How can capacity-building activities be designed to have a lasting impact?

                      Below, answers and related operational recommendations for each question have been
                      highlighted. These answers are useful for both program managers (e.g. TTLs) and grant
                      making facilities (e.g. GFDRR) to determine which operational steps and considerations
                      can lead to the most effective and valuable activities.


         Question 1   Q1   Answer 1: Designing capacity-building activities in a project
                                   proposal
         How can
capacity building     Thinking strategically about capacity building from the inception phase of a project;
   be effectively     assessing, monitoring, and evaluating throughout; and documenting experiences, can
                      substantially increase projects’ impact, especially for smaller initiatives.
        planned?
                      Capacity building is not always clearly delineated as “capacity building.” These activities
                      can occur outside of specifically identified line items and project proposals—through the
                      process of continual learning, exchange, and acting as part of project implementation.
                      This informal or indirect capacity building can be difficult to document. Tangible outputs
                      or outcomes are challenging to identify. Therefore, assessment throughout the project is
                      necessary.

                      In this study, it was established that few projects fully monitored activities and outputs
                      (e.g. the number of workshop participants), and even fewer monitored capacity-building
                      outcomes. A handful of projects had a review of a particular training (e.g. the 2012 Malawi
                      PDNA). However, this was not undertaken consistently; a post-training report for the
                      2015 Malawi PDNA has not been created. These outcomes are not usually included within
                      measurement and evaluation progress reports, and therefore might not be easily accessible
                      or comparable.
                                                                                    Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 9



A training and needs assessment review was carried out prior to the PDNA training in the
Philippines, laying the foundation for future interaction with stakeholders, and allowing capacity-
building activities to be tailored to the needs of local participants. Capacity reviews should be
cognizant of available human, financial, and technical resources. As part of the same project, a
review of human capacity was undertaken for the Philippines Project Monitoring and Evaluation
System for DRM. However, after a three-day training program, the Office of Civil Defense
did not have the information and communication technology capacity for this system to be
institutionalized. As a result, the project required an extension.



Operational Recommendations
 Recommendation # 1 Capacity building is more likely to be effective when identified as a
goal in the planning stage, and based on
i)	 reviews of existing capacity and capacity needs, and
ii)	 a consideration of the institutional and external contexts.
    Recommendation # 2     Following the definition outlined in the introduction, include
capacity-building activities within both project design and budget. Identify, which
components should be marked as capacity-building activities, including describing
expected, informal capacity building, such as continual learning through implementation.
  Recommendation # 3 Selecting indicators to monitor throughout project implementation
ensures the role of capacity-building activities (and investments) are clearly assessed. This
links capacity building to defined outcomes in proposals and allows the TTL and GFDRR to
assess progress throughout implementation and upon project completion. See question 3
in this section for further information.
    Recommendation # 4    Developing a timeline for capacity-building activities in collab-
oration with local stakeholders provides a clear project implementation structure for both
the project manager and the client.
 Recommendation # 5 Including a mid-term review of capacity-building activities enables
progress to be monitored and adjustments to implementation to be made accordingly, if
necessary.


    Q1   Answer 2: Strategically identify activity types and beneficiaries

When developing the project proposal, it is key to identify the most suitable capacity-
building activities and their beneficiaries, given the objectives and the scope of the
project. This means strategically putting capacity building “in context” of the project’s
overall goal(s), not just as a subsidiary activity. Extensive literature confirms that the
activity selection, in terms of time horizon—long term vs. short term, and type 7—should
follow an assessment of: existing capacities (local and GFDRR); capacity needed (locally);


	 As defined above: (1) knowledge products; (2) short-term learning; (3) long-term learning; (4) consultations with
7

  stakeholders; (5) campaigns; (6) knowledge exchange/fostering partnerships/ network development
10 / Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building


                              and lessons learned from previous actions (supported by GFDRR, and when possible,
                              by other donors and stakeholders). Furthermore, a participatory process of selecting
                              capacity-building activities and beneficiaries encourages ownership of the process and
                              local sustainability of its outcomes.
                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1 Capacity-building activities can and should include a combination
                              of complementary activities (e.g. workshop followed by knowledge products). This is
                              already practiced in part - 75 percent of GFDRR projects with capacity building in their
                              proposals had more than one type of capacity-building activity. However, these activities
                              would benefit from more strategic thinking. Case studies and the stocktake show that,
                              though most common activity is short-term learnings, there is a tendency to combine
                              different activities, targeting different audiences, rather than planning a set of capacity-
                              building activities as connected processes.
                               Recommendation # 2        A clear phase of consultation with the clients—and, ideally,
                              a number of relevant stakeholders—is key to legacy. Formal consultation allows the
                              identification of the most appropriate capacity-building activities and beneficiaries, and
                              enhances the chances that these activities are locally owned and, thus, more sustainable,
                              beyond GFDRR efforts, in the long term.


                              In the Bangladesh Urban Resilience Project, stakeholder consultations were organized with
                              approximately 40 different government ministries and organizations, academic institutions, and
                              civil society members in order to decide on the composition and coordination of the focus groups.
                              This approach gave participating organizations greater ownership of the process and, ultimately,
                              greater sustainability. Although the focus groups were not intended to continue after the project
                              outputs were created, the multi- stakeholder focus groups continue to have a working relationship,
                              discussing the challenges and opportunities they face. Furthermore, one of the focus groups has
                              formed its own Urban Resilience Unit.




                               Q1 Answer 3: Where possible, identify and build upon previous
                              capacity-building activities

                              Continuity of capacity-building activities aids effectiveness. Many case studies built
                              upon previous World Bank implemented capacity-building activities. This is easier when
                              consecutive projects are led by the same TTL. For example, the Malawi 2015 PDNA built upon
                              the 2012 PDNA, expanding upon and increasing the skillset of the participants. Given that
                              many capacity-building activities are short-term learnings, linking activities creates a more
                              sustained capacity building and learning engagement.


                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1       Consult formally with the regional or country focal point to
                              ascertain whether previous capacity-building activities have taken place, which could
                              compliment the new initiative.
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 11


 Recommendation # 2         If conducting a capacity review, ascertain whether the targeted
beneficiary has already participated in either Bank-led or other capacity-building activities
that are relevant to the project initiative.



Q2  Answer 1: Developing M&E as a way to understand impact                                      Question 2
and create value
                                                                                                How can the impact
There are two main purposes driving M&E for capacity building: i) accountability, and ii)       of capacity building
learning to improve performance. Technically speaking, M&E of capacity building should
focus on the quality and relevance of efforts and their ability to promote immediate changes.
                                                                                                be identified and
Given that the duration between capacity-building interventions and their outcomes can be       managed?
long (longer than the project) and stretched across different stakeholders and sectors, M&E
generally focuses on the immediate changes in a specific project, organization, or activity.
In addition, it must be pragmatic, simple, and its costs should not outweigh the benefits.

Operational Recommendations
 Recommendation # 1 M&E of capacity building should be included in the project proposal.
A description of capacity-building activities—including activity type and beneficiaries, as
discussed in question 1—should be outlined, followed by a series of indicators. Inputs and
capacity-building objectives should be clearly linked to intended outputs and outcomes
(see figure 3, annex C in the full report for further information). These indicators should
then be monitored throughout all project phases, through impact evaluation. All projects
should include indicators to measure immediate outcomes of capacity-building activities
such as “raised awareness.” For extra depth, projects can include indicators measuring
broader and longer-term outcomes, such as “formulated policies.” In order to monitor and
evaluate, assessments are generally done at least twice throughout the activity, at the mid-
term juncture and upon completion.


 Recommendation # 2       Both the progress and final assessment should also seek ways
to describe informal capacity building (as discussed above), even if anecdotally. Not
everything should be labelled as capacity building. Rather, capacity building should be
accepted as both a formal and informal process and described as such.


 Recommendation # 3      M&E to improve performance was identified as a key component
by many of the TTLs interviewed. Here, M&E is seen as an illustration of changes
brought, processes and procedures followed, the level of satisfaction of beneficiaries and
partners, etc. Knowledge notes or short reports and briefs, perhaps following a common
framework, can help to communicate the main lessons learned. These can then be built
upon systematically.
12 / Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building


               Question 3      Q3  Answer 1: Consider whether mechanisms to scale up or sustain
                              the learning can be incorporated.
How can capacity-
building activities           The outcome of legacy thinking includes a lasting commitment from clients to mainstream DRM
                              into development policies and planning. Mechanisms are needed through which DRM interest,
   be designed to             knowledge, and skills can be retained and scaled to create a self-sustaining post-project legacy.
    have a lasting
          impact?
                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1         Consider whether a training of trainers approach can be
                              incorporated, even after the mid-project review. The trainings offered can focus upon
                              training a smaller group, which would then be equipped to train others in their country.
                               Recommendation # 2         Training of trainers needs to consider two operational questions:
                              i)	 What knowledge and skills does a person need to be able to train others?
                              ii)	 What structures will be available for the person to pass on knowledge to others in his/
                                   her country?


                              In the Philippines, a training-of-trainers module was included within the 2011 PDNA program. Upon
                              project completion, “champions” were identified and tasked with rolling out PDNA trainings across
                              government authorities as well as to Local Government Units (LGUs). The module was designed to
                              equip the “champions” with the necessary skills and knowledge to train others. Another GFDRR
                              project ran a DRM capacity building program across LGUs. Establishing these DRM structures and
                              processes in LGUs was critical for an effective PDNA training rollout.


                               Recommendation # 3       Consider whether (and what) knowledge products can be
                              produced by the project (e.g. manuals or e-learning modules), which can help to create
                              institutional memory.


                              The WBI worked with BNPB in Indonesia to create learning modules to be used both internally and
                              to scale learning to local DRM agencies. Internally, the modules allow knowledge to be passed onto
                              new staff, thus creating institutional memory.



                               Recommendation # 4 When organizing a knowledge exchange, consider how the community
                              of practice will be sustained.
                              i)	 Create an online community of practice. This could require additional funding for a
                                  community of practice manager after the project end date. Alternatively, local community
                                  of practice coordinators could be designated.
                              ii)	 Organize a follow up event to ensure another opportunity to develop relationships and
                                   share knowledge.
                                                                        Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 13


Q3  Answer 2: Where possible/appropriate include non-governmental
local partners

Projects that identify and target key local actors, and encourage a participatory approach
to capacity building, result in greater ownership of processes and outcomes by local
stakeholders.

In a number of case studies, including key actors from government, universities, and
civil society strengthened the outcomes of the project and resulted in long-term shifts in
the local risk management landscape. Including non-governmental actors is particularly
useful in situations when there is high staff turnover in government institutions. Non-
governmental actors, such as civil society and academia, often have relatively lower
turnover rates. Therefore, they can be competent at taking ownership of the project and
ensuring its continuation.


Operational Recommendations
 Recommendation # 1       When possible identify a local delivery partner to assist in project
outputs and project legacy.


In the Peru Safer Schools Project, a team of engineers were contracted to develop retrofitting
solutions. These engineers were selected from the Pontifical Catholic University of Peru and the
Japan-Peru Center for Earthquake Engineering Research and Disaster Mitigation based at the
National University of Engineering in Peru. Support was also provided from Universidad de los
Andes in Colombia. Using knowledge from local academic platforms helped create an enabling
environment for DRM and facilitated relationships between the Universities and the Ministry of
Education. Local expertise, rather than that provided by an external consultant, is often a more
trusted knowledge source.




 Recommendation # 2 When possible include a number of local stakeholders in capacity-
building activities.


In Malawi, a degree of institutional capacity was lost between the 2012 and 2015 PDNA training
due to ministry staff turnover. However, the development of a multi-stakeholder network, including
local NGOs and international institutions enabled a means of sustaining a significant proportion of
institutional capacity.
14 / Planning, Managing, and Sustaining Capacity Building


                               Q3   Answer 3: Maintaining a flexible approach

                              Processes of consultation, learning, and knowledge exchange require an adaptive approach,
                              but must also retain focus on, and commitment to, the long-term project goals. Factors to
                              account for include differing rates of learning and changes in the external environment (e.g.
                              sudden political or environmental events) and changes in institutions (e.g. leaders, and
                              personnel). While not advocating for doing away with project planning—a cornerstone to the
                              previous key question—a degree of flexibility might ensure that capacity-building activities
                              are responsive to their beneficiaries and contexts while retaining the fundamental goals.


                              Operational Recommendations
                               Recommendation # 1        Periodically review the utility and applicability of capacity-
                              building activities in order to adjust capacity-building efforts during the course of the
                              project without losing focus on the main project goal(s). Document the adjustments made
                              in project progress reviews.


                               Recommendation # 2         Including a “knowledge manager” or a facilitating agency for
                              knowledge management and project development (e.g. the World Bank) can ensure that
                              learning is monitored, and that observations are integrated into project implementation.



                              For the CAPRA initiative, the World Bank hired a knowledge manager who was responsible for
                              interviewing the trainees and reporting back on lessons learned. Throughout its duration, these
                              lessons were integrated into project implementation, and included the format of capacity-building
                              activities. This feedback process significantly altered the course of the CAPRA initiative by shifting
                              from a Bank-led process to a locally owned approach.




                              By contrast, for the Philippines PDNA training, local knowledge managers were selected by the
                              consultant, who drew from a pool of workshop participants. The objective was for these individuals
                              to become future PDNA trainers. Their secondary role was monitoring the learning of their peers
                              and feeding this information back to the implementing consultant. This allowed the consultant to
                              adapt capacity building activities to the needs of the participants throughout the implementation of
                              the project, resulting in more effective and locally owned DRM capacity.
                                                                     Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 15


                                                                                                   St. Lucia: Discussing the surface
                                                                                                   water and slope stability issues
                                                                                                   and potential drainage solutions
                                                                                                   at a community meeting. Photo
                                                                                                   credit: David Ramos




Monitoring learning activities
(synthesized from the Capacity Development Results Framework)
Learning activities, for monitoring purposes, are actions taken, or work performed, by which
inputs are converted into specific outputs. Activities, such as providing training, conducting a      Existing World
workshop, etc. are designed to deliver outputs that enable learning objectives and outcomes to        Bank Resources:
be achieved.                                                                                          The Capacity
Inputs are the financial, human, and other resources mobilized to support activities undertaken       Development
by a capacity-building program.                                                                       Results Framework
Input indicators measure the quantity (and sometimes the quality) of resources provided               The WBI produced
for program activities. For capacity building, these can include: funding (counterpart funds,         “The Capacity
co-financing, grants); human resources (number of person-years for client/partner agencies,           Development Results
consultants, and technical advisers); equipment, materials, and supplies, or recurrent costs of       Framework” (2009)
these items (e.g. textbooks).                                                                         which provides the
                                                                                                      theoretical basis behind,
Outputs are the products and services resulting from a learning activity designed to generate
                                                                                                      and a framework for
learning outcomes. The key distinction between outputs (specific goods or services) and learning
                                                                                                      designing, implementing,
outcomes is that the former typically takes the form of an increase in supply of knowledge and
                                                                                                      monitoring, managing,
information. In contrast, learning outcomes reflect behavioral changes resulting from the use
                                                                                                      and evaluating capacity
and application of acquired knowledge and information.
                                                                                                      development in
Output indicators measure the quantity (and sometimes the quality) of the goods or services           development programs.
created or provided through the use of inputs. In capacity building, these might include              The framework includes
the number of people trained, the number of new courses offered, and the number of new                learning outcomes and
consultations conducted.                                                                              objectives, which are
Objectives can be thought of as an indicator for a given outcome. Capacity building outcomes          a useful for project
are reached through the articulation of learning objectives.                                          managers.

Outcomes are changes that occur in an individual or a group of individuals such as improvements
in knowledge and skills; changes in motivation and attitude with respect to a particular issue;
occurrences in the broader organizational or social environment, which are embodied in
improved processes or new products and services.
16



Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan



            C
                 apacity building has already added much, and has the potential to add even further, to
                 GFDRR projects. The overview of the stocktake and case studies have demonstrated
                 the reach, substantial investment, and variety of activities at hand when we consider
            capacity building as a component of GFDRR operations.

            But what now for GFDRR? How can the ‘”value added” functions of capacity building be
            enhanced in future projects? This section outlines three possible roadmaps for further
            action by GFDRR, ranging from simple consideration (scenario one), to a more strategic
            approach (scenario two), to full investment (scenario three). The research team outlines
            here what seems the most effective action plan of the three. The authors believe that the
            second scenario, focused on strategic “wins” without a major overhaul, would lead to the
            most effective benefits. The final decision, however, rests with GFDRR and its consultative
            group.
                                                                   Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 17



          Business as usual: “Maintain the status quo”
 Scenario One
—GFDRR highlights its position as effective facilitator of
capacity-building activities
While the status quo could be easily criticised by an external, uninitiated eye, the
current state of capacity building in GFDRR projects is already encouraging. As has
been demonstrated throughout the in-depth case studies, significant value is added to
GFDRR projects through capacity-building activities. The authors believe three minimal
interventions could further sustain this effective status quo and ensure GFDRR continues
to benefit from capacity-building activities. These potential next steps do not require
substantial or strategic adjustments, as in the other two scenarios, but rather are thought
of as using current resources, and are focused on GFDRR enhancing M&E, supporting better
dissemination of best practices and lessons learned, and continuing the coordination and
facilitation of training and e-learning.



Intervention 1: M&E
Systematic M&E of capacity building is critical to ensuring that capacity building is deployed
in a strategic rather than ad hoc manor. A systematic M&E framework for accountability
will ensure that capacity-building activities are clearly linked to defined objectives and
outcomes in project proposals and both the TTL and GFDRR can determine the extent to
which progress towards these has been achieved during project implementation and at
the project close. Equally, a continued review and analysis effort—as represented by this
report—is fundamental to maintaining an effective appreciation of the value added of
capacity-building activities. Equally, it is central to avoid path dependencies, unnecessary
duplications, and unexpected negative externalities to these activities.

Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

n	 Include capacity building within M&E requirements. This includes ensuring that it is
   accounted for in the proposed budget. Requirements should include a description of
   capacity-building activities, including activity type and beneficiaries (as discussed in
   the section on capacity-building planning above) in project proposals. Outputs such as
   number of participants trained should be monitored; equally, a selection of capacity-
   building indicators for TTLs to choose from should be integrated into the GFDRR M&E
   framework – the indicators outlined in the Capacity Development Results Framework
   provide one possible model (see figure 3, annex C in the full report). In this scenario the
   indicators should focus on immediate outcomes of capacity-building activities such as
   “skills gained” and “improved consensus” (for examples see outcomes 1-4 in figure 3,
   annex C in the full report).
n	 Continuation and formalisation of the current systematic assessment exercise (as
   represented in this report) to allow for overall GFDRR strategic planning on capacity
   building. With M&E indicators in place, a more effective assessment of impact can be
   undertaken. With more detailed data, it would be possible to analyze which capacity-
   building activities are the most effective across the GFDRR portfolio and prioritise
   investments accordingly. At a later date, a longitudinal assessment of trends will enable
   a more strategic overview.
18 / Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan


                          Intervention 2: Sharing knowledge, best practices and lessons learned
                          Dissemination of lessons learned and better communication on current activities can improve
                          capacity-building activities at an operational level. Equally, the roles played by GFDRR, as
                          facilitators and convener, as well as the support given to multiple capacity-building activities and
                          their outcomes should be explained and highlighted, in order for TTLs to be able to make better
                          use of these resources.

                          Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

                          n	 Integrate more clearly a section on capacity building in GFDRR’s annual report, flagging the
                             value added of these activities for the broader GFDRR portfolio.
                          n	 Dissemination of lessons learned (including the case studies in annex B in the full report)
                             and better communication on current activities can improve capacity-building activities at
                             an operational level. One platform for these lessons could be The Resilience and Disaster
                             Risk Management (DRM) Global Solutions Group’s (GSG) recently launched knowledge
                             platform, but there are several other venues that could be explored.


                          Intervention 3: Coordinating and facilitating training and e-learning
                          The delivery of capacity-building assistance to clients is offered through multi-year programmatic
                          engagements with key institutions. This decentralized delivery mode of capacity-building
                          efforts includes training, mentoring, knowledge sharing and South-South collaborations
                          among different partners. Partners are involved in developing core curricula, localizing these
                          core curricula to specifics of the countries, and also in delivering training activities. GFDRR
                          partnership with national, regional, and international organizations contributes to efficient use
                          of scarce resources by reducing duplications and overlaps in developing training materials and
                          tools, allowing joint and coordinated capacity-building interventions based on the comparative
                          advantages of partners, and leveraging resources by creating a pool of shared capacity-building
                          assets — training materials and standardized learning packages, knowledge and guidance
                          notes, multimedia products — accessible in public domain.

                          Suggested Next steps for GFDRR:

                          n	 These partnerships need to be maintained to ensure the sustainability of these initiatives.
                          n	 GFDRR could also play the role of coordinator/facilitator of 2 DRM courses delivered
                             through the World Bank internal learning platform Online Learning Consortium (OLC).
                                                                   Reviewing the impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 19


 Scenario Two      Moderate action taken: be strategic                                           Recommended
                                                                                                 Scenario
GFDRR enhances its position as a strategic enabler of capacity-building activities

Between continuing business as usual and offering a major capacity-building-oriented
overhaul, the research team would like to recommend this scenario, which should, based
on the evidence above, provide the most effective pathway. In this scenario, GFDRR is seen
as cementing and enhancing its current function as an enabler, albeit not a direct provider,
of capacity-building activities. There are four areas of strategic intervention that could
significantly enhance the impact of capacity building in GFDRR supported projects. The
first three interventions are organized similarly to scenario one, but also include additional
activities: enhancing M&E, supporting better dissemination of best practices and lessons
learned, and coordinating and facilitating training and e-learning. The fourth intervention
focuses on providing support to the activities promoted by project managers (TTLs).


Intervention 1: M&E
Moving beyond “business as usual,” this scenario includes a more extensive review of
potential capacity-building M&E frameworks. Additional outcome indicators would be
incorporated into the M&E framework to measure the extent to which new knowledge (1)
gets used, and (2) effects the broader organizational, socio-political, or policy environment.
A review of other capacity-building M&E frameworks should be conducted in order to ensure
the most effective indicators are selected. Given that M&E is critical to encouraging and
monitoring effective capacity building, this is a strategic investment of time and resources.

Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

n	 Include capacity building within M&E requirements. This includes ensuring that it is
   accounted for in the proposed budget. Requirements should include a description of
   activities, including type and beneficiaries (as discussed in the section on planning,
   above). Outputs, such as number of participants trained, should be monitored. A
   selection of capacity-building indicators for TTLs to choose from should also be
   integrated into the M&E framework. In scenario 1, indicators focus upon measuring
   the immediate outcome of capacity-building activities. However, in order to add more
   depth and greater understanding of capacity-building legacy, indicators should include
   broader, and longer term outcomes such as “formulated policy” (for examples, see tabe
   C1 in Annex C in the full report).
n	 Continuation and formalization of the current systematic assessment exercise (as
   represented in this report) to allow for overall GFDRR strategic planning on capacity
   building. With M&E indicators in place, a more effective assessment of impact can be
   undertaken. With better data, it would be possible to analyze which capacity-building
   activities are the most effective across the GFDRR portfolio, and prioritize investments
   accordingly. At a later date, a longitudinal assessment of trends will enable a more
   strategic overview.
20 / Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan


                         Intervention 2: Sharing knowledge, best practices, and lessons learned
                         Hosting a capacity-building forum for TTLs, project staff, and managers provides an important
                         space for interactive knowledge sharing.

                         Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

                         n	 More clearly integrate a section on capacity building in the annual report, flagging the value
                            added of these activities for the broader GFDRR portfolio.
                         n	 Dissemination of lessons learned and better communication on current activities can improve
                            capacity-building activities at an operational level. The recently launched Resilience and Di-
                            saster Risk Management Global Solutions Group knowledge platform might provide a channel
                            for doing so, but there are several other venues that could be explored.
                         n	 A regular capacity-building forum for TTLs (internal to the Bank), project staff, and managers,
                            would allow for a more structured exchange on on-going efforts and options.

                         Intervention 3: Coordinating, facilitating, and developing specific training
                         and e-learning
                         Beyond maintaining the current, existing partnerships and delivery channels, including with the
                         Tokyo DRM Hub and the Tokyo Distance Learning Center (TDLC) (as described in the previous
                         scenario), this intervention advocates for additional efforts devoted to the development of
                         specific courses, to serve several training purposes. These new courses could be developed with
                         international partners and delivered through the OLC.

                         n	 Coordinate and facilitate two existing training/e-learning courses on the basics of DRM
                            (“Introduction to DRM” and “Safe and Resilient Cities”), all existing courses on PDNA, and
                            new programmed courses on gender and DRM, as well as social impact assessment and
                            DRM. These courses should be updated frequently to capture the changes in the political
                            and international agenda, as well as new case studies, or innovative tools and practices.
                            The coordination and facilitation activities could be assured internally by GFDRR, while
                            update and integration of new concepts/tolls might need additional support.
                         n	 GFDRR could provide support to partners in the development of new DRM courses, as long
                            as they are complementary to, and not duplicative of, the existing DRM courses. GFDRR
                            could assist in disseminating and communicating these courses when needed, or as per
                            specific agreements.
                         n	 Develop further basic training on needs assessments and planning for capacity building.
                            This could be provided for TTLs and Bank staff to encourage more explicit appreciation of
                            existing efforts and also help them to plan to ensure future capacity-building value.
                                                                   Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR / 21



Intervention 4: Supporting activities promoted by project leaders (TTLs)
This intervention focuses upon providing guidance, training, and resources for TTLs in order
to support a well-designed approach to capacity-building activities. These activities could
suggest the recruitment of a dedicated expert to knowledge and capacity-building advising and
management.

Suggested next steps for GFDRR:

n	 Provide support in the selection of capacity-building activities and the implementation of
   M&E indicators. The socialisation of a new M&E system will require time and guidance.
   Support in selecting activities can contribute to a more strategic deployment of activities,
   moving beyond the idea of capacity building as a subsidiary component.
n	 Access facilitation to networks and expert rosters. GFDRR’s facilitation of expert networks
   is recognized as one of the most effective capacity-building activities. Expert rosters have
   proved useful for identifying appropriate experts. Updating and disseminating these would
   ensure full advantage is taken of this valuable resource.
n	 Pilot more in-depth needs assessments in up to four projects in the next fiscal year, developing
   a closer appreciation of how capacity building shapes legacy and further investments.
n	 Develop a toolkit of resources for TTLs, outlining the most effective ways to conduct various
   capacity-building activities (e.g. a South-South knowledge exchange). The best practices estab-
   lished in the pilot capacity-building needs assessment could be Included within this toolkit.
22 / Next Steps for GFDRR: An Actionable Plan



                                     Major action taken: GFDRR becomes a key
                           Scenario Three
                         provider of capacity-building activities
                         GFDRR could, in principle, consider shifting capacity building to the core of its activities. Doing
                         so would require the creation of a unit/function. This would necessitate a significant allocation
                         of funding and resources, including a team of capacity-building experts. The work by GFDRR on
                         capacity building would have to be advertised and viewed as central in the eyes of both internal
                         audiences (the World Bank and the plethora of project partners for GFDRR), as well as in those
                         of the broader DRM community. This centralization would need to take place on two levels:

                         n	 The new unit/function would support and supervise capacity-building activities. In so
                            doing, it would provide guidance on both identifying suitable activities—dependent upon
                            the project and context—and designing, implementing, and delivering capacity-building
                            activities. This would require a more extensive formalization of capacity-building planning
                            and monitoring, making capacity-building assessments mandatory before each project/
                            activity starts, and embedding them into current planning, monitoring, and reporting
                            frameworks.
                         n	 GFDRR would take a more distinctive position in the DRM community as a provider of
                            capacity-building services. This scenario implies significant additional human and financial
                            resources to be addressed, specifically to capacity development on DRM through this unit.
                            On the basis of the practices and lessons discussed above, this scenario seems unlikely
                            and a more complex transition from the status quo. While the authors of this report would
                            certainly be available to provide more information as to possible steps towards scenario
                            three, the research team would like to place greater emphasis on the other two possible
                            scenarios, and encourage GFDRR and donor thinking in those very feasible, directions
                            (scenario one and two), setting GFDRR as facilitator or even a strategic enabler of capacity-
                            building efforts.

                         In conclusion, the authors are advocating for scenario two, in which GFDRR builds upon
                         and cements its current function as an enabler of capacity-building activities. This more
                         strategic approach could bring better scoping of activities and support to TTLs as well as
                         enhancing legacy thinking when designing capacity-building activities.

                         Table 1 summarizes the three scenarios and outlines the organizational structure that would
                         be required in order for each scenario to be successful, including: the necessity to add specific
                         functions to those that already exist; the type of activities that would be included; and
                         partnerships and collaborations with clients and external partners.
                                                                   Reviewing the Impact of Capacity Building in GFDRR


Table 1: A summary of the 3 scenarios for GFDRR
                      Organizational structure      Activities                        Partnerships
                                                    1) M&E for accountability
                                                    of project/activities;
                                                                                      1) Maintain existing
                                                    2) Development and
                                                                                      partnership for e-learning
                                                    dissemination of knowledge
                                                                                      deliveries; 2) Assure key
Scenario 1                                          notes to document selected
                      No changes                                                      partnership with clients and
Business as usual                                   project/activities;
                                                                                      local partners for specific
                                                    3) Coordination and
                                                                                      capacity-building activities
                                                    facilitation of existing
                                                                                      within projects.
                                                    e-learning and training
                                                    through existing partnerships.
                                                    1) M&E for accountability
                                                    of project/activities and
                                                    impacts; 2) Development and
                                                    dissemination of knowledge
                                                    notes as a systematic practice
                                                    for every capacity-building       1) Maintain existing
                                                    activity; 3) Coordination         partnership for e-learning
                                                    and facilitation of existing      deliveries and activate new
                      One expert on capacity        e-learning and training,          ones for new courses to be
Scenario 2
                      building and knowledge        plus additional courses to        developed; 2) Assure key
Moderate action
                      management                    be developed on a needs           partnership with clients and
                                                    basis; 4) Support activities of   local partners for specific
                                                    TTL: advise and support on        capacity-building activities
                                                    capacity-building activities      within projects.
                                                    selection, access roster and
                                                    networks, piloting capacity-
                                                    building needs assessment,
                                                    implementation of effective
                                                    M&E.
                                                     1) Several toolkits to be
                                                     developed, including
                                                                                      1) For specific projects: client/
                      Capacity-building unit/        one for capacity-building
                                                                                      partners and local experts;
                      function to support/supervise needs assessment to be
                                                                                      2) For capacity-building
                      capacity-building activities,  operated before any project/
                                                                                      global initiatives: new
                      and provide guidance on        activity; 2) Training and
Scenario 3                                                                            partnerships to be activated
                      how to: identify activities;   e-learning courses on an
Major action taken                                                                    for global initiatives (not
                      design, implement and          ad hoc basis; 3) M&E for
                                                                                      related to specific projects)
                      deliver capacity building; and accountability and impacts;
                                                                                      with selected partners, e.g.
                      disseminate and communicate 4) Extensive dissemination
                                                                                      the United Nations, academic
                      outcomes and lessons learned. and communication activities
                                                                                      institutions, Foundations, etc.
                                                     to present capacity-building
                                                     outcomes.
                The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
www.gfdrr.org




                Recovery (GFDRR) is a global partnership that helps
                developing countries better understand and reduce their
                vulnerabilities to natural hazards and adapt to climate
                change. Working with over 400 local, national, regional,
                and international partners, GFDRR provides grant
                financing, technical assistance, training, and knowledge
                sharing activities to mainstream disaster and climate
                risk management in policies and strategies. Managed
                by the World Bank, GFDRR is supported by 36 countries
                and 10 international organizations.
