      JOBS
  WORKING
    PAPER
Issue No. 1




              Fostering Quality
                of Employment
                    for Women
               Namita Datta and Aphichoke Kotikula
Not Just More, but
Better – Fostering
Quality of Employment
for Women
WORKING PAPER
                                   Acknowledgements
This paper was written by Namita Datta (Jobs Group) and Aphichoke Kotikula (Gender Cross
Cutting Solutions Area CCSA) under the overall guidance of David Robalino (Manager, Jobs
Group) and Caren Grown (Senior Director, Gender CCSA). It is a revised version of a paper that
was submitted on behalf of the World Bank Group for the G20 meetings. We also received
valuable support from Eliana Rubiano (Gender CCSA) and excellent comments from Luc
Christiaensen (Jobs Group) and Alvaro Gonzalez (Jobs Group). This report has been edited by
Graham Colin-Jones, Siv Tokle, and Grace Chao.

This work has been made possible through a grant from the World Bank’s Jobs Umbrella Trust
Fund, which is supported by the Department for International Development/UK AID, the
governments of Norway and Germany, the Austrian Development Agency, and Swedish
Development Agency SIDA.




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect
the views of the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the
privileges and immunities of the World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.



                                                2
                                   Abbreviations
BW       The Better Work program (a joint IFC-ILO program)
CCSA     Cross Cutting Solutions Area of the World Bank
CEO      Chief Executive Officer
FCS      Fragile and Conflict affected States
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
G20      Group of Twenty—an international forum for the governments and central bank
         governors from 20 major economies
ICT      Information and Communication Technology
IFC      International Finance Corporation
ILO      International Labor Organization
OECD     Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PISA     Program for International Student Assessment
SEWA     Self-Employed Women’s Association SMEs
SMEs     Small and Medium-size Enterprises
STEM     Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
UNESCO   United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNHLP    UN Secretary-General’s High Level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment,
         2016
WBG      World Bank Group
WDR      World Development Report, World Bank




                                            3
                                                             Table of Contents

Acknowledgements....................................................................................................................................... 2
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................................................ 3
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................................... 4
Executive Summary....................................................................................................................................... 5
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 7
1: The Business Case for Gender Parity ........................................................................................................ 8
2: Women’s Inequitable Access to Good Quality Jobs ................................................................................. 9
3: The World Bank Group’s Gender Strategy.............................................................................................. 23
4: Moving Towards Policies and Potential Solutions .................................................................................. 23
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................... 38
Annex A: Countries Included in the Calculations of Occupational Sex-Segregation .................................. 39
Bibliography ................................................................................................................................................ 41




                                                                               4
Executive Summary
This working paper explores the multiple dimensions of women’s access to good quality jobs .
It is the first in a series of notes on gender and jobs, and will be followed by notes that delve
deeper into more specific aspects of the issue. It includes a brief discussion of the gender gaps
in women’s access to good quality jobs and the factors contributing to such gaps; and suggests
actions that governments can take to close them.

When countries give women greater opportunities to participate in the economy, the
benefits extend far beyond individual girls and women to societies and economies as a
whole. Creating more and better jobs for all citizens―women and men―is essential for
sustainable and resilient growth across the world. Moreover, it is intrinsic to the World Bank
Group’s twin goals: poverty reduction and promoting shared prosperity. An important aspect of
fostering inclusiveness is the expansion of women’s economic opportunities and access to good
quality jobs. Almost across the world, women remain more economically excluded than men.
Addressing gender gaps in access to good quality jobs is not just the right thing to do from a
human rights perspective; it is also smart economics. The quality of female employment is
closely linked to a country’s productivity, and thus, is essential for its economic performance.
Furthermore, good quality jobs can pull women to the labor markets.

Despite progress on women’s education and health in the past few decades, there remain
persistent gender gaps across multiple dimensions of job quality. Women’s labor force
participation worldwide over the last two decades has stagnated, and women generally earn
less than men. Gaps are particularly acute in the Middle East and North Africa, but also persist
in high income OECD/developed countries. Gender sorting into different jobs, industries and
firm types explains much of the pay gap. Women tend to be concentrated in less productive
jobs, run enterprises in less productive sectors, and are more likely to do part-time and
temporary jobs with fewer avenues for advancement, than men. Women are particularly
concentrated in the more “invisible” activities, such as domestic labor and unpaid work or work
in the informal sector in jobs that lack security and are not covered by labor laws.

There are multiple deprivations and constraints that underlie gender inequality in the world
of work. As the burden of child care and elderly care almost always falls disproportionately on
women, it further segregates women into low paying, part time jobs. Part-time jobs may
promote women’s labor force participation, but not necessarily their access to better quality
and higher paying jobs. Despite the global progress in education enrollment, the quality of
education that men and women receive still differs. Women tend to study in fields that lack job
opportunities, which reinforces their segregation into jobs that offer limited earning potential.
In addition, sexual harassment both at work and also while travelling to work is a major barrier
to women’s access to job opportunities. Poor working conditions not only reduce the quality of
jobs but also push prospective female workers away from the labor markets and curb
companies’ ability to retain skilled and experienced workers. Limited access to assets and




                                                5
property rights limits women’s’ ability to start or grow a business. Moreover, they face several
legal, regulatory and societal constraints that undermine their agency and voice.

Gender-smart job strategies and concerted action by policy makers, businesses, and civil
society are urgently required to level the playing field for women’s economic opportunities.
Some suggested actions include:

   1) Address child care, parental leave and working conditions : A strong public-private
      partnership to address access to good quality and affordable care and sensible parental
      leave policies could address segregation and thus pay gaps. In addition, governments
      and companies need to be proactive in addressing gender-based violence at home, at
      work and also while travelling to work.

   2) Open pathways to good jobs: Countries should encourage more girls to take up STEM
      (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) subjects, especially focusing on
      areas of new labor demand like ICT, green jobs. In particular, adolescent girls can be
      targeted through a comprehensive approach.

   3) Foster women’s career progress: Measures need to be implemented to retain female
      talent and foster career progress, including by creating more opportunities for women
      in leadership positions.

   4) Systematically address legal and regulatory inequalities: Addressing these inequalities,
      such as ownership of assets, would help establish a level playing field, so that women
      can access good jobs or the necessary finance to enable them to start a business.

   5) Strengthen women’s collective voice, partner with the private sector and work to
      address data and knowledge gaps. Progress in providing quality jobs for women will
      require the active participation of the private sector as well as the commitment of
      governments. However, the formulation of effective measures will require good quality
      data that is not currently available in many developing countries. A more concerted
      effort needs to be made to ensure that women themselves are actively engaged in
      designing gender –sensitive programs.




                                                6
Introduction
Work is the main source of income for people, especially in the world’s poorest countries.
Therefore, access to jobs, including in farming and self-employment, offers households the
means to escape poverty, increase consumption, and afford a good quality of life. Good quality
jobs can also be an important driver of increased labor force participation, enhanced
productivity, and therefore, higher economic performance. More jobs are critical to achieving
strong, sustainable, and balanced growth, but what is even more important, is the quality of
those jobs and how inclusive those good quality jobs are. An important aspect of fostering
inclusiveness is the expansion of women’s access to better economic opportunities. In fact,
having access to quality jobs that are stable, decent, secure and productive is even more
important from a gender perspective, because women are more likely than men to be over-
represented in low paying, part-time, informal and low productivity jobs. Addressing persistent
gender disparities, especially in the world of work, is a win-win on many fronts.1

This paper focuses on the quality of female employment. While addressing gender gaps in labor
force participation rates remains a critical concern in several countries, it is essential to also
focus on the quality of the jobs that women have access to and ask whether those jobs can be
transformative for women’s empowerment. The paper draws on the available literature and
evidence from a variety of projects and initiatives in order to highlight for policy makers some
possible solutions to address the multiple dimensions of the “quality gap” on women’s jobs.
One aspect of “better jobs” or quality jobs is the level and quality of earnings /wages attached
to those jobs. Wages are also associated with productivity, since higher productivity leads to
higher returns and earnings, and adds value to the economy. Another related aspect of better
jobs includes benefits, job security, social security coverage, stability of income and income
protection. There are also some non-monetary aspects related to a job, such as social relations
at work, promotion and advancement opportunities, working conditions, reasonable working
hours, sexual harassment, that deeply influence worker satisfaction.
In this paper, three main dimensions of job quality or better jobs are discussed.2

    1. Earnings/wages;

    2. Job security and stability, which is often determined by the types of jobs that women
       do, the sectors they work in, and whether these jobs are stable, secure and covered by
       labor laws and/or benefits; and

    3. Quality of working conditions, which covers the non-economic dimensions of a working
       environment and includes occupational safety, workplace relations, the risk of sexual

1World Bank. 2014. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs. Washington DC: World Bank.
2Quality of a job is a multi-dimensional concept. There is substantial literature (Annex 2) on how the quality of a job can be
defined and measured. A large part of this literature relates to developed/OECD countries. In this paper, we have focused on
three broad dimensions of the concept of quality or “better jobs” that are most relevant to developing countries.


                                                               7
         harassment at work and overall job satisfaction. However, discussion of this dimension
         is limited by the scarce amount of data available.

Section 1 of this note summarizes why addressing gender disparity in access to good quality
jobs is also good for economic growth. Section 2 briefly presents a few stylized facts about
women’s access to jobs across the world. Section 3 describes elements of the World Bank
Group’s strategy on gender, and Section 4 concludes with a few policy recommendations.

1: The Business Case for Gender Parity
Addressing gender gaps in access to jobs is not just the right thing to do from a human equity
perspective; it is also smart economics. The case for women’s economic empowerment has
several interlinked pillars, each integral to progress: (a) the universal case for basic human
rights, (b) the growth and human development case, and (c) the business case.3 Reducing
gender gaps, especially in access to good quality jobs, can yield big development pay-offs.
These extend beyond immediate benefits to women themselves and have positive spillover
effects on children, enhanced poverty reduction, business productivity, and broader social
cohesion.4 Aguirre and others (2012) suggest that raising female labor force participation to
country-specific male levels would boost Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the United States by
5 percent, in Japan by 9 percent, in the United Arab Emirates by 12 percent, and in Egypt by 34
percent.5 Moreover, a recent estimate puts the economic loss from gender inequality at about
25 percent of GDP for Turkey and 26 percent for India.6 An OECD paper also shows how raising
female labor force participation in India with a package of pro-growth and pro-women policies
could boost the growth rate by about two percentage points over time.7

The effects of the gender gap on economic growth are not just limited to developing
countries. Gender gaps cause an average income loss of 15 percent in the OECD.8 Apart from
the potential GDP losses, there are other more nuanced channels through which gender gaps
can affect growth. Mitra, Bang, and Biswas (2015) report that the presence of more women in
legislative bodies may alter the composition of public expenditure in favor of health and
education, which can raise potential growth over the medium to long run.9

Economic growth does not automatically reduce gender inequalities . In the Global Gender
Gap Report, 2015, the World Economic Forum finds a correlation between gender equality and

3 UN Women. 2016. Leave No One behind: A Call to Action for Gender Equality and Women’s Economic Empowerment. Report
of the UN Secretary-General’s High Level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment.
4 World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.
5 Aguirre, D., L. Hoteit, et al. 2012. Empowering the Third Billion: Women and the World of Work in 2012. Booz & Co.
6 Cuberes, D. and M. Teignier. 2015. ‘How Costly are Labor Gender Gaps? Estimates for the Balkans and Turkey’, Washington,

DC: World Bank, https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/22195.
7 Agénor, Pierre-Richard, Jan Mares, and Piritta Sorsa. 2015. Gender Equality and Economic Growth in India: A Quantitative

Framework, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, 2015.
8 Cuberes, D. and M. Teignier. 2015. Aggregate Effects of Gender Gaps in the Labor Market: A Quantitative Estimate. Journal of

Human Capital, Volume 10, Number 1, Spring 2016. University of Chicago Press Journals
9 Mitra, A., J. Bang, and A. Biswas. 2015. “Gender Equality and Economic Growth: Is it Equality of Opportunity or Equality of

Outcomes?” Feminist Economics, 21(1):110 –135.


                                                              8
GDP per capita. The variation in the size of the gender gaps across countries is quite large; for
example, Saudi Arabia, Japan and Korea are high income countries, but they also have high
gender inequality. This points to the fact that economic growth does not automatically
guarantee a higher level of gender equality. The type of growth matters, as do policies, for
more inclusive job creation. For example, in East Asia, growth in the manufacturing sector—
particularly in textile and food services industries—has increased women’s wage work and
improved female and child health and education outcomes, but there still remains
considerable occupational segregation and concentration of women in low paying jobs.10
However, even if the cause and effect is difficult to clearly establish, it is evident that as more
women enter better quality wage jobs that are decent, stable, and secure, they can help
stimulate economic growth. Therefore, closing gender gaps is not only vital from a human
development and human rights perspective, but also will support efforts to meet country
growth targets and an overall economic growth agenda. Moreover, a deliberate effort needs to
be made to address gender disparities, as growth strategies alone may not be sufficient to
break through gender barriers.

2: Women’s Inequitable Access to Good Quality Jobs
While differences between male and female participation rates have narrowed, women’s
labor force participation has actually decreased from 57 percent in 1990 to 55 percent in
2014.11 The average gender participation gap—which is the difference between male and
female labor force participation rates—has been declining since 1990, largely due to a
worldwide fall in male labor force participation rates. The quality of jobs that are available to
women also affects their incentive to participate in the labor markets, and hence their labor
force participation rates. The gender gap in participation varies strongly by region (see Figure
1), with the highest gaps observed in the Middle East and North Africa and South Asia.
However, the gender gap is still significant even among OECD countries.12 In Japan, for
example, it is 25 percentage points, though it is only 6 percentage points in Sweden. In Europe,
women remain less active participants in the labor force than men. In 2014, only 89 women in
Europe were working for every 100 men of prime working age.13 Women’s labor participation
rates also vary with countries’ per capita income, with some evidence pointing to a U-shaped
relationship.14 At lower levels of per capita income, high female participation in labor reflects
the necessity to work in the absence of social protection programs. With higher household
income and increasing social protection, women can withdraw from the market in favor of
household work and child care. At advanced country income levels, labor force participation
rebounds as a result of better education, lower fertility rates, access to labor-saving household
technology, and the availability of market-based household services.


10 World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.
11 A more detailed discussion on quantity i.e. gender gap in labor force participation rates will be the subject matter of a
forthcoming paper planned by the Jobs Group and Gender CCSA.
12The G20 leaders adopted an ambitious goal in 2014 to reduce the gap in participation rates between men and women in their

countries by 25 percent by 2025, and to bring more than 100 million women into the labor force.
13 Christiansen, L. et al. 2016. Unlocking Female Employment Potential in Europe, Drivers and Benefits. Washington DC: IMF.
14 Elborgh-Woytek, K. et al. 2013. Women, Work and the Economy. Washington DC: IMF.




                                                             9
                  Figure 1: Gender gaps in labor force participation occur across regions

                                         Labor force participation rates, 2014
          90
          80
          70
          60
          50
          40
          30
          20
          10
           0
                East Asia & Europe & High income   Latin   Middle East South Asia Sub-Saharan            World
                  Pacific   Central Asia         America &  & North                  Africa
                                                 Caribbean   Africa

                                                        Female     Male


Source: World Bank Gender database; labor force participation rate, female (% of female population ages 15-64) (modeled ILO
estimate).


Women’s access to good quality jobs is as important, if not more important, than their
increased participation in the labor market. Although the most obvious gender gap is in the
labor force participation rates, a more multi-dimensional view shows that gender gaps in the
equitable access to good quality jobs arise in multiple forms. Even when labor force
participation rates are high, as they are in several poor countries, it does not mean that women
are either employed in good jobs or farming, or running profitable or productive enterprises. In
fact, labor participation rates often mask the other dimensions of women’s inequitable access
to good quality jobs. There are persistent inequalities in earnings, time spent, productivity, and
the types of jobs that men and women do, further affecting women’s wellbeing and
empowerment. Therefore, it is not enough to simply create more jobs, there is need to focus on
good quality jobs for women.

There is a significant gender gap in earnings and wages, even after controlling for industry
and occupation. Women on an average earn between 10 percent and 30 percent less than
working men, but there are large variations between countries, with the gender wage gap
ranging from 20 percent in Mozambique and Pakistan to more than 80 percent in Côte d’Ivoire,
Jordan, Latvia and the Slovak Republic.15 Even among the middle and high income countries,
gender pay gaps exist in varying degrees. In the United States, full-time female secretaries
earned 14 percent less than male secretaries in 2011, and full-time first-line women retail sales



15   World Bank Group. 2015. Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth. Washington DC: World Bank Group.


                                                             10
supervisors earned 21 percent less than men in the same position.16 Figure 2 shows the
female–male wage gap as a percentage of the male wage in OECD countries.

                       Figure 2: Wage Gap (% of male wage) in select OECD countries

                  40
                  35
                  30
                  25
                  20
                  15
                  10
                   5
                   0




                        KOR
                        HUN

                         NZL




                        AUS

                        CHE
                        DEU

                        USA
                        AUT
                          IRL




                        MEX




                         JPN
                         CZE
                        GRC
                        NOR




                         SVK
                           ISL




                        GBR
                          ITA




                        CAN
                         BEL




                         PRT

                         FIN
                        POL




Source: Staff calculation from OECD gender wage gap data, latest years (2014, 2015)


Emerging economies show a significant degree of variation in the size of the wage gender gap
of self-employed workers. The gaps are relatively high in China, Indonesia, and South Africa.
Comparatively narrow wage gaps in the Middle East and North Africa are explained by the small
share of women in wage employment, who are often more highly educated than their male
colleagues (Figure 3). In several countries, earnings differences are even more significant when
comparing women and men with higher educational attainment (OECD, 2012). The OECD
estimated the gender wage gap in its countries (defined as the difference between male and
female median wages divided by male median wages) at 16 percent. Occupational segregation
(discussed later), reduced working hours, and differentials in work experience explain around
30 percent of the wage gap in the OECD analysis.17 The recent UNHLP Report on Women’s
Economic Empowerment concludes that the unexplained gender pay gap reveals gender
discrimination. If men and women were equally remunerated according to observable labor
market characteristics, the gender wage gap would nearly disappear or even reverse in about
half of the developed countries in the sample, and would decline in several other countries,
including Germany and the United States.18




16 Institute for Women’s Policy Research, 2012. Fact Sheet: The Gender Wage Gap by Occupation,
https://iwpr.org/publications/pubs/the-gender-wage-gap-by-occupation-2
17 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2012. “Closing the Gender Gap: Act Now.” Paris: OECD.
18 UN Women. Leave No One behind: A Call to Action for Gender Equality and Women’s Economic Empowerment. Report of the

UN Secretary General’s High level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment, 2016




                                                             11
                              Figure 3: Gender Wage Gap (monthly earnings)


 Syrian Arab Republic
           Philippines
             Honduras
                Turkey
              Thailand
       Venezuela, RB
               Ecuador
              Lebanon
              Sri Lanka
                 Jordan
              Romania
               Panama
             Myanmar
            Costa Rica
              Vietnam
             Colombia
           El Salvador
 West Bank and Gaza
             Botswana
                Mexico
           Guatemala
             Mongolia
               Bulgaria
        Taiwan, China
             Argentina
                Belarus
         High income
             Paraguay
               Ukraine
            Cambodia
                  Brazil
                   Peru
           Kazakhstan
              Armenia
              Pakistan
                  Nepal
               Georgia
            Azerbaijan

                       -20%     -10%           0%           10%          20%           30%           40%          50%


Source: Gender CCSA team estimates based on International Labour Organization, KILM
Note: Most recent year available 2008-2011; Gender pay gap = (male average monthly earnings – female average monthly
earnings)


The gender gap persists, even though there has been progress in educational attainment. In
many countries, women have made headway in terms of education. Enrollment at all levels has
increased across a broad range of countries (Figure 4). At the tertiary level, female enrollment
in several countries has surpassed that of men. However, this progress in human capital
development has not fully yielded commensurate results in reducing the gender pay gap.




                                                           12
                                 Figure 4: Gross enrollment rate: Tertiary level




Source: Staff calculation based on data from UNESCO Institute of Statistics


One of the key factors contributing to the pay gap in wage work is occupational segregation.
Women and men earn different wages primarily because of the different types of work that
they do. Although women have entered the labor force in large numbers in the past century,
women and men tend to work in different economic worlds with little change over time, even
in high-income countries. In almost all countries, women are more likely than men to engage in
low-productivity activities and are over-represented in sectors that are characterized by low
status and pay.19. They are also more likely to be in wage or unpaid family employment, or work
in the informal wage sector. In formal employment, they are concentrated in “female”
occupations and sectors. These patterns of gender segregation in economic activity change with
economic development but do not disappear.20 The ILO documents substantial earnings
differences between male-dominated and female-dominated occupations.21 Across the OECD,
female employment is concentrated in the services sector, which accounts for 80 percent of
employed women, compared to 60 percent for men (Figure 5). Within services, women have a
disproportionally high share of occupations in health and community services, followed by
education (OECD, 2012).




19 Elborgh-Woytek, K. et al. 2013. Women, Work and the Economy. Washington DC: IMF.
20 World Bank. 2011. World Development Report, 2012. Washington DC: World Bank
21 ILO. 2010. Women in Labor Markets: Measuring Progress and Identifying Challenges. Geneva: ILO.




                                                               13
Figure 5: Occupational segregation sorts women and men in different sectors and occupations


                         Distribution of female/male employment across sectors
              100%
                                                                                      Communication Services
               90%
                                                                                      Retail, Hotels, and
               80%                                                                    Restaurants
                                                                                      Manufacturing
               70%
                                                                                      Finance and Business
               60%
                                                                                      Electricity, Gas and Steam,
               50%
                                                                                      and Water
               40%                                                                    Mining

               30%                                                                    Transport and
                                                                                      Telecommunications
               20%                                                                    Agriculture, Hunting, etc.
               10%
                                                                                      Construction
                0%
                                 Women                            Men

Source: Gender CCSA estimates based on International Labour Organization 2014. See Annex 1 for a list of countries and years
included in the calculation.


The over-representation of women in certain sectors and under-representation in others has
not changed with the passage of time. Hegewisch and Hartmann (2014) show that in the US,
even though women have moved into many new fields and professions, their comparative
concentration in healthcare, care work, and education and their under-representation in craft
and technical occupations, such as for civil engineers and carpenters, has not changed over the
last 40 years.22 Nine in ten pre-school and kindergarten teachers, hairdressers and
cosmetologists, and dental hygienists were women in 1972, and that figure is now higher than
nine.

While most of the gender wage gap is due to occupational segregation, this segregation is
being driven by several underlying factors. These include (a) education—the limited
enrollment of girls in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses, and
(b) the burden women bear for child care. These two constraints further drive women towards
more informal and part-time jobs that also tend to be low paying.

Women are under-represented in decision-making positions. Not only are women
concentrated in sectors and occupations that are low paying, but they also tend to be under-


22Hegewisch, Ariane and Heidi Hartmann. 2014. Occupational Segregation and the Gender Wage Gap: A Job Half Done.
Institute of Women’s Policy Research. https://iwpr.org/publications/occupational-segregation-and-the-gender-wage-gap-a-job-
half-done/


                                                             14
represented in leadership positions in companies, public bodies and governments (Figure 6). As
a result, they do not have the opportunity to influence decision making.

                Figure 6: Share of female legislators, senior officials and managers, 2011




Source: World Bank Gender Data Portal.


One of the drivers of occupational segregation is gender segregation in fields of study.
Despite the global trend of convergence in educational enrollment, there are clear differences
between men and women in the subjects that they generally study. Women are typically under-
represented in STEM, and tend to study in fields that lack job opportunities and provide limited
earning potential. The table below confirms this pattern in most countries. For example, across
106 countries where data from UNESCO is available, engineering is considered ‘male
dominated’ in 98 percent of countries. On the other hand, education and health are considered
female dominated in 81 percent and 85 percent of countries, respectively (Figure 7). As a result,
women tend to work in public administration, education, and social work, with up to 70 percent
or more female participation concentrated in the public sector in some countries. Interestingly,
there is little evidence of female underperformance in subjects often dominated by men (see
gender-disaggregated PISA scores in Figure 8).23




23   World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.


                                                            15
                                         Figure 7: Segregation in education

           Field of study                      Fraction of countries where the field of            Number
                                                              study is:                              of
                                                                                                  countries
                                                Female                  Male            Neutral
                                              dominated %            dominated %          %
           Agriculture                             6                     74               20        95
           Education                              81                      8               10        106
           Engineering,                            0                     98               2         106
           manufacturing and
           construction
           Health and Welfare                         85                      5           10        106
           Humanities and Arts                        60                      8           32        103
           Science                                    9                       75          16        107
           Services                                   16                      64          20        95
           Social sciences, Business                  29                      11          60        107
           and Law

Source: Staff calculation based on data from UNESCO Institute of Statistics


           Figure 8: There is little evidence of female underperformance in STEM subjects24




Source: OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2009 Data
Note: PISA assesses students age 15.



24   World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.


                                                               16
Female entrepreneurs in developing countries are more likely than their male counterparts to
be concentrated in small and informal firms and the retail sector . Women entrepreneurs also
tend to have less access than men to capital and financial services to grow their businesses
(Figure 9).25 Most non-agricultural entrepreneurs in developing countries, especially women,
operate in the retail sector (Figure 10). Men dominate construction and business-oriented
services, whereas women are more likely found in retail and manufacturing.26

             Figure 9: Women are less likely than men to have formal accounts and credit




Source: Gallup World Surveys
Note: “Formal account” data indicate responses to the query, “Do you, either by yourself or together with someone else,
currently have an account at any of the following places? Either financial institution or post office.”




25   Ibid
26   Ibid.


                                                             17
                                  Figure 10: Distribution of self-employed jobs




Source: International Income Distribution Database (I2D2)
Note: Based on 97 developing countries


The burden of child care and elderly care almost always falls disproportionately on women,
and further segregates women into low paying, part-time and insecure jobs. Married women
with children under age six spend 14 to 42 percent of their non-leisure time on child care,
compared with 1 to 20 percent for married men.27 In 62 countries out of 113 with data, the
availability of child care—both formal and informal—is limited or very limited as a result of high
costs, insufficient supply, or both. And in most countries where child care is available, it is
informally provided by extended family members. Women are more likely than men to work in
jobs that offer flexible working arrangements (such as part-time or informal jobs) so that they
can combine work with care responsibilities. As stated in the World Development Report
(2012), “But because part-time and informal jobs often pay lower (hourly) wages than full-time
and formal jobs, a high concentration of women in these lower-paying jobs weakens the
incentives to participate in market work and thus reinforces their specialization in nonmarket
(including care) and market work along gender lines within the household.” One study of panel
data across 97 countries estimated that, on average, a birth reduces a woman’s labor supply by
almost two years during her reproductive years.28 The gender differences in the effects of
having children on caring responsibilities and work are substantial. In Australia, for example,
when men have one child under five, their full-time employment on average increases by about

27World Bank. World Development Report, 2012.
28Bloom, D., D. Canning, G. Fink, and J. Finlay. 2009. “Fertility, female labor force participation, and the demographic dividend.”
Journal of Economic Growth 14 (2): 79–101.


                                                               18
27 percent; when women have one child under five, their full-time employment drops by 20
percent.29 These gender differences in the use of time further reinforce gender segregation in
access to inputs and economic opportunities, and perpetuate market and institutional failures.

Changing demographics, aging societies, and declining fertility rates also make the burden of
elderly care a challenge, especially the failure to realize its impact on women’s time. A recent
study in the United States found that daughters spend more than twice the number of hours
than sons do caring for elderly parents.30 Another study in China estimates that on a weekly
basis, women spent 30 percent more time than men in caring for the elderly.31 And as shown in
Figure 11, elderly care is expected to take up even more of women’s time in the coming years.

          Figure 11: The burden of elderly care is an increasing constraint on women




Source: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2015). World Population Prospects: The
2015 Revision, DVD edition; as cited by report of UN Secretary General’s High-Level Panel on Women's Economic
Empowerment, 2016
Note: Weighted regional average. Old-age dependency ratio is the ratio of population 65+ per 100 population 15-54 and child
dependency ratio is the ratio of population 0-14 per 100 population 15-64.




29 Australia Human Rights Commission. 2013. “Investing in Care: Recognizing and Valuing Those Who Care.” Vol. 2, Technical
Papers.
30 Levtov, R. 2016. Men, Gender, and Inequality in Unpaid Care. Promundo, UNHLP Background Brief.
31 Dong, X.-Y., and L. Qi. 2013. “Household Burdens, Quality of Market Work Time, and Men’s and Women’s Earnings in China.”

Department of Economics Working Paper No. 2013–01. Table 1. The University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Canada.


                                                            19
Women’s jobs also tend to be concentrated in the informal sector .32 Analysis of 41 developing
countries with gender-disaggregated data shows that women were more likely than men to be
in non-agricultural informal employment in 30 countries (Figure 12).33 As informal workers,
women generally earn less than men. Women are particularly concentrated in the more
“invisible” activities, such as domestic labor and unpaid work. Women represent an estimated
83 percent of domestic workers worldwide.34 Many of these workers are not covered by labor
laws, including those guaranteeing maximum weekly working hours, minimum wages, and
maternity leave, thus subjecting women to insecure, unstable and unrecognized work.

                              Figure 12: Female to male informal employment




Source: Authors’ calculation from ILO – KILM (Key Indicators of the Labor Market ) database. Latest year between 2000 and
2011.

32 The informal economy includes workers in informal sectors, such as unpaid family enterprise workers and casual, short-term,
and seasonal workers without contracts or legal status. It also covers all jobs in unregistered and small-scale private
unincorporated enterprises, as well as informal jobs in formal sector firms.
33 ILO. 2012. “Statistical update on employment in the informal economy.” Geneva: ILO.

http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/INFORMAL_ECONOMY/2012-06-Statisticalpercent20updatepercent20-percent20v2.pdf.
34 World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.




                                                             20
Part-time jobs may promote women’s labor force participation but not necessarily their
access to better quality and higher paying jobs. In countries across the world, women are
over-represented in part-time employment. The data shows that in 63 out of 68 countries,
where data is available, women are the majority of part-time workers (Figure 13). Women’s
share among part-time workers is as high as 78 percent in Germany and 80 percent in
Luxemburg. While part-time work is often preferred by women as it can provide increased
flexibility and bring more women into the labor force, it tends to involve limited potential for
growth, lower earnings, fewer benefits, and less protection. In developed countries, there is a
strong relationship between household formation and part-time work. In the United Kingdom,
single women without children are 6 percent more likely than single men without children to
hold a part-time job, but the likelihood rises to 24 percent for those married without children
and to 50 percent for those married with small children.35

Part-time jobs may promote women’s labor force participation, but not necessarily their
access to better quality and higher paying jobs. While part-time work might allow women to
combine employment with care, it could also trap them in lower-quality jobs. Evidence from
Europe and the United States shows that, even if having children causes women to take part-
time work temporarily, such work often reduces the probability of full-time employment,
because only a few women can use part-time work as a bridge back into full employment. In
addition, in most developed countries, temporary part-time work is penalized, with women
who move back into full-time work receiving lower hourly wage rates for similar work and
lower long-term wage growth, although the size of these penalties varies widely across
countries (WDR, 2012).

In several countries, differences in the mandatory retirement age also affects women’s career
advancement prospects. Of 177 countries where data is available, 46 countries still mandate a
different age at which men and women can retire and receive full pension benefits (Figure 14).
Differences in the retirement age prevent women’s career progression, particularly at the peak
of workers’ careers when they tend to become senior officials or executives. M andatory
retirement ages for women and men poses a problem for employment quality. This gap in
retirement age is a significant barrier to increased leadership of women in government
positions, as it not only makes women leave the labor force, but also lessens the training they
receive and increases the likelihood of their being overlooked for promotions in anticipation of
their early retirement. This disadvantage is further coupled with the fact that many women
withdraw from the labor force and miss career advancement opportunities due to child rearing
and household responsibilities.




35   World Bank. World Development Report, 2012.


                                                   21
                       Figure 13: Women account for most of part-time workers

                Part-time employment, female (% of total part-time employment): Latest Year
                                                (2012-14)
      90
      80
      70
      60
      50
      40
      30
      20
      10
       0




Source: World Bank Gender Data Portal. Latest data available between 2012 and 2014.


                                   Figure 14: Gender gap in retirement age




Source: Authors’ calculation from Women, Business, and the Law database 2016.




                                                           22
3: The World Bank Group’s Gender Strategy
The World Bank Group (WBG) recognizes that when countries give women greater
opportunities to participate in the economy, manage incomes, and own and run businesses,
the benefits extend far beyond the individual women to societies and economies as a whole.
The World Bank Group has therefore formulated a new Gender Equality Strategy that outlines
an ambitious path toward improving opportunities for women and girls. This gender strategy
has four key objectives: (a) reducing maternal mortality and closing remaining health and
education gaps; (b) creating more and better jobs for both women and men; (c) closing the
gender gap in ownership and control of key assets such as land, housing, technology, and
finance; and (d) enhancing women’s ability to make themselves heard and to direct the course
of their own lives. Moreover, it focuses on promising interventions that are likely to achieve
tangible, real-world results—results that transform lives and genuinely level the playing field
and create opportunities for all.

The strategy, in particular the second objective, highlights the fact that, to expand women’s
economic opportunity, increasing female labor force participation is not enough; one must
also enhance women’s employment quality and income earning opportuni ty. However,
removing constraints to more and better jobs remains a frontier area for the WBG. The strategy
was rolled out in December 2015 and will guide the WBG’s work program from 2016 to 2023.
The Jobs Group is partnering with the gender CCSA in deepening our understanding of the
constraints that impede women from accessing more and better jobs, and in collecting
evidence that will help in the development of possible solutions.

4: Moving Towards Policies and Potential Solutions
Governments and policy makers can play a critical role in leveling the playing field for
women’s economic opportunities. Actions should be considered at three broad levels.

      Address the constraints. It is critical to systematically address the key constraints that
       prevent women from actively participating in the labor markets and accessing
       opportunities. These constraints are reflected and reinforced by gender gaps in wages;
       occupational segregation; educational segregation; concentration of women in part-
       time, home-based, informal work; gaps in credit access, etc. The underlying factors or
       drivers of these gender gaps keep women from fully engaging in economic activities.
       These include: child care and the burden of household work, limited mobility, gender-
       based violence and sexual harassment at work and travelling to work, skills and limited
       exposure to STEM subjects, and legal, regulatory and societal constraints. Each of these
       constraints and possible policy responses are discussed below and summarized in Figure
       15.




                                               23
        Engage with the private sector. Proactive leadership and innovation from the private
         sector is critical. Policy makers need to engage with the private sector in developing
         win-win solutions.

        Fill the knowledge gaps. A consistent effort needs to be made to fill knowledge gaps
         and gather better data to fully reveal the factors underlying women’s unequal access to
         jobs. Some policy recommendations and suggestions for initiatives that have worked in
         different parts of the world are discussed below.

 Figure 15: A matrix of key gender gaps in access to quality jobs, underlying constraints, and
                                     possible solutions

  Gender Gaps in Three Dimensions          Underlying Constraints to Women’s                Possible Solutions
           of Quality Jobs                     Access to Good Quality Jobs
 1. Earnings/wages:                          Occupational segregation:                  Provide access to care using a
 Women are consistently paid less        Women tend to be more concentrated               mix of public and private
 for same occupations                    in occupations, sectors, industries and
                                         types of firms that have lower pay,             Encourage parental leave
 2. Job security & stability:            status and prospects for career                  policies
 More women than men                     advancement.
        Do part time jobs                                                               Improve occupational safety
        Work in the informal                Educational segregation:                    and working conditions in firms
         sector                          Women are underrepresented in STEM               by working through value chains
        Do jobs that are often          courses and hence find it hard to access         e.g. Better Work program in
         low paying, insecure,           better paying jobs, even though there is         garments sector
         without any benefits or         no evidence that girls underperform in
         security or do “invisible”      STEM subjects.                                  Proactively address gender
         activities like domestic                                                         based violence— at home, at
         labor and unpaid work               Burden of child and elderly care:           work, during travel to work
                                         Women bear a higher burden of child
 3. Working Conditions:                  care, household work and elderly care,          Level the playing field through
 Includes non-economic dimensions        and this limits their choice and access to       legal reforms and strengthen
 of a job like occupational safety,      certain types of jobs.                           women’s collective voice
 work place relations, risks of sexual
 harassment and overall job                  Access and control of assets:              Take a gendered approach to
 satisfaction                            Women have less access or control over           encouraging STEM enrolment
                                         assets which limits their ability to raise       for women in new sectors of
                                         credit or to start or grow a business.           labor demand e.g. ICT, green
                                                                                          jobs
                                             Gender based violence:
                                         Including sexual harassment at work             Use proactive policies to
                                         and while traveling to work often                promote women in leadership
                                         prevents women entering new jobs and             position
                                         expanding business.
                                                                                         Focus on young adolescent girls
                                             Legal, societal restrictions, limited       using a package of interventions
                                              agency:
                                         Conservative societal norms, legal              Increase access to credit using
                                         restrictions, lack of women’s agency to          alternative forms of collateral
                                         make/influence decisions can limit
                                         women’s opportunities.                          Address data gaps for better
                                                                                          diagnostics and evidence of
                                                                                          what works
Source: Author’s compilation



                                                               24
      Create a strong public-private partnership to address access to good quality and
       affordable care

Expanding access to affordable child care can be effective for both developed and developing
country settings. A variety of delivery and financing models for childcare services are being
used. In some cases, governments manage public childcare centers, but this requires large
capital investments. Public vouchers for families or direct public financing of private sector
providers may be more cost-effective where feasible,36 though additional training and
accreditation elements may be needed to ensure quality of delivery. Some models require
parents to pay a fee, which can be tied to household income, subsidized, or waived altogether
for the poorest households. Financing schemes should be carefully designed so as to ensure
accessibility to the poor. Research from countries as diverse as Brazil, Canada, Kenya, and
Romania suggests mothers are more likely to use formal childcare arrangements and enter the
labor force, when free or low cost childcare options are available.37 Other options for publicly
provided day care are either to lengthen the school day (particularly at grades where
attendance is only for half a day) or to lower the age at which children enter the school system.
Analysis of the extension of school days in Chile (a form of free child care) shows that increasing
the day from half to full day would raise women’s labor force participation by 11.9 percent
points.38 Therefore, if policy makers want to move the needle on increasing female labor
participation rates, the issue of access to quality, affordable child care is critical. This is an area
where partnership with the private sector could create new approaches.




36 de Barros, R. P., P. Olinto, et al. 2011. The impact of access to free child care on women’s labor market outcomes: evidence
from a randomized trial in low-income neighborhoods of Rio de Janeiro. Washington, DC: World Bank
37 Fong, M. and M. Lokshin. 2011. Child Care and Women’s Labor Force Participation in Romania. Washington, DC: World Bank;

Lokshin, M., et al. 2000. The effect of early childhood development programs on women’s labor force participation and older
children’s schooling in Kenya. Washington, DC:World Bank; Powell, L. M. 1997. “The impact of child care costs on the
labour supply of married mothers: evidence from Canada.” Canadian Journal of Economics 30 (3): 577–94; de Barros, R. P., et al.
2011. The Impact of Access to Free Childcare on Women’s Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from a Randomized
Trial in Low-income Neighborhoods of Rio de Janeiro. Washington DC: World Bank.
38 Berthelon, M., D. Kruger and M. Oyarzun. 2015. The Effects of Longer School Days on Mother’ s Labor Force Participation:

Discussion paper 9212, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.


                                                             25
Box 1: Policies to address child care and promote female labor force participation in Poland

After coming off an economic crisis in 2014, Poland worked with the World Bank on two
development policy loans to support macroeconomic growth and resilience. In order to
strengthen labor market flexibility and promote employment, Poland also focused on
addressing gender gaps in the labor markets. An analysis by the World Bank revealed that
access to affordable child care as well as long-term care for the elderly, was a key constraint
to employment for women. Women also faced difficulty in re-entering the labor market after
child birth. To address such barriers to women’s employment, Poland carried out a number of
reforms. An amendment to the Law on Childcare helped provide financial support to
municipalities to open childcare facilities, while enabling private individuals to run early
childcare facilities. The government also amended the child tax credit section of the Law on
Personal Income Taxation, increasing incentives for second earners from poorer families
(usually women) to join the labor force after child birth.

Source: World Bank, Program documents of the first and second Resilience and Growth Development Policy Loans




      Box 2: Examples of design approaches to extend childcare services to poor women

 Daycare centers in Peru:
The Ministry of Education, in partnership with multilateral organizations, has expanded Wawa Wasi, a
low-cost daycare program. For a small fee, working mothers leave children under three years old in a
daycare home where there is a “mother-in-charge” trained in health care, early childhood stimulation,
and basic nutrition.

 Childcare cooperatives in India:
The Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) organizes child care through local cooperatives to
support self-employed women and those working in agriculture. The SEWA experience shows that
building trust among poor women to rely on non-family caretakers can take time, but good outreach,
providing clear information, and employing local women can help.

 Preschool in Mozambique:
A randomized evaluation found that having children attend preschool centers in rural areas increased
caregivers’ probability of working in the 30 days prior to the survey by 26 percent, and it even
increased 10- to 15-year-olds’ school attendance by 6 percent—presumably due to adolescent girls’
reduced caring burden for younger children. Participating children also experienced gains in primary
school enrollment and key child development outcomes.




                                                         26
  Childcare vouchers in Mexico:
 The Estancias Infantiles program provides vouchers covering 90 percent of the cost of child care for
 children up to age four for women who are either in paid employment, currently enrolled in an
 educational or vocational program, or seeking employment. The program increased the probability of
 employment by 5 percent and increased average earnings by 20 percent among eligible women who
 participated; it also generated approximately 45,000 paid jobs for providers and aides, who are mainly
 women.

 Source: Gender at Work, World Bank, 2014



Both the public and the private sector could contribute in various ways to relieving this
binding constraint on women’s work. Providing on-site daycare is not the only option available
for employers. Companies are supporting employees’ childcare needs, while also saving costs
and maximizing benefits by, for example, providing subsidies, vouchers, and backup care.
Employers are also focusing on elderly care, given the changing demographics in many
countries, by expanding paid family leave and emergency leave and putting in place dependent
care assistance programs and resources. To encourage all employees to avail of flexible work
and parental leave options, SheWorks members advise framing these benefits as gender-
neutral and available to all employees, not just women. Senior management often has to lead
by example to change mindsets and culture.39

                                    Figure 16: How the private sector can help




Source: Adapted from IFC Tackling Childcare Project, 2016




39   Source: IFC. 2016. She Works: Putting Gender-Smart Commitments into Practice, executive summary. Washington DC: IFC.


                                                              27
 Use maternity, paternity, and parental leave to help make more work opportunities
  available to women

Maternity leave is well established, but neither paternity nor parental leave has been
accepted in all regions. Though maternity leave seems standard in almost all economies, it
varies greatly in duration—from a few weeks to a few years. Most maternity leave is paid,
though regions vary on whether it is paid by employers, governments, or both. Paternity leave
is still not offered everywhere and tends to be just a few days in most economies. Parental
leave (where both parents can take time off from work to take care of children) is almost
nonexistent in most developing countries, and is limited to the middle- and high-income
economies. Of the 30 high-income OECD economies, 28 have parental leave, as do 19 of 23
economies in Europe and Central Asia. No economy in Latin America and the Caribbean, the
Middle East and North Africa, South Asia, or Sub-Saharan Africa grants parental leave. In East
Asia and the Pacific, only Taiwan, China offers this benefit.

Who pays for such benefits is an important consideration. If firms must pay for maternity
leave, their cost of hiring women of reproductive age will be higher than the cost of hiring men.
But if governments pay for it, firms would not necessarily face higher costs for hiring women. In
approximately 50 percent of the economies that provide paid maternity leave, governments
pay the full costs of maternity benefits. In 22 percent the costs are shared between firms and
governments, and in 28 percent employers pay the full cost.40 To avert the risk of discrimination
against the hiring of workers of childbearing age, paid leave policies could be collectively
financed by taxation or social insurance contributions. Paid parental leave in Finland, Norway,
and Sweden, for example, is funded through national social insurance.41 Legal expansion of
maternity leave in Germany has had significant effects on mothers’ return to work behavior
after childbirth, reducing turnover and preserving good job-employee matches.42

Through paternity and parental leave, men can be encouraged to take more responsibility for
childcare. Providing maternity but not paternity leave risks reinforcing the norm that women
are the primary household care providers. In contrast, providing both maternity and paternity
leave and making paternity leave mandatory will likely be “transformative”; by giving men
incentives to take on more care duties, it attempts to change the norms around care. In Norway
and Sweden, offering non-transferable paternity leave has increased its uptake. Iceland’s
approach has been to offer a package of nine months of parental leave (with 80 percent of
wage replacement); the mother and father must each take three months and decide how to
allocate the remaining three months. Women take most of this additional leave, but overall this
policy has resulted in high paternity leave uptake among men, with some promising changes in



40 Yasmin Bin-Humam, Khrystyna Kushnir, and Rita Ramalho (2012) Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in Getting a Job.
 http://wbl.worldbank.org/~/media/WBG/WBL/Documents/Notes/Mapping-Legal-Gender-Gap-in-Getting-a-Job.pdf
41 Equality, G., R. Ray, J. C. Gornick and J. Schmitt. 2008. Parental leave policies in 21countries. Washington, DC: Center for

Economic and Policy Research.
42 C. Dustmann, et al. 2011. “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Children’s Long-Term Outcomes.” American

Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 2011, 4(3): 190-224


                                                                 28
gender relations at home and in the workplace. 43 In 2007, Germany switched from a low-paid,
income-tested, two-year flat-rate payment to a higher-paid, earnings-related parental leave
benefit (two-thirds of prior earnings) payable for 10 months, plus two additional months if a
partner, typically a father, used at least two months. These changes increased the use of
parental leave by fathers, especially highly educated fathers and those working in the public
sector.44

 Address issues of occupational safety to attract women to not only traditional male
  dominated sectors like construction, but also sectors which currently attract a female
  work force.

Poor working conditions push prospective female workers away from the labor markets and
curb companies’ ability to retain skilled and experienced workers. As the leading female-
dominated industry, the apparel industry is well-known for its poor working conditions. Low
wages, long hours, high temperatures, excessive noise, poor air quality, unsanitary
environment, and abuse (both verbal and physical) often characterize working conditions in
apparel factories in many developing countries. Despite these risks, the apparel sector has
unusually high development potential, because apparel workers tend to be women whose
alternative options for employment are likely to be in the low-skilled agriculture and service
sectors. Being a global industry with international value chains, buyers have become
increasingly concerned about the working conditions of apparel workers. The Better Work (BW)
program (see Box 3) is an example of a partnership between international organizations (IFC
and ILO), buyers, garment factories and workers in addressing working condition problems.
Recent independent studies have shown that, over time, these factories exhibit improved
compliance with key national and international standards (such as safety, fire prevention,
protective gear, accurate compensation, discrimination). Workers themselves also report that
factories are safer. In a follow-up survey after the introduction of the BW Program in Lesotho,
workers reported occupational health and safety (OSH) as the area with the most improvement
and attributed the improvement to changes in workers’ awareness and factory policies.


     Box 3: The Better Work program has helped improve working conditions in the garment
                                            sector

 The Better Work (BW) program is a partnership launched in 2007 by the IFC and
 the International Labour Organization (ILO), with the aim of improving working conditions in
 garment factories. BW trains local enterprise advisors to assist factories in becoming
 compliant with national labor laws and international standards, with the advisors then
 conducting unannounced assessments. The BW program also promotes the behavioral
 change of workers and factory management through training and advisory services. The BW


43
 World Bank. World Development Report 2012.
44
 UN Women. Leave No One behind: A Call to Action For Gender Equality and Women’s Economic Empowerment: Report of the
UN Secretary-General’s High level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment.


                                                         29
 advisory services help to create Performance Improvement Consultative Committees (PICCs)
 in factories. Data from Cambodia, Lesotho, and Vietnam suggest that the creation of PICCs is
 particularly valuable. In terms of training, the workers and managers surveyed often
 expressed how they were able to use the knowledge gained through BW training to create
 safer, healthier, and more collaborative work environments. In addition to addressing
 working conditions, the training in the apparel industry also helps women gain more equality
 in their families. Working in urban areas, in the formal sector, and in the fast-paced and
 demanding work of the garment industry could act as an agent of change in breaking old
 norms, like women bearing the burden of household chores. The data also reveal that
 communication skills learned through BW have been key in changing parochial norms, as
 improved communication skills allow women to negotiate a new balance inside their home
 and society. Improving working conditions also makes solid economic sense. Research from
 Vietnam shows that BW factories may be performing better than their counterparts. Being in
 the BW program is associated with significant increases in apparel exports both to the world
 generally and to the United States in particular. This relationship holds true after controlling
 for relevant factors that may affect the apparel trade (Kotikula et al, 2015). However, more
 research is needed to rigorously establish this relationship between working conditions and
 profitability across a range of sectors in different contexts.

 Source: Kotikula et al. (2015) Interwoven: How the Better Work Program Improves Job and Life Quality in the Apparel Sector .
 World Bank.


 Pro-actively address gender-based violence

This issue not only includes violence at home, but also sexual harassment both at work and
while travelling to work. Women exposed to partner violence have shown higher work
absenteeism, lower productivity, and lower earnings than similar women who are not. A meta-
analysis of 41studies showed negative impacts of sexual harassment on multiple aspects of
women’s well-being and job performance and satisfaction.45 A study in Peru found significant
costs of domestic violence to companies through worker absenteeism, amounting to an
estimated aggregate national cost to firms’ equivalent to 3.7 percent of GDP.46 This does not
include the emotional cost borne by the woman or her family. One recent study in the United
Kingdom estimates the costs of domestic violence linked to loss of life satisfaction at 10 percent
of GDP.47 A particularly strong barrier to female labor force participation includes safety issues
on the way to work, including lack of safe transportation. Security in transport is a paramount
determinant of women’s use of transportation. Policy interventions focusing on infrastructure
(lighting in stations, design of buses and trains to allow strollers, alarm systems, and special
focus on security in public transport systems etc.) can enable women to access more and better
jobs outside their homes. Several WBG-supported urban transportation operations in Latin



45 Willness, C. R., P. Steel, and K. Lee. 2007. “A meta-analysis of the antecedents and consequences of workplace sexual
harassment.” Personnel Psychology
46 World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.
47 Santos, C. 2013. “Costs of Domestic Violence: A Life Satisfaction Approach.” Fiscal Studies 34 (3): 391–409.




                                                              30
America and South Asia have already incorporated measures aimed at making the mass
transportation systems safer and more convenient for women.


                                  Box 4: Partnering with the private sector


 Partnerships with the private sector are critical in advancing economic opportunities for women and
 supporting gender equity at work. One such partnership led by the IFC is SheWorks, a global private
 sector partnership to improve employment opportunities and working conditions for women. This
 partnership currently has 13 leading private sector companies in 9 sectors and 20 countries that have
 pledged to implement a minimum of 3 measures to support women in the workplace: flexible work,
 effective anti-sexual harassment mechanisms and programs to accelerate women in leadership.




Countries also need to address domestic violence effectively. Support to victims should be
quick and integrated—with telephone hotlines, emergency shelters, legal assistance,
psychological care, support groups, income generation programs, and child welfare services.
For example, Malaysia has one-stop crisis centers at government hospitals. When a woman
arrives at an emergency department with injuries from domestic violence, she is immediately
examined and treated by medical personnel and referred to social workers and volunteers from
women’s organizations, who then see that she receives counseling, if needed, and coordinate
further assistance.48 Leadership from the private sector can also help address sexual
harassment at work. Examples from some top companies show that they are pushing the
envelope to ensure the effectiveness of their sexual harassment policies.49 Gap Inc., for
example, operates in an industry where workers are vulnerable to sexual harassment and
physical and verbal abuse. It developed and instituted a Zero Means Zero policy, which
underscores the company’s zero tolerance of harassment of all kinds.

 Level the basic playing field; address legal barriers to women’s access to good jobs

Legal restrictions prevent women from entering more lucrative occupations. The World Bank
report on Women, Business, and Law examines laws differentiating between men and women
in ways that affect women’s opportunities and incentives to work as entrepreneurs or
employees. These legal differences negatively affect female participation rates and also GDP
growth. All the 141 economies covered by Women, Business, and Law have labor regulations
that differentiate between men and women. The differences are mostly in four areas: working
hours and industry restrictions, parental benefits, retirement and pension, and legal rights. 50
This report found that 44 economies restrict the working hours of women and 71 limit the

48World Bank. World Development Report 2012.
49IFC. She Works: Putting Gender-Smart Commitments into Practice, executive summary.
50Yasmin Bin-Humam, Khrystyna Kushnir, and Rita Ramalho (2012) Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in Getting a Job.

 http://wbl.worldbank.org/~/media/WBG/WBL/Documents/Notes/Mapping-Legal-Gender-Gap-in-Getting-a-Job.pdf.


                                                          31
industries in which they can work. For example, in Slovenia, as in many other economies,
women are prohibited from working underground in mines. India has different regulations for
shop and factory workers, with female shop workers able to work slightly later hours than
female factory workers. Women are prohibited from working near cotton openers or in jobs
deemed unsafe by state governments.51 Addressing such legal barriers is almost the basic
minimum that policy makers can do to level the playing field and enable women to access more
and better jobs. Figure 17 from the recent UN report highlights some specific areas where
women continue to face fundamental legal constraints.

             Figure 17: Examples of legal constraints and reforms to overcome them

 Discriminatory law/lack of  Number of        Recommended reform         Example of reform
 legal protection            countries
 Assets
 Married women lack legal    7                Both spouses must agree    In Brazil in 1962, legal reform to the civil
 right to administer                          in administering marital   code allowed women to administer their
 property                                     property                   own property
 Married women lack rights   6                Gender neutral             As of 2001, wives no longer need their
 to sign a contract, open a                   legislation                husbands’ permission to work in Turkey
 bank account and/or
 register a business
 Employment (formal and informal)
 Existing laws do not        103              Ban discrimination         In 2001, Guinea enacted labor laws
 mandate                                      based on gender in         mandating nondiscrimination in hiring
 nondiscrimination based                      hiring                     based on gender
 on gender in hiring
 Existing laws do not        101              Provide equal              In 2008, Mauritius adopted legislation
 mandate equal                                remuneration for work      requiring equal remuneration for work of
 remuneration for work of                     of equal value             equal value for women
 equal value
 Married women cannot        17               Repeal discriminatory      Bolivia repealed provisions that previously
 pursue trade or a                            legislation                granted husbands the ability to restrict
 profession in the same way                                              their wives from working for reasons of
 as married men                                                          morality or prejudice to their role in the
                                                                         household
 Women (nonpregnant and        100            Lift restrictions on       Taiwan, China, lifted previous bans that
 nonnursing) are restricted                   women’s employment         prevented women from working in mining,
 from certain jobs                                                       jobs deemed hazardous and occupations
                                                                         that require heavy lifting
 Extend social and labor                      Ensure universal           In 2002, Thailand created a Universal
 protection coverage to                       coverage for health,       Coverage Scheme that provides informal
 informal workers                             pension, unemployment,     workers with health insurance
                                              maternity and disability
                                              benefits

Source: Women, Business and the Law, 2016; as cited by UNHLP Report on Women's Economic Empowerment, 2016




51   Ibid.


                                                        32
 Take a gendered approach to new sectors of labor demand, such as green jobs and ICT,
  and encourage more girls to take up STEM subjects.

ICT can be a game changer for women, compensating for restricted mobility by allowing for
virtual access to information, financial resources, and social networks. Technological change,
driven by the improving capacities and wider adoption of digital technologies, is having
profound effects on the world of work and can create opportunities for women. For example,
over 85 percent of U.S. sellers on the Ecommerce platform Etsy are women, which is more than
three times the share of women among small business owners.52 The ability of such
technologies to increase access to financial and public services could also serve to empower
women, especially where social norms or constraints on movement might otherwise hold back
participation. But they also embed certain risks due to gender gaps in access to technology,
which could mean that women are less likely to benefit from technologies in their work,
whether they are in high-paying, high-skilled digital economy jobs, or as users of Internet-based
information or job search services. A conscious effort to focus on bridging these barriers to
connect more women to technology and on training them to improve digital literacy could offer
opportunities to address gender gaps and access to higher paying jobs. In Kosovo, a pilot
program called ‘Women in Online Work’ (WoW) aimed to increase the ability of young
underemployed women to work online. The pilot trained about 100 women in skills that are in
demand by the ever-growing online freelancing market. By the end of the program, 56 trainees
obtained at least one online contract, with cumulative earnings reaching close to US$13,000.
Box 5 gives further examples of technology as an enabler.

Policy actions are needed to strengthen women’s opportunities in these new sectors. Policy
actions should aim to bring together civil society groups, community leaders, governments, and
the private sector so as to reduce the risk of women being disconnected, left without a voice,
and without the means to fully participate in a world that is increasingly digital. Similarly,
opportunities in the green economy in newer industries like renewable energy could offer some
opportunities to break through traditional occupational sex segregation by focusing attention
on STEM education, technical training, and job placement for female students. An option to
encourage more girls to take STEM courses is through the TVET programs (Technical Vocational
Education and Training). Early college courses emphasizing real world applications of STEM
work have also shown to increase the retention of women in STEM majors. Interventions could
include inclusive messaging about who can be a technician and revising admission policies to
avoid requiring experience that will be taught (for example, requiring computer science major
applicants to have significant computer programming experience).53




52http://fortune.com/2015/08/02/etsy-sellers-women-2/
53The World Bank Group. Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth, 2016-2023. Washington DC: World Bank
Group.


                                                          33
                               Box 5: Technology as an Enabler54

 eRwanda: Campaigns for Enhancing Digital Literacy and Information and Communications
 Technology (ICT) Skills. Bridging the digital divide by including women in all ICT training was a
 high priority for Rwanda’s government when operations began in 2007. The eRwanda project
 trained more than 2,000 citizens and focused on having a minimum of 30 percent female
 students in each of the classes it offered to young Rwandans to obtain the “ICT driving
 license.”

 eLanka: Common access and training through telecenters. eLanka aimed to develop locally
 relevant content through programs that educated marginalized rural populations in the uses
 of the Internet/ The project created an eGov portal with a particular focus on creating local
 content for women and girls in Sinhalese and on training women to access information
 through government-funded telecenters.

 eGhana: Creating jobs for women in the ICT industry (IT enabled services, Business process
 outsourcing). eGhana is credited with employing women in the IT industry and helping create
 strong ICT skills among women and young girls employed through the project. eTransform
 Ghana, a follow-up operation, builds on the results of the earlier project and includes an eID
 component that for the first time allows women to be included in processes related to digital
 identity, obtaining credentials, and authentication, all essential elements to online service
 delivery, financial inclusion, and social protection.


 Focus on adolescent girls as they can benefit greatly from support to facilitate the
  transition into the workforce

Support for adolescent girls as they transition from school to work can enable them to access
better quality jobs. Reaching adolescent girls is critical because decisions made and behaviors
established during this period affect their attitudes, choices, and development later in life.
While adolescence for boys typically ushers in increased mobility and autonomy, for girls it
often comes with increased restrictions and less freedom to exercise choice.55 This needs a
more comprehensive approach that includes a mix of counselling and life-skills training to try to
change behaviors, instill confidence, business training, vocational training, job placement and
follow up support. An example of such a bundle of support is the Adolescent Girls Initiative,
which was designed to better understand what works in helping adolescent girls. For example,
in Liberia 2500 young women were trained for either wage employment or self-employment
plus life skills, with an emphasis on job placement and follow-up support. A rigorous evaluation
showed that employment rose by 47 percent. The impacts were larger for the self-employment
track than for wage employment. The project also significantly increased girls’ savings and had

54   Ibid.
55   Ibid.


                                                34
positive effects on their confidence and job satisfaction. Scholarships and conditional cash
transfers can increase school attendance and reduce dropout rates for adolescents, especially
girls. These positive impacts are well documented in Latin America, such as in Colombia,
Ecuador, Mexico, and Nicaragua.56 More work is, however, needed to better understand and
design programs that specifically target this age group of women. Box 6 describes a project for
adolescent girls in India.


     Box 6: Tejaswini: Socioeconomic Empowerment of Adolescent Girls & Young Women
                                 Project in Jharkhand, India

 The government of India is scaling up its efforts to foster female youth economic opportunity.
 The World Bank’s US$ 63 million project Tejaswini: Socioeconomic Empowerment of
 Adolescent Girls & Young Women Project in Jharkhand state of India will support adolescent
 girls and young women, ages 14-24, to complete their secondary level education and acquire
 relevant skills for the job market. The project is expected to benefit about 680,000
 adolescent girls and young women. The project will intervene at two levels – at the
 community and at the institutional level. The community-based platforms (“clubs” and
 “centers”) will hold regular counseling and guidance sessions, life skills education, livelihood
 support services, and provide information on, and access to, broader services and
 opportunities—especially on project-contracted training and courses for adolescent girls and
 young women. At the institutional level, it will work with partner institutions through
 performance-based contracts to deliver vocational training, business skills training, and non-
 formal education to a subset of adolescent girls and young women.

 Source: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/06/21/world-bank-approves-usd63-million-socio-
 economic-empowerment-adolescent-girls-young-women-in-jharkhand-india



 Address gender parity in leadership positions

Women in senior positions can act as positive role models and instill more confidence among
younger women. Exposure to female role models, whose positions of leadership or power
contradict stereotypes of women’s role, can reduce the intergenerational transmission of
gender norms. A study of political reservation for women (i.e., quotas for legislative positions
for women) in India showed that teenage girls who have repeated exposure to women leaders
are more likely to express aspirations that challenge traditional norms, such as a desire to
marry later, have fewer children, and obtain jobs requiring higher education.57 Some countries
have very proactively addressed gender parity in senior corporate positions. For example,
Norway passed a law in 2003 mandating at least 40 percent representation of each gender on
the board of publicly listed companies. Many European countries have followed suit (Profeta

56World Bank. World Development Report 2012.
57Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova. 2009.“Powerful Women: Does
Exposure Reduce Bias?”Quarterly Journal of Economics


                                                          35
and others, 2014). Germany passed a law that requires publicly listed companies to have
women occupy at least 30 percent of supervisory seats, as of 2016. Overall, the introduction of
quotas has supported a substantial rise in the share of women on the boards of Euro pe’s largest
publicly listed companies, showing that strong policy action can positively influence women’s
economic opportunities, although a lot more still remains to be done. According to OECD
(2014), across the 27 European Union countries, only 25 percent of business owners with
employees are women and only 3 percent of CEOs are women. The percentage of females on
boards of directors in the largest listed companies in most countries is below 30 percent.

 Help women entrepreneurs to access capital and financial services

On the supply side, financial institutions and banks need to better understand how to grow
their portfolio of women-owned small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs). At present, they
often consider women-owned SMEs as ‘risky’ business due to their lack of access to collateral
and lack of financial literacy. A survey of 106 banks found that half did not collect sex-
disaggregated data on their lending portfolio to SMEs.58 This lack of disaggregated data
significantly hampers banks’ capacity to engage women entrepreneurs as an under-tapped
business market. In Brazil, for example, IFC’s investment and advisory services to Banco Itau are
supporting the development of a specific value proposition for women-owned SMEs, including
the use of psychometric credit-risk scoring measures that are more women-friendly. In Nigeria,
the IFC has partnered with Access Bank to extend credit to women-owned distributors to bring
more women into Coca-Coca’s value chain and enable greater business growth.59 Reforming
secured transactions regimes, allowing for more alternative forms of collateral, and creating
collateral registries for movable assets, such as livestock and jewelry, also benefits women by
enabling them to overcome their lack of access to titled land and unlock formal credit markets.
In Ghana, the World Bank Group supported secured transactions reforms and the
establishment of a modern collateral registry. Early results showed that women entrepreneurs
were among its top users, and as of June 2014, almost 15,000 registrations at $75 million value
were made by women entrepreneurs.60

 Strengthen the collective voice

Fundamental to any action towards addressing gender parity is the issue of women’s voice
and agency.61 Central to any reform, policymaking, or initiative for women is that women
themselves should lead these processes. This allows women to voice their needs and demands
and enhance their bargaining power, advocating for legal and policy reforms, and increasing
access to markets on fair and efficient terms. Research also shows the benefits of the active
participation of women in making local decisions and in infrastructure and service delivery

58 Multilateral Investment Fund (MIF). 2013. SMEs in Latin America and the Caribbean: Closing the Gap for Banks in the Region.
6th Regional Survey. Washington, DC: MIF.
59 World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.
60 World Bank Group Gender Strategy, 2016-2023
61 Agency means an individual's (or group's) ability to make effective choices and to transform those choices into desired

outcomes.


                                                             36
management bodies. Recognizing the importance of giving women equal voice and an equal
role in decision making in societies and households, the WBG’s gender strategy has identified
four areas of focus: 1) addressing issues of child and early marriage, and teen pregnancies with
a special focus on girls’ agency; 2) addressing gender-based violence in key operations:
transport, extractives, citizen security, health, and urban and rural development; 3) building the
evidence base for changing adverse norms of masculinity, especially in fragile and conflict
states (FCS); and 4) promoting and enhancing women’s participat ion and decision making in
service delivery governance structures (community-driven development, water use
associations, school boards and local government service management).

 Address knowledge and data gaps in understanding gender inequalities
Planning effective targeted interventions requires good diagnostics; and good diagnostics
require good country level data. Globally, close to 80 percent of the countries regularly
produce sex-disaggregated statistics on mortality, labor force participation, and education and
training. Less than one-third of countries disaggregate statistics by sex on informal
employment, entrepreneurship, earnings and unpaid work or collect data on violence on
women.62 The WBG‘s new data strategy for supporting household survey programs provides for
establishing best practices on collecting high-quality, individual-level information on priority
areas such as asset ownership and control, time use, control over income and employment; this
will help client countries meet the increasing demand for this type of information as part of
Sustainable Development Goal 5 and beyond.63 In addition to its country work, the WBG is
engaging in global initiatives with the UN and ILO on the issue of better data. Figure 18 shows
where urgent action is needed to close data gaps.

              Figure 18: Indicators where urgent action is needed to close data gaps64

 Indicator
 1. Average number of hours spent on unpaid domestic work by sex (Note: Separate
     housework and childcare if possible)
 2. Average number of hours spent on paid and unpaid work combined (total work
     burden), by sex
 3. Percentage of firms owned by women, by size
 4. Employment rate of persons aged 25–48 with a child under age 3 living in a household
     and with no children living in the household, by sex
 5. Proportion of children under age 3 in formal care
 6. Proportion of women aged 15–49 subjected to physical or sexual violence in the last 12
     months by an intimate partner
 7. Proportion of women aged 15–49 subjected to physical or sexual violence in the last 12
     months by a non-partner
 8. Proportion of adult population owning land

62 World Bank Group Gender Strategy, 2016-2023
63 World Bank Group Gender Strategy, 2016-2023
64 World Bank. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.




                                                          37
 9. Informal employment as a percentage of total non-agricultural employment, by sex
 10. Proportion of population with access to credit (and financial services), by sex
 11. Share of female science, engineering, manufacturing and construction graduates at
     tertiary level

Source: “Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs,” World Bank


Conclusion
Better jobs that empower women and contribute to gender equality can increase
development impact through better living standards, productivity, and social cohesion. Given
the widespread nature of gender gaps in the world of work, it is important to address the
multiple and mutually reinforcing nature of constraints that influence the ability of women to
participate in economic activities. Women’s employment decisions result from an interaction
between prevailing gender and social norms about educational choices, occupational choices,
domestic household responsibilities and family duties, mobility, constraints on access to
resources that govern female and male time allocation, and access to markets for labor and
inputs.65 Reducing these constraints and ensuring equitable access to quality jobs will require
focused and targeted action, from both policy makers as well private sector leaders. There is no
magic key that will unlock gender equality in the world of work. A gender-smart jobs strategy is
a long-term commitment that requires a coordinated policy across the public and private
sectors on the basis of country-specific diagnostics, but such a policy will have pay-offs for
growth, development, and shared prosperity for all.




65World Bank Group. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth.


                                                           38
Annex A: Countries Included in the Calculations of Occupational Sex-
Segregation
   Countries included in the calculations of
   occupational sex-segregation                     Year
                       Aruba                        2011
                      Belgium                       2008
                       Belize                       2005
                       Bhutan                       2013
                     Botswana                       2010
                        Brazil                      2013
                        Chile                       2013
                     Colombia                       2013
                       Croatia                      2008
                       Cyprus                       2008
                   Czech Republic                   2008
                      Denmark                       2008
                     El Salvador                    2007
                       Estonia                      2008
                      Ethiopia                      2012
                       Finland                      2008
                       France                       2008
                      Georgia                       2007
                      Germany                       2008
                      Hungary                       2008
                       Iceland                      2008
                  Iran, Islamic Rep.                2010
                        Iraq                        2008
                       Ireland                      2008
                        Italy                       2008
                      Jamaica                       2013
                       Latvia                       2008
                      Lesotho                       2008
                      Lithuania                     2008
                 Macao SAR, China                   2013
                  Macedonia, FYR                    2008
                    Madagascar                      2005
                      Maldives                      2010
                        Mali                        2004
                       Malta                        2008
                      Moldova                       2013
                      Morocco                       2012



                                               39
        Nepal                2008
     Netherlands             2008
       Nigeria               2007
       Norway                2008
      Portugal               2008
      Romania                2008
 Russian Federation          2013
Sao Tome and Principe        2006
   Slovak Republic           2008
     South Africa            2013
        Spain                2008
       St. Lucia             2004
       Sweden                2008
     Switzerland             2008
 Syrian Arab Republic        2011
      Tanzania               2006
        Tonga                2003
       Uganda                2003
United Arab Emirates         2008
  United Kingdom             2008




                        40
Bibliography
Agénor, P.R., J. Mares, and P. Sorsa. 2015. “Gender Equality and Economic Growth in India: A
      Quantitative Framework” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, 2015.
Aguirre, D., L. Hoteit, Leila Hoteit, Christine Rupp, and Karim Sabbagh. 2012. Empowering the
       Third Billion: Women and the World of Work in 2012. Booz and Company.
Australia Human Rights Commission. 2013. “Investing in Care: Recognizing and Valuing Those
       Who Care.” Vol. 2, Technical Papers.
Barros, R., Pedro Olinto, Trine Lunde, and Mirela Carvalho. 2011. "The Impact of Access to Free
       Childcare on Women’s Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in
       Low-Income Neighborhoods of Rio de Janeiro." In World Bank Economists’ Forum.
Beaman, L., Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova.
     2009. “Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     124, no. 4: 1497-1540.
Berthelon, M., D. Kruger, and M. Oyarzun. 2015. “The Effects of Longer School Days on
       Mother’s Labor Force Participation: Discussion Paper 9212.” Institute for the Study of
       Labor, Bonn, Germany.
Bin-Humam, Y., K. Kushnir, and R. Ramalho. 2012. "Mapping the Legal Gender Gap in Getting a
      Job." The World Bank: 8.
      http://wbl.worldbank.org/~/media/WBG/WBL/Documents/Notes/Mapping-Legal-
      Gender-Gap-in-Getting-a-Job.pdf.
Bloom, D., David Canning, Günther Fink, and Jocelyn E. Finlay. 2009. “Fertility, Female Labor
       Force Participation, and the Demographic Dividend.” Journal of Economic Growth 14 (2):
       79–101.
Christiansen, L., Huidan Lin, Joana Pereira, Petia Topalova, and Rima Turk. 2016. “Unlocking
        Female Employment Potential in Europe: Drivers and Benefits.” Washington DC: IMF.
Cuberes, D., and M. Teignier. 2015. “How Costly are Labor Gender Gaps? Estimates for the
      Balkans and Turkey.” Washington, DC: World Bank,
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/22195.
———. 2016. "Aggregate Effects of Gender Gaps in the Labor Market: A Quantitative
    Estimate."    Journal of Human Capital 10, no. 1: 1-32.
Dong, X.-Y., and L. Qi. 2013. “Household Burdens, Quality of Market Work Time, and Men’s and
       Women’s Earnings in China.” University of Winnipeg, Department of Economics Working
       Paper No. 2013–01. Table 1. The University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Canada.



                                              41
Dustmann, C., and U. Schönberg. 2012. “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Children’s
      Long-Term Outcomes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4, no. 3 (2012):
      190-224.
Elborgh-Woytek, K., Monique Newiak, Kalpana Kochhar, Stefania Fabrizio, Kangni Kpodar,
       Philippe Wingender, Benedict J. Clements, and Gerd Schwartz. 2013. Women, Work, and
       the Economy: Macroeconomic Gains from Gender Equity. Washington DC: IMF.
Fong, Monica, and Michael Lokshin. "Child care and women's labor force participation in
       Romania." (1999).
Hegewisch, A., and H. Hartmann. 2014. Occupational Segregation and the Gender Wage Gap: A
      Job Half Done. Institute of Women’s Policy Research.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2016. She Works: Putting Gender-Smart Commitments
        into Practice, executive summary. Washington DC: IFC.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2010. Women in Labor Markets: Measuring Progress
        and Identifying Challenges. Geneva: ILO.
———. 2012. “Statistical Update on Employment in the Informal Economy.” Geneva: ILO.
    http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/INFORMAL_ECONOMY/2012-06-
    Statisticalpercent20updatepercent20-percent20v2.pdf.
Institute for Women’s Policy Research. 2012. “Fact Sheet: The Gender Wage Gap by
        Occupation.”
Levtov, R. 2016. “Men, Gender, and Inequality in Unpaid Care.” Promundo, UNHLP Background
       Brief.
Lokshin, Michael, Elena E. Glinskaya, and Marito Garcia. The effect of early childhood
       development programs on women's labor force participation and older children's
       schooling in Kenya. Vol. 15. World Bank Publications, 2000.
MIF (Multilateral Investment Fund). 2013. “SMEs in Latin America and the Caribbean: Closing
      the Gap for Banks in the Region.” 6th Regional Survey. Washington, DC: MIF.
Mitra, A., J. Bang, and A. Biswas. 2015. “Gender Equality and Economic Growth: Is it Equality of
       Opportunity or Equality of Outcomes?” Feminist Economics, 21(1):110 –135.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2012. “Closing the Gender
      Gap: Act Now.” Paris: OECD.
Powell, Lisa M. "The impact of child care costs on the labour supply of married mothers:
       Evidence from Canada." Canadian Journal of Economics (1997): 577-594.




                                               42
Ray, R., J. Gornick, and J. Schmitt. 2008. "Parental Leave Policies in 21 Countries." Assessing
        Generosity and Gender Equality. Washington, DC: Center for Economic and Policy
        Research.
Santos, C. 2013. “Costs of Domestic Violence: A Life Satisfaction Approach.” Fiscal Studies 34
       (3): 391–409.
Smith, N. 2013. “World of Labor: Gender Quotas on Boards of Directors.” IZA World of Labor.
UN Women (United Nations Women). 2016. Leave No One Behind: A Call to Action for Gender
     Equality and Women’s Economic Empowerment. Report of the UN Secretary-General’s
     High Level Panel on Women’s Economic Empowerment.
Willness, C., P. Steel, and K. Lee. 2007. “A Meta-Analysis of the Antecedents and Consequences
       of Workplace Sexual Harassment.” Personnel Psychology 60, no. 1: 127-162.
World Bank. 2011. World Development Report, 2012: Gender Equality and Development.
      Washington DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-0-8213-8810-5.
———. 2014. Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.
    Washington DC: World Bank.
———. 2015a. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty
    Reduction and Inclusive Growth. Washington DC: World Bank.
———. 2015b. Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth, 2016-2023.
    Washington DC: World Bank.
World Economic Forum. "The Global Gender Gap Report 2015." World Economic Forum,
      Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
Zarya, Valentina. 2015. “Meet the 86%: This is Why Most Etsy Sellers are Women.” Fortune.
        http://fortune.com/2015/08/02/etsy-sellers-women-2/




                                                43
          Address: 1776 G St, NW, Washington, DC 20006
Website: http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/jobsanddevelopment
                        Twitter: @WBG_Jobs
              Blog: https://blogs.worldbank.org/jobs/




                             44
