             WORLD BANK GROUP
             DISASTER RISK FINANCING &
                 INSURANCE PROGRAM
                         Supporting countries to
                         manage the cost of
                         disaster and climate shocks




$50 billion to                By 2050, the average       100 million people
                              annual economic losses     could be pushed into poverty
$200 billion                  from Asian flood           by climate change over the next
increase in average           disasters could surge to   15 years.
annual weather-related
losses & damages              $500 billion.
alone since the 1980s.
   Financial losses from natural disasters continue to rise with developing
countries and their low-income populations experiencing the greatest impacts.




61%                                                                      2.5 - 3.5%

                                                                             3x
14%                                                                         more

                                                                            $1.46
15%                                                                         billion


But the cost of disasters does not have to be so devastating.
   Financial protection policies and instruments help governments be
       effective risk managers, rather than emergency borrowers -
     protecting livelihoods, investments, and development progress.




   $
        post-disaster local GDP by 2-4%.




                                        greater the amount of losses that are insured, the
        lower any subsequent declines in growth and GDP losses will be.




        The Disaster Risk Financing & Insurance Program leads
        the dialogue on financial resilience as a component of the WBG’s
        support to vulnerable countries on better managing disasters
        and climate shocks.
HOW WE SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS
      DRF for Rapid Response. Support sovereign and sub-sovereign governments to better plan
 !    for and implement mechanisms to provide rapid access to money following disaster shocks.
      • Since 2008, 9 countries were provided with contingent credit worth US$2.3 billion.
 $    • Lao PDR set up a new State Reserve Fund to manage the impact of disasters.
      • Vanuatu received $1.9 million from PCRAFI two weeks after Tropical Cyclone Pam struck in 2015.


      DRF for Budget Protection. Support governments to become proactive financial risk
      managers to meet the cost of disasters and climate shocks.
      • Colombia, Kenya, Indonesia, Peru, the Philippines, Serbia, and Vietnam have developed or are working


 S
        towards national financial protection strategies.
      • Colombia insured $38 billion of new road infrastructure built through public-private partnerships.
      • Uruguay received US$200 million in contingent investment to support its energy price stabilization fund.


      DRF for Resilient Livelihoods. Support governments to integrate social protection schemes
      in its DRF strategy to offer rapid and timely assistance to vulnerable households affected by shocks.
      • In 2015 the Government of Kenya scaled up one of its safety net programs at the early signs of
        a drought providing cash transfers directly into the bank accounts of over 200,000 households in
        addition to those that already received regular cash assistance.



      DRF for Agriculture. Support countries to implement sustainable, cost-effective public private
      partnerships in agricultural insurance as part of broader agricultural risk management.
      • 34 million Indian farmers and 15,000 Mongolian herder households are benefiting from more effective
        insurance cover.
      • Kenya launched the Kenya National Agricultural Insurance Program, a Public Private Partnership to
        protect vulnerable farmers and pastoralists against production shocks from droughts and floods.



      DRF for Homeowners and Small Businesses. Support governments to strengthen
      supervision and promote the development of private property catastrophe risk insurance markets.
      • Morocco is revising its catastrophe risk insurance law as a part of national risk management reform.
      • Peru and the Philippines are exploring the establishment of insurance pools to support the expansion
        of private catastrophe risk insurance market.



      DRF Analytics. Provide public officials with the information and tools to make informed financial
      decisions on managing disaster and climate risks.
      • Developed a framework for cost-benefit analysis of national DRF strategies.
      • Analytical support to Central American countries considering joining the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
        Insurance Facility (CCRIF)"



      DRF Global Policy, Knowledge, and Training. Leverage the WBG’s convening
      power to invest in policy advice and knowledge that supports policy reforms and financial instruments.
      • Developed a DRF training program, with a pilot reaching over 200 participants in 11 countries;
      • Providing ongoing policy advice to APEC; the G7 InsuResilience initiative; the G20 Presidency; the UNSG’s
        High Level Panel on Humanitarian Financing; the V20; and the Sendai Framework for DRR.
      • The “Understanding Risk & Finance Conference” in Addis Ababa in November 2015, was attended by 450
        policy-makers and experts from 38 countries across Africa.
    The Disaster Risk Financing & Insurance Program brings the financial, analytical,
      advisory and convening services of the World Bank Group to governments,
                 businesses and households in more than 60 countries.




Over 360 million
  people protected through World Bank Contingent Financing.




                                                           21 Small Island Developing States
                                                             can access catastrophe risk insurance markets by working
                                                             together.




                                                                                                    21 private insurance
                                                                                                    companies
     1000+ participants                                                                                brought into new or strengthened
       at over 30 international policy discussions and knowledge sharing events,                       catastrophe risk insurance markets in the
       and more than 15 trainings and local workshops organized or                                     Pacific, India, and Mongolia.
       supported in 2015.




                                                                                                                 Climate & Disaster
                                                                                                                 Risk Management
                                                                                            En




                                                                                                                                                     en et
                                                                                               er




                                                                                                                                                    m rk
                                                                                                 gy




                                                                                                                                                  op a

                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                el l M

We connect financial
                                                                                                    an




                                                                                                                                            ev ia
                                                                                                      d




                                                                                                                                           D anc
                                                                                                       W




expertise with risk
                                                                                                        at




                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                          er




                                                                                                                                            Fi




management across many
                                                                                  Infrastructure & Urban        Disaster                      Public Debt and Risk
sectors to bring vulnerable                                                            Development                Risk
                                                                                                                Finance                          Management

countries comprehensive
                                                                                                            d




                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                          oo




solutions to become more
                                                                                                                                              ac St
                                                                                                                       Social Protection
                                                                                                     rit d F




                                                                                                                                                ro ab
                                                                                                 cu an




                                                                                                                                                  an ilit
                                                                                                        y




effective risk managers.
                                                                                               Se ure




                                                                                                                                                    d y
                                                                                                                                                     Fi
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                ul




                                                                                                                                                        sc
                                                                                            ric




                                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                          Ag




(GFDRR). We work in close coordination with the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice; and the World Bank Treasury; as well as many
other partners across the WBG for our different areas of support.


Contact: Olivier Mahul
Global Lead, Disaster Risk Finance
Program Manager, Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program
                                                                                                                                                               May 2016
