 LATIN AMERICAN COMPANIES CIRCLE

      Corporate Governance Recommendations
                             for
                    Company Groups
Based on Experiences from the Latin American Companies Circle

                       November 2014


                    Sponsoring Institution:




                        Supported by:
                                   INDEX


I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND             2

II. CHALLENGES OF COMPANY GROUPS           2

III. GENERAL PRACTICES

 a) Related Party Transactions             3

   a.1) Shared Services                    4

IV. WHOLLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES

 a) Incorporation or acquisition           4

 b) Control                                4

   b.1) Reporting Framework                4

   b.2) Appointment of Directors           5

   b.3) Internal Controls                  5

V. PARTIALLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES

 a) Incorporation or Acquisition           6

 b) Shareholders Agreement                 6

 c) Shareholder Activism                   7

   c.1) Share Voting                       7

   c.2) Appointment of Directors           7

   c.3) Reporting                          8

VI. FINAL COMMENTS                         8




                                               1
I.      INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

        These set of corporate governance recommendations for group of companies has been developed
by the Latin American Companies Circle. The Circle is a group of Latin American firms that have
demonstrated leadership in advocating and practicing governance improvements for companies
throughout Latin America. The Circle is sponsored by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and
supported by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and is presently
composed of 14 companies: Los Grobo from Argentina; Grupo Algar, CPFL Energia, Embraer, Natura
and Ultrapar from Brazil; Grupo Argos, Carvajal and ISA from Colombia; Florida Ice from Costa Rica;
Grupo Gentera from Mexico; Buenaventura, Ferreycorp and Grupo Graña y Montero from Peru.

         This document is based on experiences of the Circle member companies and takes into
consideration limited analysis of the companies’ own practices and covers areas related with wholly- and
partially-owned subsidiaries.

         The objective of these recommendations is to share a set of best practices for companies in Latin
America to consider while developing or improving their respective policies and practices for company
groups. These best practices derive primarily from the experiences of members of the Circle, most of
which are listed companies, and therefore may be relevant for other publicly-listed companies of the
region. At the same time, many of the practices might be relevant and could be adopted by non-listed
companies as well. Furthermore, this document does not imply that all Circle members follow these
practices or suggest that companies should follow all of the suggested practices – each company is unique
and should consider its own facts and circumstances such as domestic laws and regulations, ownership
structure, history and culture, market practices, needs and requirements of its relevant stakeholders, either
local or foreign, governmental or private.

       The Companies Circle views these recommendations as non-exclusive that eventually may be
updated to reflect changing realities and emphasize additional points and developments in the corporate
governance field as an evolving area. At the same time, members consider that companies in Latin
America could benefit from this document and gradually improve their relevant practices where such
improvements are necessary.

II.     CHALLENGES OF COMPANY GROUPS

         Company groups have numerous decision-making levels and, therefore, a number of challenges
may arise with respect to strategic objectives, implementation and monitoring of strategies, dissemination
of corporate culture, management of corporate risks, corporate reporting and mitigations of potential
conflicts of interests, among other matters. Company groups may also have various shareholders in
different instances. A common structure for a company group includes a listed holding company that
owns several subsidiaries, each with different business lines. Therefore, in this environment where the
decision-making process is more complex than in stand-alone companies, it is of great importance to
adopt minimum standards of corporate governance in order to align interests and create an adequate
setting for the sustainable development.

         The benefits of adopting a governance framework for company groups are multiple. In the view
of the Circle members, a governance framework for a conglomerate creates value for holding companies,
their affiliates or subsidiaries, as well as for their shareholders.




                                                                                                           2
       A governance framework for company groups allows the global integration of the business in
accordance with the group’s business model, maximizing operational efficiency at the subsidiary
companies and providing the dissemination, implementation, and compliance with the general strategy,
through the exchange of best practices among subsidiary companies and ensuring their decision-making
autonomy.

        A number of jurisdictions across Latin America have not promulgated laws and regulations
governing conglomerates1 and therefore, setting forth an applicable framework is a decision which lies at
the shareholder level, which could provide for clearer shareholder rights, allocation of Board authority at
the subsidiary level, adequate oversight, control and disclosure of information by subsidiary companies.

         Moreover, in the case of partially-owned subsidiaries, the adoption of clear governance rules
results fundamental in order to permit shareholders not related with a corporate group to understand the
applicable decision-making process and the relationship among a holding and its subsidiaries, especially
with respect to payment of dividends, intercompany transactions, access and use of information from
subsidiary companies.

III.     GENERAL PRACTICES

         The chief executive of a holding company, appointed by the Board of Directors, usually takes
overall responsibility for the organisation and strategic coordination within a group through the
dissemination, implementation, and monitoring of the global strategy and basic management guidelines
established by the Board.

         Control of a subsidiary is achieved through the implementation of different measures, which
generally include: (i) the establishment and clear communication of a group’s general strategy; (ii)
requiring shareholder vote or consent rights for specific matters; (iii) establishing corporate policies and
procedures for key matters (i.e. branding, environmental and social concerns, internal controls,
compliance and accounting); (iv) having regular monitoring meetings among representatives from holding
company and from its subsidiary to follow-up on the implementation of directives and performance; ( v)
setting a corporate-wide independent2 internal audit function with a direct reporting line to the parent
company’s Board and appointment of an external auditor; (vi) implementing risk management practices;
and (vii) establishing an efficient management information system to monitor key strategic indicators.

         a)       Related Party Transactions

                  As related party transactions present potential for abuse whereby a related shareholder
         may obtain an undue benefit at the expense of shareholders, directors, creditors, providers and the
         securities market, related party transactions are generally recommended to be entered into in an
         arm’s-length basis.

                 The requirement to have related party transactions entered into on an arm’s -length basis
         could be set as a provision within the shareholders agreement or under the corporate by-laws. A
         specific related party transactions policy could also be issued. As to procedure, it is common to

1
 Colombia has issued an applicable law for conglomerates. Additionally, Mexico has recently issued a new law
governing financial groups to replace its prior law on this same subject-matter. From a best practice perspective, the
Development Bank of Latin America has recently issued a set of guidelines for company groups
2
  Independence refers to the absence of subordination of the internal auditors vis-a-vis the management of the
audited company.

                                                                                                                    3
         subject these types of transactions to the prior approval of the subsidiary company’s Board of
         Directors based on a qualified (supermajority) or unanimous vote. Moreover, to ensure a degree
         of objectivity, the prior opinion of a committee comprised by uninterested directors (qualifying as
         non-executive or, preferably, independent) is suggested. Alternatively, conflicted parties should
         recuse themselves or be prevented from voting in this matter so as to have an uninterested vote.

         a.1)     Shared Services

                 A usual arrangement in company groups to reduce administrative costs and eliminate
         redundancies is to set shared services functions or centers (which commonly may handle
         accounting, human resources and IT matters). The rendering of these types of administrative
         services by an affiliated company constitutes a related party transaction and, therefore, to avoid
         an undue benefit these should be on an arm’s-length basis. For instance, when establishing a
         shared service center, a shareholder should not be compensated as a service provider and, instead,
         payment could be made in a cost-based manner (on a reimbursement basis) to the extent
         permitted under applicable law and regulation. Such costs should be fairly borne by all group
         companies involved in accordance with services provided. In addition, consideration should be
         given to applicable tax implications.

IV.      WHOLLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES

         a)       Incorporation or acquisition

         Incorporating or acquiring a subsidiary would usually require from Board approval (generally
supported by the opinion of a Board-level committee) in the event it is material such as strategic
acquisitions or the entry into a new business line. Finally, when these types of investments are
immaterial, the respective approval process could be handled at the managerial level.

         As a general recommendation for purposes of establishing an approval system, the involvement
of corporate bodies or functions should be set in accordance with the materiality of the transaction,
typically setting approval instances and procedures for this type of transactions in accordance with
investment thresholds.

         b)       Control

         Depending on the degree of flexibility and operational autonomy that a holding company intends
to grant upon its wholly-owned subsidiary, a parent company should be in a position to add value, ensure
effective control and align interests. Various governance mechanisms exist that permit a holding company
maintain an adequate level of control over its wholly-owned subsidiaries.

         b.1)     Reporting Framework

                 In addition, an adequate information reporting framework is generally recommended.
         While a parent company holding a 99.99%3 ownership interest in a subsidiary would practically
         have full access to subsidiary information (as it participates in shareholder meetings and it
         appointed the subsidiary’s Board members), it is important to ensure that communication is
         permanent and provided in an organized manner. To set appropriate internal reporting procedures

3
 This is the common limit for a single shareholder in joint-stock companies in the jurisdictions in which Circle companies
operate where a minimum of two shareholders is generally required.


                                                                                                                        4
            to ensure timely and accurate disclosure, a holding company should previously identify material
            information (including key performance indicators and its frequency for reporting purposes) that
            has to be provided by the subsidiary.

            b.2)       Appointment of Directors

                     Another widespread practice to ensure control by the parent company over its wholly-
            owned subsidiary is the appointment of directors from the holding company at the subsidiary’s
            Board. In addition, this practice ensures a higher degree of communication. An additional practice
            is to appoint senior management members from the parent company as Board members of the
            subsidiary or to executive positions at the subsidiary (as Chief Executive Officer or Chief
            Financial Officer). For purposes of appointing a Board member to a subsidiary, a holding
            company should initially consider if a Board of Directors is necessary for its subsidiary4 and
            whether it should replicate the entire Board composition from the parent company or just appoint
            certain directors.

                     While the entire replication of a parent company’s Board at the subsidiary level would
            certainly provide a full alignment of corporate objectives and strategies, appointing non-executive
            or independent Board members at a wholly-owned subsidiary could add professional skills
            suitable for the specific business in which the subsidiary is engaged in and may provide an
            external perspective. In particular, diversified business groups may have a need to set different
            Board profiles with specific industry knowledge and experience.

                     Non-executive or independent directors could provide a different perspective and a
            critical analysis of a subsidiary’s management. Typically, these types of appointments are made
            based on the professional qualifications of the director nominee. However, finding non-executive
            or independent directors with very specific technical skills, sector and business experience may
            sometimes impose a practical challenge across the Latin American region. To address this
            practical concern, in certain jurisdictions (particularly Brazil and Peru) companies may rely on
            databases or lists of directors (sponsored by specialized organizations) to find suitable candidates.

                    An appropriate balance between the benefits of appointing non-executive or independent
            directors and maintaining control of a subsidiary could be obtained by appointing and
            maintaining a majority of related Board members (i.e. those not qualifying as non-executive or
            independent directors) at the subsidiary’s Board, in which control is ensured by a majority vote
            while an external perspective is obtained through the participation of non-executive or
            independent directors.

            b.3)       Internal Controls

                     A group-wide internal control system should be set by the parent company so as to
            control its subsidiary’s financial and business operations. The holding company’s executives are
            responsible for ensuring that the guidelines and controls (in particular limits of authority)
            established by its Board are properly implemented, including internal controls and procedures. In
            particular, a holding company should provide guidelines as to implement an independent internal
            audit function with a reporting line to the parent company’s Board or its audit committee. These
            internal audit responsibilities should include overseeing a subsidiary’s activities.



4
    For instance, a sole administrator (instead of a Board of Directors) would suffice for a special purpose vehicle/entity.

                                                                                                                               5
                 To ensure consistency and formality among group practices, the establishment of Board-
        approved corporate policies for the entire group is recommended. Matters usually addressed
        through group-wide corporate policies set by a parent company include limits to the selling of
        fixed assets, limits of indebtedness, rules for related party transactions, fixed and variable
        compensation, managerial evaluation, environmental commitments, social responsibility and
        ethical conduct. The corporate policies should apply for all subsidiaries with eventual necessary
        adjustments as approved by the holding’s Board of Directors (for example, limits of indebtedness
        for start-up companies or for specific business segments).

                 However, corporate policies should not negatively impact the development of a
        subsidiary. The scope of policies should depend upon the business needs of a group. For instance,
        in the event subsidiaries engage in different businesses, having a sole group policy could prove
        complex and impractical to address specific business concerns of subsidiaries. Therefore, it is
        also recommended that subsidiaries establish their own set of operational policies and
        procedures. A good example is state-owned companies that compete in the markets and have a
        private structure – a completely different situation from the rules and requirements applicable for
        its owner (the state).

                According to the different business segments that a conglomerate may have and its
        related risk exposure, it is recommended that the Board of Directors of a parent company
        considers whether it should address risk management on a group-wide basis or have it overseen
        by each group company separately. Based on best practice, for a conglomerate-wide risk
        oversight a Board of Directors of a holding company should at least (i) conduct ongoing mapping
        and monitoring of risks across all group companies; (ii) establish risk appetite for the entire
        corporate group; and (iii) ensure an effective risk management system has been implemented
        across the conglomerate. Should a Board deem it convenient, it could delegate these functions in
        a Board-level risk management committee.

V.      PARTIALLY-OWNED SUBSIDIARIES

        a)      Incorporation or Acquisition

         As in the case of incorporating or acquiring a wholly-owned subsidiary, participating in a
partially-owned subsidiary requires a diligent analysis, in particular of the investment convenience. As in
the case of wholly-owned subsidiaries, it is recommended that an approval process (based on investment
thresholds) be followed at the parent company level in order to decide whether to participate in a
partially-owned subsidiary. In addition, for co-investments, a company should understand the culture of
its fellow shareholders (preferably when these are to hold significant ownership interests in the
subsidiary). A due diligence review process (particularly with respect to compliance matters of the
potential business partner) is required when acquiring a stake in an existing company in order to mitigate
reputational risks to the group.

        b)      Shareholders Agreement

         Alignment of interests with respect to partially-owned subsidiaries could be complex as a result
of differences among fellow co-investors. Under this scenario, a negotiation process among shareholders
is suggested. To provide for a clear understanding among different shareholders in partially-owned
subsidiaries, the entry into a shareholders agreement is a customary practice. Under a co-control scenario
a shareholders agreement ensures the governance of the subsidiary.



                                                                                                         6
         Shareholders agreements help prevent or solve conflicts between shareholders, protect certain
rights and give transparency to the roles of a partially-owned subsidiary’s Board of Directors and
managers. Moreover, a shareholders agreement could include detailed provisions in which applicable
corporate law may be insufficient. It is recommended that shareholder agreements at least include
provisions for (i) shareholders’ consent rights or qualified voting requirements for shareholder meetings;
(ii) Board composition, authority, procedures and voting requirements on specific subjects (election of
senior management, veto or golden shares); (iii) procedures to solve voting deadlocks (tie-breaking vote
or requiring a binding external expert opinion); (iv) exit rules (tag along, drag along, put options and call
options); (v) investment rules and limits for indebtedness; (vi) reporting procedures and information
disclosure; (vii) procedures to follow in case of conflict of interests; (viii) approval procedures to enter
into related-party transactions; (ix) the adoption of minimum compliance standards by the subsidiary; and
(x) applicable compensation for the rendering of shared services (in the event a contracting shareholder
provides these types of services).

        c)      Shareholder Activism

         Depending on the scope of influence that a holding company intends to exercise over its partially-
owned subsidiary, a parent company should evaluate whether it should assume an active or passive
shareholder role. As a way to assure its investment, it is generally recommended that a holding company
acts as an active shareholder. However, if a parent company only has a limited economic or financial
interest, it could adopt a more passive shareholder role. Nevertheless, a holding company should be
mindful of respecting minority shareholder rights and interests, avoiding the creation of conflict
situations.

        c.1)    Share Voting

                 An informed exercise by a parent company of its right to vote could add value to its
        subsidiary. A share voting policy is recommended to provide guidance and consistency with
        respect on how a shareholding company (or a proxy with discretionary authority) should exercise
        its voting rights on partially-owned subsidiaries. However, co-investors should be mindful that an
        appropriate share voting policy may provide general guidelines and that agenda matters may
        require the consideration of specific factors. Usually, these specific factors could be related with
        applicable domestic laws, governance arrangements and business-specific considerations.

        c.2)    Appointment of Directors

                 As in the case of wholly-owned subsidiaries, it is recommended that nominee directors
        appointed at the Board of subsidiaries provide industry knowledge and experience. In the case of
        partially-owned subsidiaries, an external voice at the Board level is generally recommended so as
        to balance perspectives from directors related with their nominating shareholders. To ensure an
        external perspective from co-controlling shareholders and management at a subsidiary’s Board
        level, the appointment of a non-executive or independent director is recommended.

                 It is important to clarify that a general perception exists that nominee directors act as
        “representatives” of their nominating shareholder. In principle, nominee directors generally owe
        their duties to the company in whose Board they serve and are required to act in the best interests
        of all of its shareholders (i.e. not solely for the benefit of their nominating constituency). In this
        regard, shareholders should always be mindful of requirements for directors deriving from
        applicable fiduciary duties.


                                                                                                            7
        c.3)    Reporting

                For an efficient monitoring by co-investors of a partially-owned subsidiary, shareholders
        should agree among themselves minimum information requirements and the frequency of
        reporting from a partially-owned subsidiary. It is paramount that all shareholders be provided
        with the same disclosure, reporting and access to information from a subsidiary so as to ensure an
        equal treatment among shareholders and avoid selective disclosure. Key points for reporting
        should be defined by all shareholders, identifying material information to be obtained from the
        subsidiary as an excess of immaterial information through reporting could prove exhausting.

                A partially–owned subsidiary shall not be required by any of its shareholders to disclose
        confidential information such as price-sensitive information, industrial secrets or know-how, but
        all other information should be readily available or reported. Disclosure and/or reporting of
        confidential information shall exclusively be provided to shareholders or the public in accordance
        with applicable laws and regulations.

                 Commonly, reporting of monthly financial performance is suggested. The Board of
        Directors of each co-investing shareholder should be informed on the financial performance on a
        monthly basis and quarterly performance should be presented at Board meetings, emphasizing
        budget gaps and the actions to perform. Quarterly budget review meetings could be held to obtain
        information on financial performance and situation, risk management status, update on strategic
        initiatives, human talent development, among others.

                 Maintaining subsidiary reporting as a fixed agenda item at the shareholders’ Board levels
        could allow subsidiaries to constantly present results of their activity to its shareholders.
        Likewise, permanent monitoring and evaluation could be achieved via reporting from the
        subsidiaries Board (usually through the preparation of reports or the delivery of meeting minutes
        to all shareholders).

VI.     FINAL COMMENTS

         The adoption of company group practices is an evolving dynamic process that has to be in
accordance with the context of the respective group. To the extent that each company group is distinct, for
purposes of ensuring formalization of these practices, it is nevertheless recommended that a parent
company’s relationship and interaction with its subsidiaries and affiliates should be documented,
particularly with respect to those companies that are listed. Adequate communication is paramount to
ensure transparency and, therefore, for listed companies public disclosure of group policies is suggested.
Therefore, a Board should consider establishing the group’s policies, basic guidelines for the management
of affiliated and subsidiary companies as well as the general supervision of the development of these
guidelines and decisions on strategic issues at the company group level.




                                                                                                         8
