                                                   The Global
                                                    Compact




        Who
        W   Cares
            Ca
         ho Car   Wins
              res Wins
                   ins
                       Connecting Financial Markets
                           to a Changing World

    Recommendations by the financial industry to better integrate environmental,
    Recommendations
social                   to better
       and governance issues        integrate
                                in analysis,  environmental,
                                             asset management  and and
                                                             social     governance
                                                                    securities brokerage
       issues in financial analysis, asset management and securities brokerage




                                                               Endorsed by:
               ABN Amro • Aviva • AXA Group • Banco do Brasil • Bank Sarasin • BNP Paribas • Calvert Group • CNP Assurances
                  Credit Suisse Group • Deutsche Bank • Goldman Sachs • Henderson Global Investors • HSBC • IFC • Innovest
       ISIS Asset Management • KLP Insurance • Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance • Morgan Stanley • RCM • UBS • Westpac • World Bank Group
                    The Global
                     Compact




      Who Cares Wins

           Connecting Financial Markets
               to a Changing World



Recommendations by the financial industry to better integrate
environmental, social and governance issues in analysis, asset
           management and securities brokerage




Swiss Federal Department                      United Nations
    of Foreign Affairs
                               Endorsing institutions
                        The report is the result of a joint initiative
                                of the following companies:


Financial Sector                         ABN Amro
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins                              Aviva
                                         AXA Group
                                      Banco do Brasil
                                       Bank Sarasin
                                        BNP Paribas
                                       Calvert Group
                                     CNP Assurances
                                   Credit Suisse Group
                                      Deutsche Bank
                                      Goldman Sachs
                              Henderson Global Investors
                                            HSBC
                                              IFC
                                          Innovest
                                ISIS Asset Management
                                       KLP Insurance
                              Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance
                                      Morgan Stanley
                         RCM (a member of Allianz Dresdner
                                Asset Management)
                                             UBS
                                          Westpac
                                    World Bank Group

                    Note: Throughout this report, the pronoun “We” refers
                    to the endorsing institutions listed above and not to the
                   individuals that have contributed to producing this report.
                     Contents


                   Executive summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .i

Financial Sector   Background and scope of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .vii
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins
                   Working group and partner organisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .x


                   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1


                   Rationale and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3


                              1. General considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3


                              2. Investment rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9


                              3. Meeting clients’ needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21


                              4. Integration in financial analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27


                              5. Transparency and disclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31


                              6. Implementing change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37


                   Conclusions and outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40
                     Executive summary

                   This report is the result of a joint initiative of financial institutions
                   which were invited by United Nations Secretary-General Kofi
                   Annan to develop guidelines and recommendations on how to
Financial Sector   better integrate environmental, social and corporate governance
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     issues in asset management, securities brokerage services and
                   associated research functions. Twenty financial institutions from
                   9 countries with total assets under management of over 6 trillion
                   USD have participated in developing this report. The initiative is
                   supported by the chief executive officers of the endorsing institu-
                   tions. The U.N. Global Compact oversaw the collaborative effort
                   that led to this report and the Swiss Government provided the
                   necessary funding.


                      The institutions endorsing this report are convinced that in a
                   more globalised, interconnected and competitive world the way
                   that environmental, social and corporate governance issues are
                   managed is part of companies’ overall management quality need-
                   ed to compete successfully. Companies that perform better with
                   regard to these issues can increase shareholder value by, for
                   example, properly managing risks, anticipating regulatory action
                   or accessing new markets, while at the same time contributing to
                   the sustainable development of the societies in which they operate.
                   Moreover, these issues can have a strong impact on reputation and
                   brands, an increasingly important part of company value.


                      The report aims at increasing the awareness of all involved
                   financial market actors, at triggering a broader discussion, and
                   supporting creativity and thoughtfulness in approach, rather than
                   being prescriptive. It also aims to enhance clarity concerning the
                   respective roles of different market actors, including companies,
                   regulators, stock exchanges, investors, asset managers, brokers,
                   analysts, accountants, financial advisers and consultants. It there-
                   fore includes recommendations for different actors, striving to
                   support improved mutual understanding, collaboration and con-
                   structive dialogue on these issues.


                      The endorsing institutions are committed to start a process to
                   further deepen, specify and implement the recommendations out-
                   lined in this report by means of a series of individual and
       i
collaborative efforts at different levels. They are also keen to start a
dialogue with other stakeholders on ways to implement the recom-
mendations because they are convinced that only if all actors
contribute to the integration of environmental, social and gover-
nance issues in investment decisions, can significant improvements
in this field be achieved. As an important next step, endorsing insti-
tutions plan to approach the relevant accounting standard-setting,         Financial Sector
                                                                              Initiative
professional and self-regulatory organizations, and investor rela-         Who Cares Wins
tions associations in order to ensure that their intentions are fully
understood and supported. They invite the Global Compact or one
of its implementing bodies to review the state of the implementa-
tion of this report’s recommendations in a year’s time with the goal
of assessing how market actors have responded to the call for
action by this report.


   Endorsing institutions are convinced that a better consideration
of environmental, social and governance factors will ultimately
contribute to stronger and more resilient investment markets, as
well as contribute to the sustainable development of societies.


The report’s recommendations can be summarized as follows:

   • Analysts are asked to better incorporate environmental, social
    and governance (ESG) factors in their research where appro-
    priate and to further develop the necessary investment
    know-how, models and tools in a creative and thoughtful way.
    Based on the existing know-how in especially exposed indus-
    tries, the scope should be expanded to include other sectors
    and asset classes. Because of their importance for sustainable
    development, emerging markets should receive particular con-
    sideration and environmental, social and governance criteria
    should be adapted to the specific situation in these markets.
    Academic institutions, business schools and other research
    organisations are invited to support the efforts of financial
    analysts by contributing high-level research and thinking.


   • Financial institutions should commit to integrating environ-
    mental, social and governance factors in a more systematic way
    in research and investment processes. This must be supported
    by a strong commitment at the Board and senior management
    level. The formulation of long-term goals, the introduction of
    organisational learning and change processes, appropriate
                                                                                  ii
                    training and incentive systems for analysts are crucial in
                    achieving the goal of a better integration of these issues.


                   • Companies are asked to take a leadership role by implement-
                    ing environmental, social and corporate governance principles
                    and polices and to provide information and reports on related
Financial Sector    performance in a more consistent and standardised format.
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins      They should identify and communicate key challenges and
                    value drivers and prioritise environmental, social and gover-
                    nance issues accordingly. We believe that this information is
                    best conveyed to financial markets through normal investor
                    relation communication channels and encourage, when rele-
                    vant, an explicit mention in the annual report of companies.
                    Concerning the outcomes of financial research in this field,
                    companies should accept positive as well as critical results.


                   • Investors are urged to explicitly request and reward research
                    that includes environmental, social and governance aspects
                    and to reward well-managed companies. Asset managers are
                    asked to integrate research on such aspects in investment
                    decisions and to encourage brokers and companies to provide
                    better research and information. Both investors and asset
                    managers should develop and communicate proxy voting
                    strategies on ESG issues as this will support analysts and fund
                    managers in producing relevant research and services.


                   • Pension fund trustees and their selection consultants are
                    encouraged to consider environmental, social and governance
                    issues in the formulation of investment mandates and the
                    selection of investment managers, taking into account their
                    fiduciary obligations to participants and beneficiaries. Govern-
                    ments and multilateral agencies are asked to proactively
                    consider the investment of their pension funds according to the
                    principles of sustainable development, taking into account their
                    fiduciary obligations to participants and beneficiaries.


                   • Consultants and financial advisers should help create a
                    greater and more stable demand for research in this area by
                    combining research on environmental, social and governance
                    aspects with industry level research and sharing their experi-
                    ence with financial market actors and companies in order to
                    improve their reporting on these issues.
      iii
• Regulators are invited to shape legal frameworks in a pre-
 dictable and transparent way as this will support integration in
 financial analysis. Regulatory frameworks should require a
 minimum degree of disclosure and accountability on environ-
 mental, social and governance issues from companies, as this
 will support financial analysis. The formulation of specific
 standards should, on the other hand, rely on market-driven         Financial Sector
                                                                       Initiative
 voluntary initiatives. We encourage financial analysts to par-     Who Cares Wins
 ticipate more actively in ongoing voluntary initiatives, such as
 the Global Reporting Initiative, and help shape a reporting
 framework that responds to their needs.


• Stock exchanges are invited to include environmental, social
 and governance criteria in listing particulars for companies as
 this will ensure a minimum degree of disclosure across all list-
 ed companies. As a first step, stock exchanges could
 communicate to listed companies the growing importance of
 environmental, social and governance issues. Similarly, other
 self-regulatory organizations (e.g. NASD, FSA), professional
 credential-granting organizations (e.g. AIMR, EFFAS), account-
 ing standard-setting bodies (e.g. FASB, IASB), public
 accounting entities, and rating agencies and index providers
 should all establish consistent standards and frameworks in
 relation to environmental, social and governance factors.


• Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) can also contribute
 to better transparency by providing objective information on
 companies to the public and the financial community.




                                                                          iv
                             Graphical summary of key recommendations

                           Overall goals:
                               • Stronger and more resilient financial markets
Financial Sector               • Contribution to sustainable development
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins
                               • Awareness and mutual understanding of involved
                                 stakeholders

                               • Improved trust in financial institutions




                                                       Analysts / Brokers
                                                          Incorporate ESG
                                   Companies               factors into
                                                                             Investors / Asset
                                   Lead the way by         mainstream
                                                                                managers
                                implementing ESG            research              Reward ESG
                                  principles and                                  research
                                improving reporting                              Integrate ESG
                                  and disclosure                             factors in research
                                                                               and investment
                                                                                 processes


                     Accountants                          Better                          Pension trustees
                        Facilitate                                                         Consider integrating
                    standardisation                    investment                            mandates and
                      Educators                          markets                              selection of
                      Facilitate‘high-                                                         managers
                   level’ thinking and                       +                            Governments/
                    training on ESG                        More                          Multilat. agencies
                          issues                                                                Proactively
                                                       sustainable                          consider in PF
                                                         societies                            investment

                                  Consultants
                                   Combine ESG                               Regulators / stock
                                  research with                                exchanges /
                                  industry level                              governments
                                    research                                       Implement
                                                             NGOs
                                   Support demand                            reporting standards
                                                               Provide
                                  and awareness           objective ESG             Listing
                                      building            information on         particulars
                                                         companies to the
                                                          public and the
                                                       financial community




       v
                     Background and scope of the report

                   This report is the result of a joint effort of financial institutions
                   which were invited by United Nations Secretary-General Kofi
                   Annan to develop guidelines and recommendations on how to bet-
Financial Sector   ter integrate environmental, social and governance issues in asset
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     management, securities brokerage services and associated
                   research functions. The work that led to this report took place
                   under the auspices of the U.N. Global Compact.


                      The Global Compact is a corporate responsibility initiative
                   launched by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 2000 with the pri-
                   mary goal of implementing universal principles in business. By
                   establishing the link between environmental, social and gover-
                   nance issues and investment decisions, this report wishes to
                   contribute to better integration of these factors in investment deci-
                   sions which will ultimately support the implementation of the
                   Global Compact principles throughout the business world.


                      The need for this report has been repeatedly expressed to the
                   U.N. Secretary-General and to the Global Compact by senior exec-
                   utives of financial institutions and other companies which are
                   signatories to the Global Compact. In January 2004, Secretary-
                   General Kofi Annan wrote to the CEOs of 55 of the world’s leading
                   financial institutions inviting them to join in the initiative that led to
                   the development and release of this report.




      vii
  Exhibit 1

Brief description of the U.N. Global Compact

Launched in July 2000 by United Nations Secretary-General Kofi           Financial Sector
                                                                            Initiative
Annan, the Global Compact is an international initiative bringing com-   Who Cares Wins
panies together with UN agencies, labour and civil society to support
ten principles in the areas of human rights, working conditions, the
environment, and anti-corruption. Through the power of collective
action, the Global Compact seeks to advance responsible corporate
citizenship so that business can be part of the solution to the chal-
lenges of globalisation. In this way, the private sector — in
partnership with other social actors — can help realize the Secretary-
General’s vision: a more stable and inclusive global economy.


   The Global Compact is a voluntary corporate citizenship initia-
tive endorsed by companies from all regions of the world. It has
two objectives:
   1. Mainstream the ten principles in business activities around
      the world
   2. Catalyse actions in support of UN goals


   To achieve these objectives, the Global Compact offers facilitation
and engagement through several mechanisms: Leadership Model,
Policy Dialogues, Learning, Local Networks and Projects.


   As of June 2004, more than 1,500 companies worldwide had com-
mitted to the Global Compact and its principles.




                                                                               viii
                     Exhibit 2

                   U.N. Global Compact Principles

Financial Sector   Human Rights
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins        Principle 1:   Businesses should support and respect the protec-
                                     tion of internationally proclaimed human rights
                                     within their sphere of influence; and
                      Principle 2:   make sure that they are not complicit in human
                                     rights abuses.

                   Labour
                      Principle 3:   Businesses should uphold the freedom of associa-
                                     tion and the effective recognition of the right to
                                     collective bargaining;
                      Principle 4:   the elimination of all forms of forced and compulso-
                                     ry labour;
                      Principle 5:   the effective abolition of child labour; and
                      Principle 6:   eliminate discrimination in respect of employment
                                     and occupation.

                   Environment
                      Principle 7:   Businesses should support a precautionary
                                     approach to environmental challenges;
                      Principle 8:   undertake initiatives to promote greater environ-
                                     mental responsibility; and
                      Principle 9:   encourage the development and diffusion of
                                     environmentally friendly technologies.

                   Anti-Corruption
                      Principle 10: Businesses should work against corruption in all its
                                    forms, including extortion and bribery.*



                   * The Secretary-General introduced this principle at the Global Compact
                   Leaders Summit on 24 June 2004.




      ix
  Working group and partner organisations

A working group including representatives of endorsing institu-
tions was in charge of developing this report in the period between
early March 2004 and the end of May 2004. It was facilitated by Ivo
Knoepfel, on behalf of the Global Compact Office, represented by      Financial Sector
                                                                         Initiative
Gavin Power. The Swiss Government provided funding to facilitate      Who Cares Wins
the process and produce this report.


   In addition to the Global Compact Office, The Conference Board,
Columbia Business School and the UNEP Finance Initiative sup-
ported the work leading to this report. Their input and the support
of many individuals involved is greatly appreciated.




   Exhibit 3

 Members of the working group


  ABN Amro                        Deutsche Bank
  Madeleine Jacobs                Michael Hölz
  Vincent van Assem               Goldman Sachs
  RCM (a member of                Anthony Ling, Sarah Forrest
  Allianz Dresdner                Henderson Global Investors
  Asset Management)               Rob Lake
  Bozena Jankowska
                                  HSBC
  Morley Fund Management          Ivor Godfrey - Davies
  Luigi Minerva
                                  IFC
  AXA                             Rachel Kyte, Dan Siddy
  Pascale Sagnier
  Michel Pinault                  Innovest
                                  Matthew Kiernan
  BNP Paribas
  Asset Management                ISIS
  Eric Borremans                  Karina A. Litvack
  Calvert Group                   KLP Insurance
  Steve Falci                     Ylva Lindberg
  Citigroup                       Morgan Stanley
  Pamela Flaherty                 Juan-Luis Perez
  Credit Agricole                 Sarasin
  Séverine Deval                  Klaus Kämpf
  Credit Suisse                   State Street Global Advisors
  Asset Management                Kimberly Gluck
  Thomas Albrecht

                                                                             x
                   Members of the working group (continued)


                    UBS                                   UNEP-FI AMWG
                    Julie Hudson                          Carlos Joly
                    Westpac                               Vincent Zeller
Financial Sector    Martin Hancock                        UNEP-FI
   Initiative                                             Jacob Malthouse
Who Cares Wins                                            Paul Clements-Hunt
                    ———————                               Philip Moss


                    Global Compact Office                 ———————
                    Gavin Power
                    The Conference Board
                    Meredith Whiting                      Facilitator:
                    David Vidal                           onValues Investment
                    Columbia Business School              Services
                    Bruce Usher                           and Research
                                                          Ivo Knoepfel




                      Exhibit 4

                    Acknowledgements

                    We would like to express our sincere appreciation for all individuals
                    that have provided valuable insights and input for this report, including:


                    Duncan Austin, World Resources Institute; Stephen Hine, EIRIS; Alois
                    Flatz, SAM Research; Matthew Kiernan, Innovest; Regula Ritter,
                    onValues; Anne-Maree O’Connor, Core Ratings; Caroline Desaegher,
                    AXA; Bjoern Edlund, ABB; Herman Mulder, ABN AMRO; Felix Schnella,
                    RCM; Gunnar Miller, RCM; Bernardo Rothe, Banco do Brasil; Emma
                    Hunt, Forum for the Future; Jerome Lavigne-Delville, Global Compact;
                    Barbara Dubach, Holcim; Glen Armstrong, International Finance
                    Corporation; Peter Sherratt, Lehman Brothers; Peter Zollinger,
                    SustainAbility Ltd.; Thilo Goodall, Sustainable Asset Management;
                    Ambassador Peter Maurer, Swiss Federal Department of Foreign
                    Affairs; Gerald Pachoud, Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs;
                    Ingeborg Schumacher, UBS; Mira Merne, AccountAbility; David
                    Levine, Haas School of Business.
      xi
  Exhibit 5

Partner organisations

The Conference Board                                                          Financial Sector
                                                                                 Initiative
The Conference Board creates and disseminates knowledge about                 Who Cares Wins
management and the marketplace to help businesses strengthen their
performance and better serve society. Working as a global, independ-
ent membership organization in the public interest, it conducts
research, convenes conferences, makes forecasts, assesses trends,
publishes information and analysis, and brings executives together to
learn from one another. The Conference Board runs a total of 11 mem-
ber Councils on corporate citizenship issues and a total of six Councils
on corporate governance related aspects. Councils are membership
groups joining executives with common responsibilities and interests
to share solutions to business challenges.


Columbia Business School
Columbia Business School’s Social Enterprise Program aims to
inspire and prepare leaders who create social value in business, non-
profit and government organizations. Situated in the world’s financial
capital and widely admired for its global and cutting-edge curriculum,
Columbia Business School is one of the world’s leading business
schools. Finance and Sustainability, a course taught by Bruce
Usher, will draw on insights from this project to prepare future lead-
ers in finance to create social, environmental and economic value.


The UNEP Finance Initiative
The United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative (UNEP-
FI) is a global public private partnership between the United Nations
Environment Programme and 239 firms from across the global financial
services sector. Its mission is to collaboratively integrate relevant envi-
ronmental, social and corporate governance criteria into financial
sector operations and services. The Asset Management Working Group
(AMWG) of UNEP-FI includes 12 financial institutions and has actively
contributed to drafting this report. Its goals are three-fold: 1. sector-
specific financial analysis of ESG issues; 2. engagement with
institutional investors; 3. ESG management as a risk mitigation option
for emerging market investment.


                                                                                    xii
                     Introduction

                   In an increasingly complex and interconnected world, the impor-
                   tance of actively managing risks and opportunities related to
                   emerging environmental and social trends, in combination with
Financial Sector   rising public expectations for better accounta-
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     bility and corporate governance, presents a new
                                                                                        “Every corporation
                   set of challenges with far-reaching financial con-
                                                                                    is under intense pressure
                   sequences for corporations. This is true both at
                                                                                    to create ever-increasing
                   the level of companies and at the level of invest-                   shareholder value.
                   ment portfolios.                                                 Enhancing environmental
                                                                                     and social performance
                      The financial industry has begun to acknowl-                    are enormous business
                   edge the importance of such issues and has                            opportunities to
                   engaged in a series of initiatives to improve their                    do just that.”
                   management in core business processes. Several
                   institutions have implemented systems to manage                       Gary M. Pfeiffer
                                                                                           CFO, Du Pont
                   environmental risks in their lending businesses.
                   Other companies have engaged in initiatives
                   aimed at improving accountability and governance or the integration
                   of environmental and social aspects in project financing1.


                      Until now, the industry has not developed a common under-
                   standing on ways to improve the integration of environmental,
                   social and governance (ESG) aspects in asset management, secu-
                   rities brokerage services and the associated buy-side and sell-side
                   research functions. This is due partly to the complexity and diver-
                   sity of issues involved.


                      As more analysts and fund managers have begun to experiment
                   with the integration of these issues, knowledge and awareness in
                   the industry is increasing. Investors have also become more vocal
                   in their demand for products and services incorporating such
                   aspects. We therefore believe that this is the right time to provide
                   the industry with better guidance on ways to improve the
                   consideration of environmental, social and governance issues in
                   investment decisions.


                      Throughout this report we have refrained from using terms
                   such as sustainability, corporate citizenship, etc., in order to avoid

                   1 For example, in the context of the recently released Equator Principles
       1
misunderstandings deriving from different interpretations of these
terms. We have preferred to spell out the environmental, social and
governance issues which are the topic of this report.


   This report focuses on issues which have or could have a mate-
rial impact on investment value. It uses a broader definition of
materiality than commonly used — one that includes longer time-                  Financial Sector
                                                                                    Initiative
horizons (10 years and beyond) and intangible aspects impacting                  Who Cares Wins
company value. Using this broader definition of materiality,
aspects relating to generally accepted principles and ethical guide-
lines (e.g. the universal principles underlying the Global Compact)
can have a material impact on investment value.


   Sound corporate governance and risk management systems
are crucial pre-requisites to successfully implementing policies
and measures to address environmental and social challenges.
This is why we have chosen to use the term “environmental, social
and governance issues” throughout this report, as a way of high-
lighting the fact that these three areas are closely inter-linked.


   In particular, we believe that corporate governance systems can
play a key role in implementing many of the recommendations in
this report, particularly with regard to better transparency and dis-
closure, linking executive compensation to longer-term drivers of
shareholder value and improving accountability.


   Recently released recommendations on best practices in the
corporate governance field, such as those released by The
Conference Board Commission on Public Trust and Private
Enterprise2, lay out a corporate governance framework which in
our view is crucial in order to successfully implement the
recommendations outlined in this report.




2 Conference Board Commission on Public Trust and Private Enterprise: Findings
and Recommendations, 2004                                                               2
                     Rationale and recommendations

                   1. General considerations
                   Ultimately, successful investment depends on a
Financial Sector   vibrant economy, which depends on a healthy civil               “Creating long-term
   Initiative                                                                      value for our share-
Who Cares Wins     society, which is ultimately dependent on a
                                                                                       holders while
                   sustainable planet. In the long-term, therefore,
                                                                                  concurrently ensuring
                   investment markets have a clear self-interest in              the enduring viability
                   contributing to better management of environmen-                 of our human and
                   tal and social impacts in a way that contributes to           natural resources is an
                   the sustainable development of global society. A               important part of our
                   better inclusion of environmental, social and cor-             business philosophy”.
                   porate governance (ESG) factors in investment
                   decisions will ultimately contribute to more stable           Dr. Josef Ackermann
                   and predictable markets, which is in the interest of          Chairman of the Group
                                                                                  Executive Committee
                   all market actors.                                              Deutsche Bank AG

                      To some extent, financial markets are already
                   factoring in environmental and social issues, but often only if they
                   are seen as being material to value creation and risk in the short-
                   term. In addition, we believe that markets do not yet fully recognise
                   the importance of new emerging trends, such as the growing
                   pressure on companies to improve corporate governance, trans-
                   parency and accountability and the increasing importance of
                   reputation risks related to ESG issues.


                      The integration of these aspects in investment decisions is
                   increasingly viewed as falling within the scope of the fiduciary duty
                   of trustees, financial advisers, asset managers and intermediary
                   institutions. It therefore needs to be addressed effectively by all
                   involved market actors.


                      We recognise that a series of barriers have in the past hindered
                   a better integration of ESG factors. CEOs and CFOs recently inter-
                   viewed by the World Economic Forum3, for example, stressed that
                   intangible aspects related to ESG issues play an increasingly
                   important role in value creation but that analysts’ short-term focus



                   3 World Economic Forum: Values and Value — Communicating the strategic
       3           importance of corporate citizenship to investors, 2003 CEO Survey
          hinders them in recognising this trend. Challenges cited by the
          WEF survey include:
             • Problems of definition of ESG issues
             • Problems of making and measuring the business case
             • Problems with quality and quantity of information
                                 • Problems of skills and competence             Financial Sector
                                                                                    Initiative
                                 • Problems of differing time horizons           Who Cares Wins
    “Environmental and
 social issues count. (...)
     In an increasingly          Additional challenges which have been men-
complex world we believe      tioned by analysts and fund managers in past
  such issues are part of     surveys related to the long-term nature of many
  the relative quality of     ESG issues and the uncertainty about future
   overall management         regulation in this area.
  performance needed to
  compete successfully.”
                                 Throughout this report we will address these
                              obstacles and show how they could be over-
 Goldman Sachs Global
                              come. Obstacles related to time horizons and
 Investment Research
                              regulation are addressed in chapter 1, obstacles
                              related to defining and measuring the business
          case in chapter 2, obstacles related to skills and competences in
          chapters 4 and 6, and obstacles related to information in chapter 5.




                                                                                        4
                   Recommendations:

                     a.   We are convinced that it is in the interest of investors,
                          asset managers and securities brokerage houses alike
                          to improve the integration of ESG factors in financial
Financial Sector          analysis. This will contribute to better investment
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins            markets as well as to the sustainable development of
                          the planet.


                     b.   We invite all financial market actors, including
                          investors, asset managers, analysts, financial advis-
                          ers and consultants to improve their understanding
                          and consideration of these trends and related poten-
                          tial impacts. This will not be possible without
                          adequate disclosure on these matters by companies.


                     c.   The use of longer time horizons in investment is an
                          important condition to better capture value creation
                          mechanisms linked to ESG factors. We therefore
                          invite investors and other market actors to include
                          longer time horizons in investment mandates and to
                          request research supporting this development.


                     d.   We urge regulators to be transparent with regard to
                          the nature and timing of new regulations concerning
                          ESG issues relevant to investment. This will make
                          regulatory changes more predictable and quantifiable
                          for financial markets and will support integration in
                          financial analysis.




       5
  Exhibit 6

A selection of ESG issues impacting company and invest-
ment value
                                                                         Financial Sector
                                                                            Initiative
ESG issues relevant to investment decisions differ across regions and    Who Cares Wins
sectors. The following are examples of issues with a broad range of
impacts on companies:


Environmental issues:
   • Climate change and related risks
   • The need to reduce toxic releases and waste
   • New regulation expanding the boundaries of environmental lia-
     bility with regard to products and services
   • Increasing pressure by civil society to improve performance,
     transparency and accountability, leading to reputational risks if
     not managed properly
   • Emerging markets for environmental services and
     environment-friendly products

Social issues:
   • Workplace health and safety
   • Community relations
   • Human rights issues at company and suppliers’
     /contractors’ premises
   • Government and community relations in the context of opera-
     tions in developing countries
   • Increasing pressure by civil society to improve performance,
     transparency and accountability, leading to reputational risks if
     not managed properly

Corporate governance issues:
   • Board structure and accountability
   • Accounting and disclosure practices
   • Audit committee structure and independence of auditors
   • Executive compensation
   • Management of corruption and bribery issues




                                                                                6
                       Exhibit 7

                    World Economic Forum Initiatives

Financial Sector    Survey of CEOs and CFOs on communication with the
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins      financial community

                    In January 2004, the World Economic Forum’s Corporate Citizenship
                    Initiative released results of a survey of CEOs and CFOs of member
                    companies focusing on the communication of corporate citizenship to
                    investors and financial institutions 4.


                        Surveyed CEOs/CFOs note many positive signs with regard to an
                    increasing interest and activity by investors, analysts and financial insti-
                    tutions concerning ESG matters. 70% of respondents “expect to see
                    increased interest in ESG issues by mainstream investors in the future”.


                        But they also highlight what they perceive as being key obstacles
                    to mainstream investors who show more interest in how corporations
                    address ESG risks and opportunities:
                        • Problems of definition of ESG issues
                        • Problems of making and measuring the business case
                        • Problems with quality and quantity of information
                        • Problems of skills and competence
                        • Problems of differing time horizons
                        In terms of interest from mainstream investors, just over two-
                    thirds of the companies that participated in the survey claimed that
                    “they are occasionally asked questions about their corporate citizen-
                    ship activities, but usually only when there has been a crisis related to
                    their industry or company, or around certain ‘hot’ topics such as cli-
                    mate change, diversity, obesity and HIV/AIDS”. The head of investor
                    relations at one company reflected the comments of many others,
                    “These issues never come up unless there is a problem — no one
                    cares unless there’s a financial risk or short-term exposure.” One CFO
                    commented, “With a few honourable exceptions, most mainstream
                    investors ask little or nothing about social responsibility. That might
                    change in the event of a serious environmental/community/political
                    incident, which raised questions about the company’s performance.”

                   4 World Economic Forum: Values and Value — Communicating the strategic
                   importance of corporate citizenship to investors, 2003 CEO Survey
       7
Initiative on corporate citizenship and investment

WEF’s Global Corporate Citizenship Initiative, in association with
AccountAbility, is also exploring how best to improve the understand-
ing of concrete impediments to, and opportunities for, the broader
integration of the social and environmental aspects of corporate citi-    Financial Sector
                                                                             Initiative
zenship in mainstream investment policies and practices. The initiative   Who Cares Wins
is grounded in a series of international roundtables with some of the
financial sector’s most important actors from pension funds, asset
management companies and regulators. The initiative will offer
insights into how best to impact information, competencies and incen-
tives along the investment value chain. Results will be published in a
WEF/AccountAbility report in October 2004.




                                                                                 8
                     2. Investment rationale

                   The investment rationale for more rigorous inclusion of ESG
                   criteria in financial analysis rests on the business case at the level
                   of the company. Several recent studies of com-
Financial Sector   panies and industries have contributed to better           “Considering that a
   Initiative                                                                     large share of
Who Cares Wins     understanding the value drivers through which
                                                                                company value is
                   good management of ESG issues contributes to
                                                                            intangible and relates
                   shareholder value creation.
                                                                           to future earnings, it is
                                                                            evident that risks and
                      Furthermore, many studies confirm that the            opportunities deriving
                   way a company manages ESG issues is often a                from environmental
                   good indicator of overall risk levels and general         and social trends are
                   management quality — which are both strong                of great importance”.
                   determinants of companies’ long-term success.
                   A recent report on the oil and gas industry by             Martin Hancock
                   Goldman Sachs, for example, concludes that              Chief Operating Officer
                                                                           Westpac, London Branch
                   companies with the best track record in terms of
                   social responsibility and a long-term vision about
                   a low-carbon future also dominate the market share of strategic
                   projects, which is seen as a key determinant of business success.


                      Companies with better ESG performance can increase share-
                   holder value by better managing risks related to emerging ESG
                   issues, by anticipating regulatory changes or consumer trends, and
                   by accessing new markets or reducing costs. Instead of focusing on
                   single issues, successful companies have learned
                   to manage the entire range of ESG issues relevant        “The Corporate Social
                                                                            Responsibility impera-
                   to their business, thereby achieving the best
                                                                             tive is one which, we
                   results in terms of value creation. Moreover, ESG
                                                                           believe, will increase in
                   issues can have a strong impact on reputation and
                                                                            importance over time.
                   brands, an increasingly important part of compa-           (...) Looking at CSR
                   ny value. It is not uncommon that intangible               could improve stock
                   assets, including reputation and brands, represent           picking ability”.
                   over two-thirds of total market value of a listed
                   company. It is likely that ESG issues will have an            ABN Amro
                   even greater impact on companies’ competitive-             Equities Research
                   ness and financial performance in the future.


                      It is interesting to note that, when asked, both investors/asset
                   managers and company representatives confirm the increasing
       9
         importance of intangible ESG factors in shareholder value creation.
         In a survey by Cap Gemini Ernst & Young, for example, 81% of
         Global 500 executives rated environmental, health and safety
         issues among the top ten factors driving value in their businesses.
         In a survey by CSR Europe, Deloitte and Euronext, 40% of inter-
         viewed fund managers and analysts, and over 50% of investor
         relations officers, confirmed a significant contribution to value cre-   Financial Sector
                                                                                     Initiative
         ation by intangible aspects.                                             Who Cares Wins

     “Even within the
same industry — electric
  utilities — the level of
financial risk exposure to
 regulatory responses to
 climate change can vary
    by a factor of 30”.


   Matthew Kiernan
 CEO, Innovest Strategic
     Value Advisors




                    Recommendations:

               e.    We call on financial analysts to take an active role in
                     testing and refining the investment rationale for ESG
                     integration in research and investment decisions. We
                     invite analysts not only to focus on ESG risks and risk
                     management, but also to consider ESG issues as a
                     potential source of competitive advantage.


               f.    We invite academic institutions, business schools and
                     research think-tanks to support financial analysts’
                     work in this field by contributing forward-thinking
                     research on ESG risks and opportunities and the relat-
                     ed business and investment case, of both a strategic
                     and quantitative nature.




                                                                                        10
                         Exhibit 8

                      The view of fund managers, analysts and investor rela-
                      tions officers
Financial Sector
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins        A recent survey conducted among European fund managers, analysts
                      and investor relations officers5 found that in the opinion of 78% of
                      fund managers and analysts, the management of environmental and
                      social risk has a positive impact on a company’s long-term market
                      value. In the case of a shorter time horizon (3-12 months), only 32% of
                      respondents believe that environmental and social risk management
                      significantly impact market value.




                             A company‘s                                      A company‘s
                       short-term market value                           long-term market value


                            Don‘t know                                            Don't know
                                5%                                           No       5%
                                                                         influence
                                                                            13%
                                                   In a
                                                 positive             In a
                                                  way               negative
                                                   32%                way
                                                                       4%



                                                 In a
                       No                      negative                                              In a
                   influence                     way                                               positive
                      55%                         8%                                                 way
                                                                                                     78%




                   Figure 1: Results of the CSR Europe, Deloitte and Euronext survey
                   of European fund managers, analysts and investor relations offi-
                   cers. Reply to the question: “Based on your experience, how does
                   social and environmental risk management impact on a company’s
                   short-term/long-term market value?”




                   5 CSR Europe, Deloitte, Euronext,: Investing in Responsible Business. The 2003 sur-
      11           vey of European fund managers, financial analysts and investor relations officers.
    Exhibit 9

 Drivers through which good management of ESG issues
 can contribute to shareholder value creation:
                                                                                    Financial Sector
     • Early identification of emerging risks, threats, management failures
                                                                                       Initiative
     • New business opportunities                                                   Who Cares Wins
     • Customer satisfaction and loyalty
     • Reputation as an attractive employer
     • Alliances and partnerships with business partners and stake-
       holders
     • Enhanced reputation and brands
     • Reduced regulatory intervention
     • Cost savings
     • Access to capital, lower cost of capital
     • Better risk management, lower risk levels




    Exhibit 10


 Environment, Healthy and Safety (EHS) performance as
 an intangible driver of market value

 In February 2004, a study released by the Global Environmental
 Management Initiative6, based on earlier research by Cap Gemini
 Ernst & Young7 8, came to the conclusion that:
     • 50 to 90% of a firm’s market value can be attributed to intangi-
       bles like EHS.
     • 35% of institutional investors’ portfolio allocation decisions are
       based on intangibles like EHS performance.
     • 81% of Global 500 executives rate EHS issues among the top
       ten factors driving value in their businesses.



6 GEMI: Clear Advantage: Building Shareholder Value, February 2004.

7 Cap Gemini Ernst & Young: Measures that Matter, 1996 (a survey of 300 sell-side
analysts, 275 buy-side analysts, as well as interviews with portfolio managers)
8 Cap Gemini Ernst & Young: Decisions that Matter, 1999 (a survey of financial
executives at global 500 corporations).
                                                                                          12
                     Exhibit 11

                   Goldman Sachs Energy Environmental and Social Index
                   (A. Ling, J. Waghorn, S. Forrest, M. Lanstone, Feb. 2004)
Financial Sector
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     Goldman Sachs (GS) recently released the Goldman Sachs Energy
                   Environmental and Social (GSEES) Index for the energy sector as a
                   response to UNEP Finance Initiative’s call for better research in this
                   field. The scope of GSEES is to identify specific environmental and
                   social issues likely to be material for company competitiveness and
                   reputation in the oil and gas industry and, to the extent possible, to
                   quantify their potential impact on stock prices. 30 criteria in the
                   following eight categories have been used, including environmental
                   and social issues:
                      • Climate change
                      • Pollution
                      • Human rights
                      • Management diversity and incentives
                      • Investment in the future
                      • Workforce
                      • Safety
                      • Transparency and vision


                   Rationale

                   To succeed in the rapidly evolving energy industry, GS believes com-
                   panies have to win, and then operate, larger, more complicated
                   projects, often in new regions (so-called “new legacy assets”).
                   Competition is more intense, the workforce smaller and external
                   observers less forgiving. The analyst team that worked on the GSEES
                   Index set out to explore a potential correlation between environmen-
                   tal and social management quality and the capability to succeed in
                   winning and managing new legacy assets.


                      GS notes that ultimately the industry is moving from the age of oil
                   to the age of gas, and potentially to an even lower carbon world. To
                   succeed in this new world, GS believes companies must be both envi-
                   ronmentally and socially aware, in order to succeed in managing a


      13
diverse workforce in a socially responsible and acceptable manner
with a vision of the evolution of the industry towards the age of gas.
An increased focus on climate change and corporate governance,
together with the rise of socially responsible investment (SRI)-man-
aged money and non-governmental organisation (NGO) activity, are
additional issues that the industry needs to manage.                       Financial Sector
                                                                              Initiative
                                                                           Who Cares Wins
Main conclusions from the GSEES Index

Based on the experience of calculating the Index and on its results, GS
concludes that one-off environmental and social issues have limited
impact on share prices unless they have a material impact on the
underlying returns of the company in question. A strong performance
in social and environmental issues is no guarantee of stock market per-
formance. That said, GS notes that social and environmental issues are
having an increasing impact on companies’ future project slates. GS
believes that this will have an increasing impact on future returns, and
therefore valuation and share price performance.


   In addition, GS notes that those companies with the best track
record in terms of social responsibility and a vision of a low-carbon
world for the future (i.e. with the best GSEES scores) dominate the
market share of new legacy projects, a strong determinant of business
success. GS adds that “It stands to reason that the best-managed com-
panies deliver the best performance with regard to social and
environmental issues and their interaction with the general business
community. It is not surprising that they manage these issues as well
as they manage the other more traditional success factors”.


Detailed results

The GSEES Index was created by scoring companies relative to each
other on metrics within the defined eight categories. GS found signif-
icant differences in performance across categories, but some
companies score consistently well, notably BP, RD/Shell, Statoil and
ExxonMobil. BP and RD/Shell’s scores are 8% higher than that of their
nearest peer, ExxonMobil.




                                                                                 14
                                       Goldman Sachs Scenario

                                      Changing production mix       21% of production non-OPEC in 1970,
                       Current
                       age of                                       42% in 2002, 70% of new legacy assets
                         oil,                                       non-OPEC
                        OPEC

Financial Sector                    Larger, more complex projects   Average size of new legacy field is
   Initiative                                                       1.7 bnboe and will require US$4 bn
                                                                    in capex to develop
Who Cares Wins

                                       Reduced workforce —          Employees in US oil and gas industry
                                         the war for talent         have slumped by 30% from 1981-1999
                                                                    and 55% in E&P alone


                                       Increasing competition       The industry is much more
                                                                    competitive post the consolidation
                                                                    which started in 1998, and the rise
                                                                    of the Emerging Market Regionals


                                       Transparency initiatives     Extractive Industry Transparency
                                                                    Initiative (EITI) is the most significant
                                                                    move to improve visibility of revenues
                                                                    between industry and governments


                                     Rise of NGOs and SRI funds     The WTO lists 966 NGOs, Eurosif
                                                                    estimates that 14% of European
                                                                    pension funds are influenced by SRI


                                      Increasing environmental      Local governments are
                                             awareness              increasingly forcing the industry
                                                                    into more environmentally friendly
                                                                    development e.g., no flaring of gas
                                                                    in West Africa beyond 2008


                                      Globalising gas industry      Oil demand growth is less than
                                                                    half GDP, gas more than GDP. Within
                                                                    20 years consumption of gas will
                                                                    overtake oil with LNG, GTL then
                                                                    hydrogen powered fuel cells
                      Future age
                      of gas and
                        beyond              Renewables              Further attempts to reduce carbon
                                                                    content mean a move to develop
                                                                    renewable energy sources such
                                                                    as wind




                   Figure 2: Evolution of the industry towards the age of gas and
                   renewables9




                   9 Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research — February 24, 2004
      15
      Goldman Sachs Energy Environmental and Social Index
Company               Climate   Pollution   Human      Management      Investment   Workforce      Safety       Transparency
                      Change                Rights     Diversity and     in the
                                                                             the                                 and Vision
                                                        Incentives       Future
BP                       23         3            11         20             6           22            21                 14
RD/Shell                 22         3            9          21             8           19            21                 14
Statoil                  18         7            11         18             5           19            18                 13
ExxonMobil               13         3            8          18             8           23            23                 12     Financial Sector
Norsk Hydro              18         8            10         13             7           16            17                 10        Initiative
TOTAL                    19         4            9          18             10          19            9                  9      Who Cares Wins
ChevronTexaco            14         3            10         20             8           19            13                 8
BG                       17         8            10         15             5           13            16                 10
ENI                      15         8            10         16             6           13            12                 10
OMV                      15         5            9          15             6           12            13                 10
ConocoPhillips           12         6            9          20             7           11            8                  11
Amerada Hess             14         5            10         15             2           11            11                 11
Occidental               10         5            6          21             2           9             14                 9
Marathon                 5         3             6          20             2           15            17                 7
Repsol                   15        3             10         12             6           12             5                 11
Petrobras                5         5             7          13             3           13            13                  7
CNOOC                    5         8             6          13             3           13            9                  8
PetroChina               5         5             7          17             4           10            7                  8
MOL                      7         2             7          10             6           8             12                 10
Sinopec                  5         3             6          11             6           12            5                  8
Yukos                    7         4             7          10             2           7             5                  5
Lukoil                   5         4             6          12             2           8             5                  4
CEPSA                    5         2             5          13             2            9             5                 4
Average                 11.9      4.7            8.2       15.7           5.0          13.6          12.1               9.3
Maximum                  25        8             12         23            10            25            25                14




                                                 GSEES Index Overall Score (Max=142)



                                                                                                       Majors



                                                                                                     Regionals



                                                                                                     Emerging
                                                                                                      Market
                                                                                                     Regionals


                                                                                                   Average       80.5
               120 117 109 108 99 97 95 94 90 85 84 79 76 75 74 66 65 63 62 56 47 46          45
                                                                                                   Maximum       142
                              dro




                                                        s




                                                Lu s

                                                      A
                                              CN s
                              co




                                                    ina
                                            Pe psol




                                                       L
                                                     ec
                                                       s
                        n M il




                                           M a ntal
                              ell




                                                CE l
                                                    BG

                                                       I
                                        Am oPhi V




                                               Re n



                                          Pe OOC
                             BP




                        Te L
                      rsk bil




                                          era llip




                                                      i
                                                   EN




                                                    ko
                                                  bra




                                                  MO
                                          Oc Hes




                                                   PS
                              A
                 E x Stato




                                                   ho




                                                   ko
                                            c OM
                           xa




                                                 op
                          /Sh




                 e v TOT
                           Hy
                            o




                                                 Ch



                                                Yu
                                               rat
                                                 e



                                               tro




                                             Sin
                                             cid
                                              da




                                             tro
                 RD




                    ron
                     xo
                  No




                                         no
                                            Co
              Ch




              Figure 3: Company relative positioning on the Goldman Sachs
              Energy Environmental and Social Index10


              10 Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research — February 24, 2004
                                                                                                                                     16
                     Exhibit 12

                   Case-study on the automobile industry

Financial Sector   (Sustainable Asset Management and World Resources Institute,
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     Changing Drivers: The Impact of Climate Change on Competitiveness
                   and Value Creation in the Automotive Industry, October 2003.)


                      In a 2003 report, SAM and WRI used conventional shareholder val-
                   uation techniques to demonstrate how emerging policies to tackle
                   climate change could alter discounted future earnings for the ten
                   largest global auto companies.


                      Emerging climate policies create both financial risks and opportu-
                   nities for auto manufacturers. The report used scenarios of future
                   regulatory policies and industry commitments to identify possible
                   cost and earnings trajectories for the auto companies over the next
                   decade. The analysis paired data on ESG factors, such as the CO2
                   emissions intensity of specific vehicle models, with conventional
                   investment data, such as sales volumes and profit margins. The
                   analysis also explicitly assessed the quality of management in
                   addressing climate change issues.


                      From discussions with auto analysts, it appears that the mid- to
                   long-term impacts of climate change policy are not currently “priced
                   in” to auto company stock values. Yet, the SAM/WRI analysis shows
                   that pricing in the impact of climate change policies could significantly
                   affect earnings (see Figure 4). Moreover, companies are very different-
                   ly positioned on this issue, indicating that climate change will be a new
                   and additional influence on competitiveness within the industry.




      17
15%

10%

 5%

 0%                                                                           Financial Sector
                                                                                 Initiative
 -5%                                                                          Who Cares Wins


-10%

-15%




                                                          W




                                                                        d
                                                               GM
                                      a

                                          DC
                            an




                                               VW
                      t
            ta




                                                     A
                      ul




                                                                         r
                                  nd




                                                    PS




                                                                      Fo
                                                         BM
        yo




                           ss
                  na




                                 Ho
       To




                           Ni
                 Re




Figure 4: Potential Impact of Climate Change Policies for Earnings
of Leading Auto Companies (Percentage Change in EBIT Forecasts
(2003-2015) from Pricing in Climate Change Policies) Source:
SAM/WRI, Changing Drivers, 2003. Note: Vertical lines indicate pos-
sible ranges for discounted EBIT; dots indicate “most likely”
forecast EBIT.




       Exhibit 13

   The view of fund managers, analysts and investor rela-
   tions officers

   A recent survey of European fund managers, analysts and investor
   relations officers indicates that the link between intangible assets and
   shareholder value is widely acknowledge by the financial industry11.
   The ability to innovate (65%), and corporate governance and risk man-
   agement (54%) were mentioned as top-ranking issues systematically
   taken into account by fund managers and analysts. Environmental
   impact management and supply chain management were ranked
   highly as being integrated for some sectors or companies. This
   reflects the need for a sector-specific approach in terms of both the
   company’s communication approach and financial analysis.


                                                                                    18
                              In your opinion, do intangible assets contribute to shareholder value?
                                       (Question to fund managers and analysts and IROs)



                                                                                         Fund managers
                                                                                         and analysts
                       60 %
Financial Sector                                                                         IROs
                       50 %
   Initiative
                       40 %
Who Cares Wins
                       30 %
                       20 %
                       10 %
                        0%
                                     Yes,          Yes,           No,             No,           No answer
                                 significantly    a little      not really      not at all




                   Figure 5: Results of the CSR Europe, Deloitte and Euronext survey of
                   European fund managers, analysts and investor relations officers12




                   11 CSR Europe, Deloitte, Euronext: Investing in Responsible Business. The 2003
                   survey of European fund managers, financial analysts an investor relations officers.
                   12 CSR Europe, Deloitte, Euronext: Investing in Responsible Business. The 2003

      19           survey of European fund managers, financial analysts an investor relations officers.
 Which topic is taken into account when making an investment recommendation?
                (Question to fund managers and analysts and IROs)



                             Option 1: Yes, systematically

                                        Corporate governance                          Financial Sector
                                        and risk management                              Initiative
                                                                                      Who Cares Wins
                   Management of          80%                  Management
                 community relations      60%                  of the brand
                                          40%
               Management of              20%
                 supply chain                                      Ability to
                                          0%                       innovate
                  (social and
             environmental issues)

                                                                Management of
                   Management of
                                                               customer relations
                environmental impacts
                                          Management of
                                          human resources




                    Option 2: Yes, for some sections or companies

                                        Corporate governance
                                        and risk management
                   Management of     80%                       Management
                 community relations 60%                       of the brand
                                        40%
               Management of
                 supply chain           20%                        Ability to
                  (social and           0%                         innovate
             environmental issues)

                   Management of                                Management of
                environmental impacts                          customer relations
                                          Management of
                                          human resources




                        Fund managers
                                                            IROs
                        and analysts




Figure 6: Results of the CSR Europe, Deloitte and Euronext survey of
European fund managers, analysts and investor relations officers 13




13 CSR Europe, Deloitte, Euronext: Investing in Responsible Business. The 2003 sur-
vey of European fund managers, financial analysts an investor relations officers.           20
                     3. Meeting clients’ needs

                   Recently, institutional investors have launched a series of joint ini-
                   tiatives calling on companies to improve disclosure and on
                   investors and asset managers to improve their
Financial Sector   consideration of ESG aspects in investment deci-       “There is a growing body
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     sions and in engaging with companies. A wide             of empirical evidence
                   range of issues and sectors has been touched             that companies which
                   upon by these initiatives, including climate            manage environmental,
                                                                           social and governance
                   change, corporate governance, issues relating to
                                                                            risks most effectively
                   the pharmaceutical industry, the disclosure of
                                                                            tend to deliver better
                   payments to governments and the management
                                                                           risk-adjusted financial
                   of corruption and bribery cases.                        performance than their
                                                                               industry peers”.
                      We welcome these initiatives because they
                   support better disclosure and transparency by                  Jean Frijns
                   companies and the efforts of financial market           Chief Investment Officer
                   actors to better integrate these issues in the                    ABP
                   investment value-chain. Clearly, it is client
                   demand that will most effectively trigger change in the financial
                   industry. That said, we believe that in addition to requesting better
                   integration of ESG factors, clients must also be prepared to explic-
                   itly demand and reward better research
                   and   investment    services    taking   into
                                                                     “The consideration of material
                   account ESG aspects.
                                                                    social and environmental issues
                                                                         should be part of every
                      Given the importance of pension funds
                                                                       financial analyst’s normal
                   in the world of asset management, trustees        work. Not only does this make
                   and their consultants can play a pivotal role     sense from an investment risk
                   in requesting better coverage of ESG issues          perspective; institutional
                   in investment mandates and the underlying             clients are increasingly
                   research. Consultants and financial advisers       asking for better integration
                   also have an important role to play in creat-          in fund management”.
                   ing greater and more stable demand for
                   ESG research.                                           Thomas Albrecht
                                                                          Director of Research
                                                                          Credit Suisse Asset
                      Sell-side analysts have in the past                     Management
                   demonstrated their preparedness in effec-
                   tively responding to an explicit request by
                   clients. A recent example was the call by the members of the UNEP
                   Finance Initiative Asset Management Working Group requesting
      21
ESG research from financial research organisations. Within a
period of only 8 months, research organisations produced a total of
11 reports on a wide range of industries and issues.




                                                                      Financial Sector
                                                                         Initiative
                                                                      Who Cares Wins




  Recommendations:

     g.    We encourage pension fund trustees and their selec-
           tion consultants to consider integrating ESG issues
           into the formulation of investment mandates and
           the selection of investment managers, taking into
           account their fiduciary obligations to participants
           and beneficiaries. We believe that governments and
           multilateral agencies should proactively consider
           the investment of their pension funds according to
           the principles of sustainable development, taking
           into account their fiduciary obligations to partici-
           pants and beneficiaries.


     h.    Consultants and financial advisers should support
           the integration of ESG criteria by combining ESG
           research with industry level research and sharing
           their experience with financial actors and compa-
           nies in order to improve ESG reporting.


     i.    We urge investors to explicitly request and reward
           research that includes environmental, social and
           governance aspects and to reward well-managed
           companies. Asset managers should integrate
           research on such aspects in investment decisions
           and encourage brokers and companies to provide
           better research and information.


     j.    We encourage brokers and asset managers to more
           actively forge partnerships with institutional clients
           with a stated or potential interest in ESG research

                                                                            22
                           and raise the awareness of clients on the relevance
                           of ESG issues to their investments.


                     k.    We invite investors to develop proxy voting guide-
                           lines clarifying their position on ESG issues. This
Financial Sector           will support asset managers and analysts in produc-
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins             ing relevant research and implementing proxy
                           voting strategies.




                     Exhibit 14

                   Recent initiatives by institutional investors on ESG issues:
                     • The Carbon Disclosure Project, calling on companies to
                       provide investment-relevant information relating to green-
                       house gas mitigation
                     • The Institutional Shareholders Committee Principles, issued
                       by a group of large institutional investors, calling on fund
                       managers to take a more active approach in relation to their
                       engagement with companies, which should include ESG issues
                     • The Pharmaceutical Shareowners Group’s call for better disclo-
                       sure in the pharmaceutical industry
                     • The Investor’s Statement on Transparency in the Extractives
                       Sector, aimed at increasing the transparency of payments made
                       by extractive sector companies to governments and govern-
                       ment-linked entities
                     • The U.S. Investor Network on Climate Risk, a group of US State
                       and City Treasurers and Trustees with fiduciary responsibility
                       for some of America’s largest and most influential pension and
                       labour funds, which recently called for greater investor focus on
                       climate change risks and opportunities
                     • The UK Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change, with
                       similar goals as the U.S. Investor Network on Climate Risk
                     • To be noted is also a 15% increase in U.S. shareholder resolu-
                       tions relating to ESG issues from January 2001 to June 2003.

      23
    Exhibit 15

 Investor networks on climate change

 In November 2003, the United Nations convened a summit of institu-            Financial Sector
                                                                                  Initiative
 tional investors in the US controlling more than $1 trillion in assets,       Who Cares Wins
 including several state and city treasurers, to discuss climate change
 risks. This group set up an Investor Network on Climate Risk and
 issued a 10-point call for action, including14:
     • The SEC to enforce corporate disclosure of climate change risks
     • Companies in major greenhouse gas-producing sectors (e.g. autos,
       power utilities) to report to shareholders on the financial implica-
       tions of climate change — including regulation and competition
     • Investment managers to include climate change in their analyses.
     Speaking at the summit, California State Treasurer Phil Angelides
 commented, “In global warming, we are facing an enormous risk to
 the US economy and to retirement funds that Wall Street has so far
 chosen to ignore. The corporate scandals over the last couple of years
 have made it clear that investors need to pay more attention to cor-
 porate practices that affect long-term value. As fiduciaries, we must
 take it upon ourselves to identify the emerging environmental chal-
 lenges facing the companies in which we are shareholders, to
 demand more information, and to spur needed actions to respond to
 those challenges.”


     In the UK, the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change
 brings together 19 funds with assets totalling £450 billion to focus on
 investment risks and opportunities in this area. It has produced reports
 on aviation and power generation, analysing the investment issues
 from a move to a low-carbon economy. In both cases, the analysis con-
 cluded that the sectors would be significantly affected, and that the
 impacts would vary significantly from company to company, with clear
 implications for sector weightings and stock selection.15




14 Association of British Insurers, Risk Returns and Responsibility, Author:
Roger Cowe, Feb. 2004
15 Association of British Insurers, Risk Returns and Responsibility, Author:
Roger Cowe, Feb. 2004
                                                                                     24
                     Exhibit 16

                   Financial research organisations respond to buy-side call
                   for more ESG research
Financial Sector
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     The Asset Management Working Group (AMWG) of the UNEP Finance
                   Initiative, comprising 12 financial institutions managing total assets of
                   about 1.6 trillion USD, recently invited leading financial research institu-
                   tions from around the world to produce sector-specific reports that would:
                      1. Identify the specific environmental and social issues that are
                         likely to be material for company competitiveness and reputa-
                         tion in that particular industry
                      2. Identify and to the extent possible quantify their potential
                         impact on stock price

                   The outcomes in terms of sector specific reports and insights with
                   regard to the relevance of ESG issues will be summarised in a sepa-
                   rate report and presented at the U.N. Global Compact Leader Summit
                   in June 2004. Pending approval from the AMWG members, a second
                   invitation will be launched in Q3 2004. A wide range of financial
                   research institutions has responded to this call. The contributing insti-
                   tutions and the titles of their reports are noted below:
                      1. Deutsche Bank Global Equity Research: Beyond the Numbers
                         — Corporate Governance: Implication for Investors
                      2. Deutsche Securities South African Equity Research: No
                         Evidence to Link Share Ratings with Good Corporate
                         Citizenship...Yet
                      3. NikkoCitigroup Japan Equity Strategy: Environmental
                         Technologies Fuelling Zones of Growth
                      4. Goldman Sachs Global Energy: Introducing the Goldman
                         Sachs Energy Environmental and Social Index
                      5. ABN AMRO Equities United Kingdom: Pharmaceuticals
                      6. West LB Equity Markets Pan-European Equities: Insurance and
                         Sustainability: Playing with Fire
                      7. Nomura Japanese Equity Markets: Corporate social responsi-
                         bility (CSR) in the nonlife insurance sector
                      8. HSBC: European Utilities
                      9. UBS Global Equity Research: European Emissions Trading
                         Scheme — Bonanza or Bust
                      10. Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Europe / Equity: Utilities —
                          Emission trading — Carbon Derby Part II: And they’re off
                      11. Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein UK / Europe / Equity :
      25                  Transport — Aviation emissions: Another cost to bear
   Exhibit 17

Increasing integration of ESG factors in UK pension funds’ management


According to a recent study by the Association of British Insurers16,          Financial Sector
                                                                                  Initiative
the knowledge of and interest in ESG aspects among pension trustees            Who Cares Wins
is constantly increasing. The study cites a recent survey of 70 UK pen-
sion funds by the research organisation EIRIS. The picture that
emerges is of trustees concerned about ESG criteria, but relying large-
ly on fund managers to take the initiative.


    Following an amendment to the Pensions Act which came into effect
in 2000, trustees are now required to include in their Statement of
Investment Principles (SIP) comment on the extent to which (if at all)
their investment decisions take account of social, environmental and eth-
ical issues. Research has shown that many trustees have responded
positively to this requirement. Almost £90 billion of pension funds’ UK
equity holdings are now subject to some form of socially responsible
investment policy, equivalent to almost a quarter of the sector’s total UK
holdings. This figure is based on SIP statements. In practical terms, in
many cases this has not led to substantial change in investment practice.


    Of the 70 responses to the EIRIS poll (mostly from the private sector),
90% said their investment strategy did take account of Social,
Environmental and Ethical (SEE)17 factors. The survey also highlighted
the increasing activity of pension funds in integrating SEE aspects in
their management of funds:
    • 59% of funds said they consider SRI experience and perform-
      ance when appointing or reappointing investment managers
    • 54% of the funds’ pensions managers/trustees have received
      training on incorporating SEE issues into investment strategy
    • 59% said they have asked their investment managers to consid-
      er the financial implications of SEE factors when assessing the
      risk and returns of each company
    • 11% undertake some form of screening and/or preference
      weighting in relation to SEE issues
    • 87% say they exercise voting rights on SEE grounds.


16 Association of British Insurers, Risk Returns and Responsibility, Author:
Roger Cowe, Feb. 2004
17 Social, Environmental and Ethical (SEE)
                                                                                     26
                     4. Integration in financial analysis

                   Until now, efforts to integrate ESG aspects in financial analysis have
                   focused on specific sectors, such as the energy, extractive, automo-
                   bile, utilities, pharmaceutical and chemical industries, which are
Financial Sector   perceived as being more exposed to these
   Initiative                                                              We believe systematic
Who Cares Wins     aspects. Analysts in these sectors have started
                                                                          evaluation of corporate
                   to collect information, and to deepen their
                                                                        governance, environmental
                   understanding and analytical skills with regard
                                                                          and social responsibility
                   to ESG issues. Their experience is invaluable in
                                                                         through “extra-financial”
                   expanding the scope to other industries.                   analysis provides
                                                                        a better view of investment
                      Financial institutions have recently begun to       risks and opportunities.
                   consider ESG factors in a more systematic way
                   across all industries and across different asset         Philippe Lespinard
                   classes. Even though ESG aspects are particu-          Chief Investment Officer
                                                                             BNP Paribas Asset
                   larly important for equity analysis, the
                                                                                Management
                   importance for other asset classes such as
                   fixed-income, private equity and real estate
                   investments also needs to be considered.


                      Because of their importance to global growth, emerging mar-
                   kets should receive particular consideration and ESG criteria will
                   need to be adapted to the specific situation in
                   these   markets.   Emerging     countries    will       “Environmental and
                                                                           related social issues
                   become increasingly important in terms of
                                                                            in transactions are
                   delivering sustained economic growth, of
                                                                        becoming an integral part
                   enabling investors to diversify their portfolios        of our risk analysis”
                   and in terms of their role in the context of sus-
                   tainable development.                                       David Bushnell
                                                                         Head of Risk Management
                      In order to improve the inclusion of ESG fac-      Citigroup Global Corporate
                   tors in financial analysis it will often be              and Investment Bank

                   necessary to adapt current analytical models
                   and tools. In particular, including qualitative information on com-
                   petitive advantages of well-managed companies or on the impact
                   of emerging risks must be improved.




      27
Recommendations:

  l.   Building on the existing awareness for ESG factors in
       exposed industries, financial analysts should expand
       their understanding and analysis of these factors to
       other industries.                                         Financial Sector
                                                                    Initiative
                                                                 Who Cares Wins
  m.   While supporting a thoughtful and creative process
       led by the analysts, we encourage financial institu-
       tions to explore ways to more systematically
       integrate ESG issues in research. We encourage ana-
       lysts to prioritise ESG issues on the basis of their
       potential impact on financial value and on a sector-
       by-sector basis. In each case the time scale over
       which issues might become relevant should be
       analysed. Financial institutions should support the
       work of analysts with the necessary training,
       resources and tools.


  n.   Financial analysts should improve their understand-
       ing and integration of ESG issues in emerging
       markets research. They should take into account that
       criteria and methodologies must be adapted to the
       specific situation in emerging countries.


  o.   We invite financial institutions to expand the scope of
       ESG integration in research to other asset classes
       impacted by ESG factors, beyond equity.


  p.   We encourage analysts to further advance the devel-
       opment of valuation methodologies to better deal
       with qualitative information and uncertain impacts
       related to ESG issues. Specific techniques such as
       scenario models, options pricing, etc., might prove
       useful in this context.




                                                                       28
                      Exhibit 18

                   Examples of traditional and emerging ESG issues in dif-
                   ferent sectors18
Financial Sector
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     Sector             Traditional issue       Emerging issue


                   Oil and gas        • Oil spills            • Socio-economic impacts
                                      • CO2 emissions         • Government relations
                                                                and revenue sharing


                   Food industry      • Food safety           • “Functional food” regulation
                                      • Brand and             • Nutritional value, especially in
                                        reputation risk         low-income diets


                   Pharmaceuticals    • Bio-safety            • Role re. national
                                      • Animal welfare          healthcare systems
                                                              • Patent rights
                                                              • Environmental effects
                                                                of compounds


                   Automotive         • Safety requirements   • Mobility and socio-economic
                                      • CO2 emissions           impacts
                                                              • Low emission regulations




                   18 Arthur D. Little and Business in the Community, Speaking the Same
                   Language, 2003




      29
  Exhibit 19

Taking into account the specific situation of emerging
countries
                                                                             Financial Sector
                                                                                Initiative
ESG issues are as important, and perhaps more important, in emerg-           Who Cares Wins
ing market investment analysis in terms of financial materiality,
reputation management and good corporate citizenship as com-
pared to developed market analysis. This is because:
   • Regulation and enforcement are typically weak
   • Many of the world’s most economically important non-renew-
     able and renewable resources are located in developing
     countries
   • Developing countries are also where the world’s most pressing
     environmental and social problems are caused and/or felt
   • Companies are in general more involved in shaping markets
     and more exposed to government and societal expectations.

   In this context it will be important to support capacity building for
better management of ESG issues by local companies and financial
markets, bearing in mind that this process will take time and will
need to take into account local cultural and economic realities. U.N.
or investor-led initiatives could play an important role in this field. An
example of such an initiative is the Hong-Kong based Association for
Sustainable & Responsible Investment in Asia (ASRIA).




                                                                                   30
                     5. Transparency and disclosure

                   Efforts by financial markets to improve the integration of ESG
                   factors in financial analysis and investment will not be successful
                   without adequate disclosure on these matters by companies.
Financial Sector   Transparency and disclosure are therefore crucial elements of
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     better functioning markets in this field.


                      The quantity and quality of companies’ reporting
                                                                                            “These issues are
                   on ESG issues has increased rapidly in recent years.                 raised more often and
                   In its international survey of corporate sustainability                 in an increasingly
                   reporting, KPMG concludes that reporting in this                       knowledgeable and
                   area is becoming mainstream with 45% of global                        professional manner
                   Fortune 250 companies regularly disclosing related                   at investor meetings”.
                   information compared to 35% in 199919.
                                                                                           Anthony Trahar
                                                                                                 CEO
                      Fund managers and analysts, on the other hand,
                                                                                          Anglo American Plc.
                   when asked if they are satisfied with the informa-
                   tion they receive from companies answer “No” by a
                   wide majority of over 55% 20. Something is clearly not working in
                   the communication between companies and financial markets on
                   these issues. Analysts confirm that a lot of information is available,
                   but that it is not presented in a consistent and meaningful way and
                   its relevance for the core business of the company is not explained.
                   That said, it is also true that analysts often do not show much inter-
                   est in this type of information.


                      This situation must be unlocked. We welcome the recommen-
                   dations by the U.N. Global Compact which cover four areas of
                   “good communications practice” with investors:

                      • Communicate a leadership commitment toward values-based
                        management

                      • Emphasise the social contribution of the core business




                   19 KPMG International Survey of Corporate Sustainability Reporting 2002, The
                   Netherlands, 2002.
                   20 CSR Europe, Deloitte, Euronext: Investing in Responsible Business. The 2003 sur-
      31           vey of European fund managers, financial analysts and investor relations officers.
   • Develop a credible and measurable business case for corpo-
     rate citizenship

   • Communicate change in a consistent and coherent manner

   We also believe that regulatory frameworks requiring a mini-
mum degree of disclosure and accountability on ESG issues would
improve the availability and comparability of data, and therefore       Financial Sector
                                                                           Initiative
support integration in financial analysis. Stock exchanges, for         Who Cares Wins
instance, could include ESG criteria in listing particulars for com-
panies. Both voluntary and market-friendly regulatory approaches
are needed to improve disclosure. Both should be flexible enough
to allow for diversity of approaches and providers, rather than rely-
ing on rigid prescriptions.


   We are also convinced that international and national accounting
bodies and rating agencies are key players in developing better
standards and achieving a better quality and availability of useful
ESG information. Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) can also
contribute to better transparency by providing objective ESG infor-
mation on companies to the public and the financial community.




Recommendations:

   q.   We invite companies to take a leadership role by imple-
        menting ESG principles and policies and to provide
        information and reports on ESG issues in a more con-
        sistent and standardised format, and to explain their
        relevance to value creation. Companies are invited to
        identify and communicate key challenges and drivers
        and prioritise ESG issues accordingly. We believe that
        this information is best conveyed to financial markets
        through normal Investor Relation communications
        channels. We also encourage, when relevant, an explicit
        mention in the Annual Report of companies.


   r.   Companies are encouraged to facilitate a constructive
        dialogue with asset managers and analysts and

                                                                              32
                        accept both positive and more critical outcomes of
                        ESG analyses.


                   s.   Analysts should improve their understanding of the
                        link between ESG performance and value creation
Financial Sector        and more actively communicate with companies on
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins          these issues.


                   t.   We believe that regulatory frameworks should
                        require a minimum degree of disclosure and account-
                        ability on ESG issues, but rely on market-driven
                        voluntary initiatives to formulate detailed standards.


                   u.   We encourage financial analysts to participate more
                        actively in ongoing voluntary initiatives, such as the
                        Global Reporting Initiative, and help shape a report-
                        ing framework that responds to their needs. We also
                        encourage the Global Reporting Initiative to closely
                        cooperate with national and international financial
                        analysts associations.


                   v.   We encourage stock exchanges to include ESG crite-
                        ria in listing particulars for companies, because this
                        will ensure a minimum degree of disclosure across
                        all listed companies. As a first step, stock exchanges
                        could communicate to listed companies the growing
                        importance of ESG issues. Similarly, other self-regu-
                        latory organizations (e.g. NASD, FSA), professional
                        organizations (e.g. AIMR, EFFAS), accounting stan-
                        dard-setting bodies (e.g. FASB, IASB), public
                        accounting entities, rating agencies and index
                        providers should all establish consistent ESG stan-
                        dards and frameworks.




      33
   Exhibit 20

Investor initiatives for better disclosure in the pharma-
ceutical and extractive industries21
                                                                            Financial Sector
                                                                               Initiative
In March 2003, 12 institutional investors issued a framework for phar-      Who Cares Wins
maceutical companies to improve disclosure in annual/social reports
in the context of “the public health crisis in emerging markets”, with
a focus on issues relating to access to patented medicines. The
investors involved in the initiative believe that “the sector’s response
to the crisis could impact shareholder value in the long term and
therefore want to enhance their understanding of how companies are
addressing this issue.”


    In May 2003, a group of institutional investors representing
US$ 7 trillion issued a statement in support of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI). Launched in September 2002 by United
Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair, with the support of leading min-
ing and energy companies, as well as NGOs, the EITI aims to increase
transparency of payments made by extractive sector companies to
governments and government-linked entities. The statement supports
a wider use of EITI and commends the efforts made by companies and
governments already engaged in the initiative, and calls on the
engagement of new companies, as well as inviting other investors to
join the statement.




21 World Economic Forum: Values and Value — Communicating the strategic
importance of corporate citizenship to investors, 2003 CEO Survey




                                                                                  34
                      Exhibit 21

                   Case-study on disclosure in the US pulp and paper industry

Financial Sector   One key barrier to the integration of ESG issues into mainstream finan-
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     cial analysis continues to be the poor quality and limited quantity of
                   financially relevant environmental information disclosed by companies.


                       Though disclosure is generally improving, there are important
                   gaps in the information that companies make available to financial
                   analysts. A review of 13 leading, publicly listed companies in the US
                   pulp and paper industry found that while impending ESG issues could
                   materially affect capital expenditures and future earnings, few com-
                   panies adequately disclosed the financial risks or competitive
                   implications of these ESG issues to their shareholders22. Similarly, in
                   2002, of 16 leading oil and gas companies analyzed by the World
                   Resources Institute, 11 failed to mention climate change as a business
                   risk in their annual reports. This, despite the fact that climate change
                   is widely recognized by oil and gas managers as being a critical issue
                   for the industry.


                       Not merely an inconvenience, this lack of disclosure makes it
                   impossible for investors to value companies accurately. Indeed, failure
                   to disclose financially material environmental information may con-
                   stitute a breach of securities law.




                   22 World Resources Institute, Pure Profit: The Financial Implications of
                   Environmental Performance, March 2000




      35
  Exhibit 22

Stock exchanges convene to discuss corporate citizenship

On 15 March 2004, the Global Compact convened a meeting with sen-          Financial Sector
                                                                              Initiative
ior representatives of the world’s exchanges and principal federations     Who Cares Wins
at United Nations Headquarters in New York. The meeting, requested
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan, invited the exchanges to explore
potential partnership and collaboration with the Global Compact.


   Many participants recognized that advancing the Global Compact
and the concept of responsible corporate citizenship based on uni-
versally accepted principles can help in building trust in societies,
which was also considered a key priority of the exchanges’ work.


   At the meeting, Leanne Parsons, Chief Operating Officer of the JSE
Securities Exchange, described JSE’s approach to corporate responsi-
bility, or “the triple bottom line.” She outlined JSE’s listing and
corporate governance policies and emphasized its integrated approach
to socially responsible investing, which links social, environmental and
economic factors. Mrs. Parsons also discussed the launch of the JSE’s
Social Responsibility Index (SRI), the first of its kind in an emerging
market, and the first such index sponsored by an exchange.


   Following the 15 March meeting, Bovespa, the Brazilian stock
exchange in Sao Paulo, and the Jakarta Stock Exchange announced
decisions to join the Global Compact and commit to its principles.
Other exchanges are actively sharing information on the Global
Compact with listed companies.




                                                                                 36
                     6. Implementing change

                   Because of the strategic nature of ESG issues, involving relations
                   with clients, regulators and additional stakeholders, the work of
                   analysts and fund managers must be supported by a strong
Financial Sector   commitment at the Board and senior management level of
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins     financial institutions. The formulation of long-term goals, the
                   introduction of organisational learning and change processes,
                   appropriate training and incentive systems for analysts and fund
                   managers are crucial in achieving the goal of a better integration
                   of ESG issues.


                      Every institution should choose its own path, based on its struc-
                   ture and culture — there is no single optimal solution. Such paths
                   can include very diverse strategies, such as buying external
                   research, supporting financial analysts and fund managers with
                   specialist ESG teams, training analysts and managers and adapt-
                   ing performance measurement and incentive systems to achieve
                   better integration of ESG aspects in core processes.


                      Change will happen if all market actors join in the effort to bet-
                   ter understand and integrate ESG factors in investment. Financial
                   analysis and the way it is used in investment decisions is to a great
                   extent the result of what all market actors perceive as being the rel-
                   evant issues, time-frames and values. That said, financial analysts
                   and investment professionals should take a leading role because
                   they are the specialists best placed to show how ESG issues impact
                   company and investment value.




      37
Recommendations:

  w.     Financial institutions should define their own path
         towards organisational learning and change in this
         field and specify long-term goals and organisational
         learning and change processes.                                        Financial Sector
                                                                                  Initiative
                                                                               Who Cares Wins
  x.     Financial institutions should integrate materially rele-
         vant ESG factors in performance measurement and
         incentive systems for analysts and fund managers.


  y.     Senior management and Board members of financial
         institutions should make clear their leadership and
         commitment with respect to ESG issues.




       Exhibit 23

 A possible organisational path leading from separate spe-
 cialist teams to full integration of ESG issues

 On their path from a research and investment process not including ESG
 factors to full integration of ESG issues, many organisations go through
 different stages often involving the use of specialist Socially Responsible
 Investment (SRI) functions and teams. It is interesting to note that full
 integration usually leads back to the initial organisational structure, in
 which specialist ESG know-how and teams are re-integrated and fully
 embedded into normal research and fund management functions. See
 Figure 7.




                                                                                     38
                                          CIO                                               CIO


                        Research           Portfolio Management          Research           Portfolio Management


Financial Sector      Economy & Strategy               Equities        Economy & Strategy             Equities
   Initiative                                        Fixed Income        Equity Research
                        Equity Research
Who Cares Wins                                                                                      Fund Manager SRI
                        Credit Research                Balanced          Credit Research
                                                                                                   Fixed Income

                                                                                                     Balanced




                                           CIO                                              CIO

                        Research                Portfolio Management    Research             Portfolio Management

                      Economy & Strategy                 Equities      Economy & Strategy              Equities
                        Equity Research
                                                       Fund Manager     Equity Research
                        Credit Research                                                              Fund Manager SRI
                                                       Fixed Income
                     Extra-Financial Research                                SRI Analyst            Fixed Income
                                                      Fund Manager      Credit Research               Balanced
                                                         Balanced

                                                      Fund Manager




                   Figure 7: One (of many) possible organisational paths leading from
                   mainstream (upper left), to first generation screening (upper and
                   lower right), to partial ESG integration in different asset classes
                   (lower left), to full ESG integration (upper left) in research and port-
                   folio management processes23




                   23 Eric Borremans, BNP Paribas Asset Management, Presentation at the meeting
                   of the Financial Sector High-Level Initiative on “Best-Practices in Financial
      39           Analysis”, Zurich, 4 March 2004.
  Conclusions and outlook

The institutions that have produced this report are committed to
start a process to further deepen, specify and implement the
recommendations outlined in this report. This will happen at
different levels and will include both individual and collabora-       Financial Sector
                                                                          Initiative
tive efforts.                                                          Who Cares Wins


   As an important next step, we plan to approach the relevant
accounting standard-setting bodies (FASB, IASB, etc.), profes-
sional and self-regulatory organizations (AIMR, EFFAS, NYSE,
NASDAQ, FSA, etc.) and investor relations associations (NIRI,
DIRK, etc.) in order to ensure that our intentions are fully under-
stood and supported.


   We also plan to use platforms provided by initiatives such as the
UNEP Finance Initiative, The Conference Board, the World
Economic Forum and others to start an in-depth dialogue with the
key stakeholders mentioned in this report, including investors,
companies, regulators, stock exchanges, accountants, consultants,
and NGOs. We are keen to learn their views and are interested in
starting a process of communication and mutual learning in imple-
menting the recommendations.


   We will approach our clients and assess their interest and needs
with regard to research that includes ESG aspects. We are com-
mitted to improving the coverage of ESG issues in the research
and investment services we provide to our clients.


   We will encourage our analysts to engage in both individual and
collaborative efforts to improve the know-how and tools needed to
integrate ESG factors in financial analysis. Our goal is to trigger
creativity, diversity of approaches and innovation in the field. We
are committed to support analysts with the necessary resources
and training.


   We invite the Global Compact or one of its implementing bod-
ies to review the state of the implementation of this report’s
recommendations in a year’s time, with the goal of assessing how
our institutions and other market actors have responded to the call

                                                                             40
                   for action by this report. The review should also describe how con-
                   cepts to better include ESG issues in financial analysis, asset
                   management and securities brokerage have evolved over time and
                   update the recommendations if necessary.



Financial Sector        Exhibit 24
   Initiative
Who Cares Wins
                     A proposal for reviewing implementation

                     UNEP-FI has expressed its preparedness in tracking global progress
                     on the recommendations of this report. Its Asset Management
                     Working Group has proposed a preliminary list of ten indicators that
                     could be used for the planned review process. They include:


                     Investors:
                        1.    Investors specifying their proxy voting guidelines on ESG
                              matters
                        2.    Trustees and their selection consultants consider integrating
                              ESG issues into the formulation of investment mandates and
                              the selection of investment managers, taking into account
                              their fiduciary obligations to participants and beneficiaries
                        3.    Government and multilateral agency pension funds start
                              considering the principles of sustainable development in
                              their investments taking into account their fiduciary obliga-
                              tions to participants and beneficiaries

                     Asset Managers:
                        4.    Senior management and Boards taking a leadership role
                        5.    Asset managers explicitly requesting and rewarding
                              research on ESG criteria
                        6.    Buy-side, sell-side and emerging market investment
                              research teams being appropriately equipped to integrate
                              ESG issues into fundamental company analysis
                        7.    Analyst performance and incentive systems rewarding ESG
                              research

                     Capital Markets:
                        8.    Stock exchange inclusion of ESG criteria in their listing
                              particulars for companies and/or communication of the
                              importance of ESG
                        9.    Accounting bodies and rating agencies integration of ESG
                              into their frameworks
                        10.   Global Reporting Initiative interactions with local and
                              international financial analysis associations

      41
Designed by the Graphic Design Unit
Outreach Division
United Nations Department of Public Information

57899—December 2004—2,000
