  Corporate Governance Program
  East Asia and the Paciﬁc
  Annual Summary 2016



IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
SELECTED CUMULATIVE PROGRAM RESULTS
AS OF JUNE 2016


•	 Direct firm engagements facilitated more than $812 million in
   financing due in part to corporate governance improvements.

•	 More than 110 public-awareness events attracted over 8,500
   participants and 2,300 firms.

•	 Over 320 trainers in countries throughout the region received training.

•	 Partner-conducted workshops – enabled through train-the-trainer
   workshops – reached more than 6,000 executives.

•	 Twenty-one laws, regulations, codes, and policies in countries
   throughout the region were improved.

•	 More than 3,100 women at the board and senior management levels
   were trained and/or attended corporate governance events.
Dear Readers,
Welcome to the 2016 IFC East Asia Pacific Corporate Governance Program Annual Summary.
This publication spotlights the ongoing efforts to create a more open, accountable, and
transparent business sector throughout East Asia and the Pacific (EAP).

Over the past fiscal year, we successfully launched a Corporate Governance Program in
Myanmar, an important frontier market. Together with our partners, IFC established the
Myanmar Corporate Governance Initiative (MCGI), which will support our longer-term
objective of establishing an institute of directors or a corporate governance training
center in the country. Across the region, we provided assistance to regulators in China,
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Vietnam as they revised their corporate governance codes
and regulations in support of investment climate improvements, much in support of
the integration of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the need to
harmonize such standards. We launched guidebooks on related-party transactions for
both Mongolian and Vietnamese commercial banks and translated the family governance
handbook into the Myanmar language to promote the adoption of best international
practices. We also expanded our work with training partners, institutes of directors, the
media, and other associations to organize awareness-raising events and train-the-trainer
workshops to broaden governance expertise in different countries.

We aim to leverage our private sector development expertise – gained through our
investment activity and World Bank Group knowledge – to promote good governance
practices at different levels of a market. We help regulatory bodies strengthen laws and
regulations, build the capacity of our partners and market intermediaries, advise individual
firms on corporate governance improvements and support various awareness-raising
activities. Our goal is to help companies and overall markets attract investment and build
vibrant, sustainable private sectors.

Through these efforts, IFC, along with the World Bank and various other local partners, has
achieved significant results in recent years. Yet, there is much more to be done. The global
economy is growing more volatile and there is a sharpened focus on firm sustainability.
As the ASEAN countries continue to integrate but vie for more foreign investment at
the same time, the year ahead will continue to present many monumental challenges
and opportunities – all of which will be underpinned by the need for a strong corporate
governance regime.

We hope this summary will provide a snapshot of initiatives around the region and
facilitate knowledge-sharing among our partners in both the public and private sectors.
We would like to acknowledge and thank our development partners, the State Secretariat
for Economic Affairs of Switzerland (SECO), Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade (DFAT), and the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID), for their
valuable cooperation and support.

Sincerely,

Chris Razook
IFC EAP Corporate Governance Lead
    Vietnam
    Building on the program’s past achievements, IFC continued to work with the State
    Securities Commission (SSC), the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), and other partners to
    improve corporate governance rules and regulations, including the launch of a guidebook
    on related-party transactions. To further enhance Vietnam’s investment climate, the
    program worked with local partners to raise awareness of good governance among
    listed and non-listed companies. During the year, IFC organized a series of workshops to
    enhance the capacity of its partners to provide training to more companies in Vietnam.
    Deloitte Vietnam and the University of Banking and Economics of the Vietnam National
    University (VNU-UEB) were two key partners with whom IFC conducted a series of
    successful training events and big conferences during the year. The Program continued
    to strongly advocate for the establishment of an Institute of Directors (IoD) for Vietnam,
    providing a blueprint and advice to partners on the potential path forward. IFC also took
    on additional clients, advising individual firms on improving their corporate governance
    practices.

    Key FY 16 project highlights include:

    •	   Guidebook on Related-Party Transactions: IFC, in collaboration with SBV, the
         Netherlands Development Finance Company (FMO), and investment firm Dragon
         Capital Group, launched a guidebook on related-party transactions for Vietnamese
         commercial banks in January 2016. Outlining best practices and examples, the guidebook
         aims to help the banks improve their management and increase the transparency
         of such transactions to reduce potential conflicts of interest. The launch ceremony
         attracted more than 30 regulators and bank representatives and received extensive
         media coverage.
    •	   Corporate Governance Code: IFC has just signed an MoU with SSC to provide technical
         support to the regulators in the development of the first corporate governance code
         for Vietnamese listed companies. The code, which is expected to be introduced this
         year, will help companies improve their corporate governance practices and their
         ability to attract more capital.
    •	   Corporate Governance Scorecard: During the past fiscal year, IFC supported the
         regulators on rating the performance of Vietnamese listed companies for the 2015
         ASEAN Corporate Governance Scorecard for Vietnam. The scorecard’s methodologies
         are based on international best practices. With IFC’s support, Vietnam is one of
         six ASEAN countries participating in the annual exercise as an effort to encourage
         companies to go beyond national legislative requirements for corporate governance.



4
     IFC also co-organized a forum and a training session with SSC and the Ho Chi Minh
     City Stock Exchange for more than 100 participants from listed companies to raise
     awareness of the scorecard. Corporate governance experts from different countries
     shared best practices from the scorecard at the training.
•	   Capacity-Building of Partners: IFC conducted a series of training-of-trainers
     corporate governance workshops in Vietnam to strengthen the capacity of partner
     institutions. At one two-day workshop, the project team provided board leadership
     and banking governance training to 26 trainers from VNU-UEB, the National
     Economics University, the Central Institute for Economic Management, the Banking
     Supervisory Authority of the State Bank of Vietnam, the Hanoi Stock Exchange, and
     SSC. In October 2015, IFC co-organized a risk governance training in Ho Chi Minh City
     with the Center for Risk Management Studies, its local partner from Indonesia. The
     program also worked with Deloitte Vietnam, which initiated its Vietnam Center for
     Corporate Governance, to jointly conduct two conferences for listed companies from
     Hanoi Stock Exchange and Hochiminh Stock Exchange during the year.
•	   Cooperation with the VNU University of Economics and Business (VNU-UEB):
     IFC signed a cooperation agreement with VNU-UEB and supported the university in
     delivering the first corporate governance training for 22 board members and senior
     executives of seven Vietnamese commercial banks in Ho Chi Minh City in April 2016.
     The course covered topics such as best corporate governance practices for the banking
     industry, improving board effectiveness, transparency and disclosure standards, and
     building a sound control environment. Trainers also discussed the practical situations
     in Vietnam to make the training more applicable. Following the success of the event,
     IFC and the university held another two-day training course for board members and
     managers from several large commercial banks in Hanoi during May 2016.
•	   Supporting Firm-Specific Improvements: During the period, IFC signed agreements
     with five new clients to advise them on strengthening their corporate governance
     structures and practices. The clients belonged to a wide range of industries including
     agricultural manufacturing, banking, chemical, mobile, and travel. Over the past fiscal
     year, IFC delivered a series of training workshops to the boards and management teams
     of various Vietnamese banks and investment companies. Participants highly rated
     the workshops, which covered a wide range of topics including strategy governance
     and development, corporate governance implementation planning, effective board
     practices, the role of independent directors, and board composition. IFC also completed
     a full corporate governance assessment of a Vietnamese payment platform company
     and recommended ways to improve on the company’s governance practices. The
     company’s board is considering engaging IFC as its advisor for implementation in the
     next phase.




                                                                                               5
    Indonesia
    Over the past fiscal year, IFC continued to work with both the regulators and local partners
    to raise corporate governance standards among Indonesian companies. Building on its
    collaboration with Indonesia’s financial services authority, Otoritas Jasa Keuangan, IFC
    helped OJK draft new corporate governance guidelines for public companies. This is part of
    OJK’s ongoing efforts to improve corporate governance standards in Indonesia following
    the launch of a landmark corporate governance roadmap for the country (also produced
    with assistance from IFC). IFC also continued to help four key partners strengthen their
    capacity, including the Indonesian Institute of Corporate Directorship (IICD), Center for
    Risk Management Services (CRMS), Indonesian Corporate Secretaries Association (ICSA),
    and the Family Business Nusantara (FBN) Foundation; the program delivered corporate
    and risk governance training with these partners. On the firm advisory front, IFC signed
    an agreement with the Melbourne Business School (MBS), one of the leading providers of
    executive education in Asia Pacific, to deliver executive training on corporate governance,
    ethics and leadership for board members.

    Key FY16 project highlights include:

    •	   Corporate Governance Guideline: IFC helped OJK draft the new Corporate
         Governance Guideline for Public Companies based on the “comply or explain” approach.
         Under the new guideline released in November 2015, public companies are required
         to implement OJK’s recommendations or disclose in their annual reports why they
         have not done so and whether they have taken alternative actions in place of OJK’s
         recommendations. The guideline is a major milestone following a series of regulatory
         changes aimed at strengthening corporate governance practices among publicly
         listed companies and new issuers, ultimately leading to an overall improvement of
         the investment climate and competitiveness of Indonesian companies following the
         launch of the ASEAN Economic Community. IFC is considering future initiatives to
         support OJK in strengthening its monitoring and supervision capacity in the corporate
         governance area.
    •	   Strengthening the Capacity of Local Partners: To broaden the reach of its
         corporate governance work and ensure sustainability, IFC continued to cultivate strong
         partnerships with local partners, including IICD and FBN. These partners used IFC tools
         and materials to deliver various corporate governance trainings and generated over
         $300,000 in revenue in the past fiscal year.
    •	   Ethics and Leadership Training: IFC signed an agreement with MBS to design and
         deliver executive training for board members focusing on corporate governance,



6
     ethics and leadership. Given the relevance of these issues for Indonesia, the training
     aims to equip senior management with the knowledge of best practices to create and
     maintain sustainable businesses.
•	   Risk Governance Programs: IFC continued to support CRMS to deliver Master
     Classes on Enterprise Risk Governance to help boards better understand audit and
     risk oversight and carry out their duties more effectively. These events attracted more
     than 200 participants, including 53 women. IFC will continue to help CRMS expand its
     domestic client base and regional market outreach.
•	   Supporting Firm-Specific Improvements: IFC continued its engagement with
     several companies in the transportation and private equity sectors to improve their
     corporate governance policies and procedures. According to surveys filled out by our
     clients, IFC’s corporate governance advisory engagements helped them raise more
     than $400 million in financing.




                                                                                               7
    Myanmar
    IFC launched an ambitious Corporate Governance Program in Myanmar during the year –
    under the banner of the Myanmar Corporate Governance Initiative (MCGI). This program
    is being supported by the U.K. and Australian governments (UK Aid and the Department
    of Foreign Affairs and Trade). The program was kicked-off with a high-profile conference
    with key partners, the Republic of the Union of Myanmar Federation of Chambers of
    Commerce and Industry (UMFCCI) and the U.K.-Myanmar Financial Services Taskforce. The
    conference, which attracted more than 400 participants, provided a forum for individuals
    from the government, the private sector and other stakeholders to share lessons, insights,
    and ideas for promoting good corporate governance practices in Myanmar. The MCGI also
    began a series of workshops for Myanmar enterprises, resulting in nearly 40 companies
    already being trained in just a few months. The program will also work with the central
    bank and begin regulatory-related initiatives with the Securities Exchange Commission of
    Myanmar (SECM) in relation to the newly launched Yangon Stock Exchange.

    Myanmar Corporate Governance Initiative: Together with the U.K.-Myanmar Financial
    Services Taskforce, the UMFCCI, and the U.K. and Australian embassies, IFC established the
    MCGI, which will support our longer-term objective of establishing an institute of directors
    or a corporate governance training center in Myanmar. With technical assistance from the
    Thai Institute of Directors, IFC supported the Director Accreditation Program organized
    by the taskforce over the past year in order to build a cadre of trainers who can deliver
    corporate governance training and events in Myanmar in the future.

    Supporting Regulators: IFC advanced discussions with SECM and submitted a
    memorandum of understanding to provide training and assistance to SECM in strengthening
    the country’s corporate governance regulatory standards and practices through various
    initiatives such as reviewing new regulations.

    Promoting Family Governance: The project team worked on translating the IFC
    Family Governance Handbook into Burmese to expand its support to family businesses in
    Myanmar.

    Supporting Firm-Level Improvements: The project team continued to work with
    a number of Myanmar banks and companies to help them improve their corporate
    governance frameworks and practices.




8
China
During the year, IFC continued its corporate governance work in China on several fronts.
The project team supported the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) on its
plan to revise the China Corporate Governance Code. IFC also worked with the China
Corporate Governance Institute of Nankai University and the China Association for Public
Companies (CAPCO) to build the capacity of regulators and professional institutions on
corporate governance training and consulting services.

Key FY16 project highlights include:
•	   Corporate Governance Code: IFC signed a memorandum of understanding with
     CAPCO and strengthened its relationship with the CSRC during the year. The project
     team provided technical advice to both organizations on their plan to revise the
     Corporate Governance Code for listed companies in China. The team will continue
     to support the CSRC on the code revision, which is targeted to be completed by early
     2017.
•	   Capacity Building: In partnership with the China Corporate Governance Institute of
     Nankai University and CAPCO, IFC conducted two workshops to provide training to
     more than 80 trainers from the CSRC, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, and educational
     institutions on corporate governance curriculum planning and training skills. Some
     of the trainers trained by IFC have since adopted IFC’s China corporate governance
     curriculum and provided training to 841 participants. More trainers are expected to
     deliver similar training to clients in the next fiscal year.
•	   Supporting Firm-Specific Improvements: IFC provided corporate governance
     advisory services to selected clients in the banking and renewable power sectors
     over the past year. This resulted in 16 corporate governance policies and procedures
     improvements. Two clients reported improved performance and successfully obtained
     $14 million investment after enhancing their corporate governance practices.




                                                                                            9
     Mongolia
     IFC has been supporting Mongolia’s efforts to strengthen corporate governance for several
     years. The team has assisted in the development of five laws including the new Mongolian
     Company Law and the new Corporate Governance Code as well as a corporate governance
     scorecard that benchmarked the practices of Mongolia’s top 20 listed companies to global
     standards. IFC also supported improvements in related-party disclosures in Mongolia
     to strengthen investor protection and helped firms facilitate more than $400 million in
     financing partly as a result of improved corporate governance. Over the past fiscal year,
     the project team continued to strengthen the capacity of key partners, in particular the
     Corporate Governance Development Center (CGDC), to provide training to Mongolian
     companies to further enhance governance standards and the advisory capacities of local
     consultants.
     Key FY16 project highlights include:
     •	   Capacity Building: Within the framework of a cooperation agreement signed
          with CGDC, IFC continued to help Mongolian companies improve their corporate
          governance practices. The team helped CGDC launch new training programs, such
          as an MBA program specialized in corporate governance, to build its capacity to offer
          advisory services and training for small and medium enterprises. IFC is also supporting
          CGDC over the next three years to develop training programs for local consultants,
          deliver corporate-governance assessments for companies, and promote industry and
          public dialogues to encourage wider adoption of best practices such as proper public
          disclosure and investor protection.
     •	   Corporate Governance Awareness: In partnership with CGDC and the Financial
          Regulatory Commission (FRC), IFC hosted a seminar for Mongolian insurance
          companies to discuss new regulations in the insurance sector, corporate governance
          challenges it faces, and international best practices.
     •	   Annual Reporting Award: IFC supported the Annual Reporting Award of Mongolia
          organized by CGDC and FRC to promote transparency and disclosure among public
          companies and state-owned enterprises in Mongolia. During the Corporate Governance
          Forum held in October 2016, the winner of the first contest was announced. Each year,
          the organizers provide training to 20 companies and advise them on best reporting
          practices and developing annual reports that are in line with international standards.
          An independent jury then selects the best annual reports produced.
     •	   Audit Committee Master Class: The team conducted a master class for the internal
          audit team of one banking client in Mongolia. This two-day training program aimed to
          enhance the team’s knowledge of internal audit methodologies and leading practices
          to carry out their duties more effectively.
     •	   Supporting Firm-Specific Improvements: IFC worked with several firms in the
          banking and mining sectors to help strengthen their corporate governance practices.
          One of the latest clients of IFC was a state-owned enterprise with stakes in the
          country’s mining deposits of strategic importance.

10
The Philippines
IFC has ramped up its work in the Philippines over the past fiscal year, working with the
government to develop a corporate governance reform plan and improve regulations as
well as strengthening the capacity of its partner institutions to provide more training. In
particular, IFC supported the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) with its efforts
to strengthen the Philippines’ governance standards of listed companies and agreed to
help the central bank (BSP) with further regulatory improvements. The project team also
continued to support the Philippines Institute of Corporate Directors (ICD) with various
market-level initiatives.
Key FY16 project highlights include:
•	   Institute of Corporate Directors: The team signed an agreement with the ICD to
     further enhance its capacity to champion good governance practices among Philippine
     companies. IFC organized a series of train-the-trainer workshops to help directors,
     corporate secretaries, and other executives improve their general training skills and
     share practices on managing difficult conversations on boards. IFC also supported the
     ASEAN Corporate Governance scorecard initiative through the ICD. IFC will support
     the ICD in developing new programs and activities to further raise the governance
     standards of Filipino companies.
•	   SEC Collaboration: IFC signed a memorandum of understanding with the SEC in May
     2016 to strengthen the country’s regulatory framework and corporate governance
     practices. The cooperation aims to raise market awareness of good governance to
     entice more foreign investment to the country. IFC and the World Bank will support
     efforts to revise the country’s corporate governance code for listed companies and
     set best practices for Philippine companies to follow. IFC also provided inputs on the
     development of a corporate governance blueprint for the country over the next five
     years. The blueprint was issued in November 2015.
•	   ASEAN Corporate Governance Scorecard Initiative: Publicly listed corporations
     in the region that scored best on the ASEAN Corporate Governance Scorecard were
     recognized during the first ASEAN Corporate Governance conference and awards
     ceremony held in Manila. More than 300 participants from 74 companies attended the
     event supported by IFC, the ICD, and the Asian Development Bank.
•	   Strengthening Shareholder Rights: IFC signed a cooperation agreement with the
     Shareholders’ Association of the Philippines (SharePHIL) in June 2016 to promote good
     corporate governance including shareholder protection in the Philippines. Under the
     agreement, IFC will support SharePHIL in educating investors and shareholders of their
     rights, duties and responsibilities to advance the development of the Philippine capital
     market.
•	   Supporting Firm-Specific Improvements: IFC worked with several firms in the
     Philippines to help strengthen their specific governance practices and ultimately lead
     to a demonstration effect for the country. This includes companies in the banking,
     microfinance and services sectors.

                                                                                                11
     Key FY16 Project Highlights
     throughout the Region


     Cambodia
     During the fiscal year, IFC began helping Cambodia’s regulators and central bank to
     strengthen the regulatory environment, improve transparency and bolster investor
     confidence in the capital market, which will help entice more foreign investment to the
     country.

     The project team signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Securities and
     Exchange Commission of Cambodia to develop a roadmap for strengthening the country’s
     corporate governance, including the creation of a corporate governance code. The two
     sides will organize public seminars to promote best practices, including a roadshow to
     introduce the ASEAN Corporate Governance Scorecard initiative.

     IFC also signed another MoU with the National Bank of Cambodia to provide training to its
     staff to enhance its regulatory, supervisory and enforcement capabilities. IFC’s assistance
     will contribute to a wide scope of capacity building and the implementation of proper
     corporate governance practices in the banking sector.


     Lao People’s Democratic Republic
     IFC signed an MoU with the Lao Securities Commission Office during the fiscal year to
     improve corporate governance practices among Lao companies. IFC completed in May
     2016 a country-wide corporate governance assessment to identify gaps and challenges in
     Lao’s regulatory framework, covering areas such as shareholder rights, corporate board
     practices, disclosure, and transparency. The team devised an action plan, which will lead
     to the development of a corporate governance code to establish good practice standards,
     with which Lao companies must comply. The partnership aims to strengthen the country’s
     capital market and boost sustainable growth.


     The Pacific

     Throughout the fiscal year, IFC met with firms, regulators, and other stakeholders across
     the region to identify potential projects, particularly in Fiji. This included conducting
     seminars in Fiji and the Solomon Islands with various government and private sector
     stakeholders.

     The project team has been exploring programs with the banking sectors in Papua New
     Guinea and Fiji, which would hopefully lead to activities targeting other types of companies
     and possibly other Pacific markets as well. The team has also been targeting specific Fiji
     state-owned enterprises that are identified for divestment. The team aims to help them



12
with their corporate governance practices and support their transition to become public
listed companies through initial public offerings as envisaged by the Fiji government in the
medium term.

In Timor Leste, the team completed work with a microfinance institution to help strengthen
its governance practices as it transformed into other deposit-taking institution. The
change allows the institution to be supervised by the Central Bank of Timor Leste, thus
ensuring better and more transparent services to its clients.




                                                                                               13
     EAP Firms Benefitting Directly from IFC Corporate Governance
     Advisory Services

2015                                  2016
 Country           Industry            Country       Industry

     China         Bank                China         Financial technology
     China         Bank                China         Bank
     China         Bank                China         Bank
     China         Construction        Cambodia      Microfinance
     Indonesia     Bank                Cambodia      Microfinance
     Indonesia     Bank                Cambodia      Microfinance
     Indonesia     Investment Fund     Indonesia     Consulting
     Indonesia     Media               Indonesia     Bank
     Indonesia     Health              Lao PDR       Bank
     Indonesia     Telecom             Mongolia      Bank
     Indonesia     Transportation      Mongolia      Bank
     Indonesia     Transportation      Mongolia      Bank
     Mongolia      Bank                Mongolia      Mining
     Mongolia      Bank                Myanmar       Bank
     Myanmar       Agriculture         Myanmar       Microfinance
     Myanmar       Bank                Myanmar       Retail
     Myanmar       Bank                Myanmar       Transportation
     Philippines   Bank                Philippines   Bank
     Philippines   Hospitality         Philippines   Bank
     Vietnam       Bank                Thailand      Investment Fund
     Vietnam       Bank                Vietnam       Bank
     Vietnam       Bank                Vietnam       Bank
     Vietnam       Equipment           Vietnam       Tourism
     Vietnam       Pharmaceutical      Vietnam       Agriculture
     Vietnam       Private Equity      Vietnam       Telecom
     Vietnam       Private Equity      Vietnam       Chemical
     Vietnam       Property




14
