                                         Approach Paper
                  Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for
        Water Supply and Sanitation Services, with Focus on the Poor FY2007-2016
                                     June 22, 2016

I.     BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT
1.      Introduction. Access to adequate, reliable, affordable, and safe water and sanitation
services is fundamental to human development and welfare. This in not just a goal in its own
right, but also critical to other development objectives for health, nutrition, gender equality, and
education, which go to improve the quality of life and economic well-being of the population.
Globally, there are an estimated 663 million people without access to improved sources of water,
and 2.4 billion people without improved sanitation facilities, with a majority of these numbers in
Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.
2.     Bridging the gap in access to improved water and sanitation is a core concern of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development 1. The Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 seeks ‘to
ensure availability of sustainable management of water and sanitation for all’. In this new
context, the evaluation will examine the effectiveness of the Bank Group in supporting client
countries for expanding access to W&S services in a manner that is adequate, affordable, and
meets acceptable quality and reliability standards. It will present evidence-based findings,
lessons, and recommendations to enhance the Bank Group’s effectiveness going forward in
supporting client countries for providing sustained water and sanitation services with focus on
the poor, as they progress towards the SDG 6.
3.      IEG’s Strategic Engagement Areas (SEAs). In FY2015 IEG introduced a new
approach in its work program, building on three purposefully selected Strategic Engagement
Areas (SEAs): Inclusive Growth, Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor, and Environmental
Sustainability. These three topics lie at the heart of the new World Bank Group Strategy and feed
into the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. This evaluation is
primarily anchored to the Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor SEA, and aligned with the
Environmental Sustainability SEA. This evaluation belongs to a series of IEG evaluations on
infrastructure (transport, electricity access, and water) and access to services (electricity access,
financial inclusion). The evaluation will coordinate with ongoing IEG studies on urban transport
and air and water pollution, as well as an upcoming evaluation on sustainable cities.

Description of context and issues
4.      Several benefits accrue from sustained access to improved W&S services. The quality of
life benefits include time saved searching for and carrying water; improved school attendance
and completion, especially for girls; fewer days lost due to preventable sickness; greater comfort,
privacy and safety, especially for women and children; and a greater sense of dignity and well-
being for all. Environmental benefits include reduction in pollution of water and land resources;
potential for promoting the circular economy by nutrient reuse, e.g. fecal sludge for fertilizer or
biogas generation; and access to a cleaner environment. Economic benefits arise from reduced
health care costs for individuals and society; cash benefits of piped water access versus vendor
supply, which can equate to 20 percent of household income; greater productivity through
increased labor force participation because of reduction in water borne diseases and
attractiveness to industrial and commercial investments. Estimates of the benefit-cost ratio of
                                                 1
achieving universal access to sanitation range between 2.8 and 8.0, while for drinking water the
range is 0.6 to 3.7. 2
5.      The Role of Behavioral Change. Experience shows that appropriate behavioral change
must accompany infrastructure investments to realize their full human and economic
developmental potential. For instance, it is important to understand and address the factors that
contribute to the continued use of unimproved facilities in some segments of the population,
even after improved sanitation facilities are made available. Adoption of hygiene-related
behaviors such as handwashing with soap (or ash or other aid) during key activities (such as food
preparation and service and defecation) are essential for reducing the incidence of diarrhea,
which is a leading cause of malnutrition and the second leading cause of death among children
under five years of age. 3 However, effecting behavior change is a complex process.
6.      Sustained Service Delivery. The imperative for making services work for the poor was
highlighted early in the 2004 World Development Report, which emphasized the need to utilize
available resources more effectively so that basic services lead to sustained benefits for the poor.
The World Bank Group (WBG) and international development actors are placing renewed
emphasis on service delivery, noting that service delivery frameworks for W&S, whether
through public agencies or private enterprises, should provide needed goods and services to
citizens “in a way that meet their expectations” 4.
7.      Improved and Unimproved facilities. Water supply and sanitation arrangements vary
widely in the nature of the facility and the quality of service that they provide. The Joint
Monitoring Program (JMP) 5 of WHO and UNICEF               Table 1. Access to Improved Drinking Water
distinguishes between improved and unimproved              Sources and Sanitation facilities, 2015 (%)
sources of water supply and sanitation. An improved
                                                                                      Water Sanitation
drinking water source is defined as one that, by
                                                           World                           91          68
nature of its construction or through active
                                                           Caucasus & Central Asia         89          96
intervention, is protected from outside                    Eastern Asia                    96          77
contamination, in particular from fecal matter             Latin America &
contamination (e.g. borewells, piped water as              Caribbean                       95          83
opposed to surface drinking water sources). An             Northern Africa                 93          89
improved sanitation facility is defined as one that        Oceania                         56          35
                                                           South-Eastern Asia              90          72
hygienically separates human excreta from human
                                                           Southern Asia                   93          47
contact (e.g. pit latrine with slab, flush/pour flush to   Sub-Saharan Africa              68          30
sewer system; as opposed to open defecation or             Western Asia                    95          94
shared sanitation facilities). (Annex A.)                  Source: Adapted from WHO-UNICEF, 2015.

8.     Global coverage of improved W&S services. The global coverage of improved
drinking water sources and sanitation facilities in 2015 is estimated at 91 percent and 68 percent
compared to 76 percent and 54 percent in 1990. According to WHO-UNICEF, drinking water
coverage exceeded the MDG goal of 88 percent, while the sanitation coverage fell short of the
MDG goal of 77 percent for 2015. However, the data may not be uniformly comparable across
countries, especially in terms of adequacy, reliability, and quality parameters.
9.     There are 663 million people still using unimproved drinking water sources in 2015.
(Tables 1; 2a) and nearly 2.4 billion people lacking improved sanitation facilities according to
WBG-UNICEF. (Tables 1; 2b).


                                                    2
    Table 2a. Population without Improved                      Table 2b. Population without Improved Sanitation
    Drinking Water Sources                                     Facilities
    Region                    Number (million)                 Region                        Number (million)
    Sub-Saharan Africa                      319                South Asia                                   953
    South Asia                              134                Sub-Saharan Africa                           695
    East and South-East                                        East and South-East Asia                     513
    Asia                                    126                Latin America and
    Other regions                             84               Caribbean                                    106
    TOTAL                                   663                Other regions                                  98
    Source: Adapted from WHO-UNICEF, 2015.                     TOTAL                                      2,365

10.     Sustainable Development Goal for the Water sector. Goal 6 of the recently declared
Sustainable Development Goals frames the focus of development institutions for drinking water,
sanitation and hygiene, and water quality, and reflects the growing importance of W&S as a
human right. 6 Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 envisages meeting the following targets
by 2030. (Table 3).
    Table 3. SDG Goal 6 for W&S: Salient Targets for 2030
    Target 6.1       Achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all.
                     Achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open
    Target 6.2       defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable
                     situations.
                     Improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of
    Target 6.3       hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and
                     substantially increasing recycling and reuse globally.
    Source: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg6

11.    Attributes of W&S Services. SDG 6 targets also serve to define the attributes or
dimensions of W&S services in terms of access, equity, adequacy, reliability, quality and
affordability/pricing:
•    Access: water and sanitation facilities are easily reached, and available when needed.
•    Equity: progressive elimination of inequalities between population sub-groups, urban / rural/ per-
     urban; income level, etc.
•    Adequacy: sufficient water for domestic needs; for sanitation, a system that hygienically separates
     excreta from human contact; safe transport and treatment off-site
•    Reliability: availability on a 24/7 basis, with adequate pressure, and meeting national drinking
     quality standards; for sanitation, meet consumer needs for W&S services reflected in the available
     W&S collection/ treatment/ disposal capacity.
•    Quality: drinking water free from pathogens and elevated levels of chemicals at all times
•    Affordability/Pricing: consumer demand or willingness to pay for services may be reflected in the
     pricing of W&S services; extent to which subsidies have been effectively targeted to fill the
     affordability gap for low income consumers; pricing factors in the costs of investing in the W&S
     infrastructure, as well as operations and maintenance costs.
12.     While the economic benefits of improved W&S services may be enumerated, the science
of delivering sustained solutions that meet expectations for all the above attributes is less well
understood. W&S in urban and rural areas have an overlay of common challenges, but with
important distinguishing features that need to be taken into account. The common issues are of
sustainability in financial, institutional, and environmental terms; while retaining a focus on
social inclusion and equitable access to services by the poor. The distinguishing features are the
wide range of options that can be offered as appropriate in urban, peri-urban and rural settings
along the ladder of improved services as described in Annex A.
                                                           3
13.      Financial Sustainability. Water supply and sanitation is a capital-hungry sector, and
therefore financial sustainability requires that there is adequate cost recovery. Ideally this should
cover operations and maintenance costs, as well as amortize investment costs. In a survey of 94
countries carried out by the UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and
Drinking-Water (GLAAS)7 2014, 70 percent of countries report that tariffs did not cover the
costs of operation and maintenance, frequently due to the politicization of tariff structure
decisions resulting in significant financing gaps – 80 percent of countries indicating insufficient
financing available through cost recovery practices. Under these circumstances, it is estimated
that an additional annual US$11.3 billion over and above current investments is needed to meet
the goal of universal access to improved W&S services by 2030. 8 Absence of cost recovery
practices result in weak financial health of water and sanitation service providers, ranging from
utilities to community based systems, which lead to poor quality of services to consumers; For
example, in Sub-Saharan Africa, 14 out of 46 countries have experienced a decline in urban
water or sanitation coverage. It is important to note that low water prices also lead to wasteful,
inefficient water use.
14.     Environmental Sustainability. Management of water resources, particularly when there
are competing uses from communities, agriculture and the environment is a growing challenge.
By 2030, half of the world population will be living in water stressed areas. Global driving
forces, including climate change, water scarcity, population growth, and urbanization are
expected to affect the resilience of W&S services. It is estimated that 90 percent of wastewater in
developing countries goes untreated and is discharged to land and water bodies. 9 There are
increasing problems of pollution of surface and ground water from the untreated septage and
sewage generated from urban and rural communities all over the developing world. Often, it is
the poor and vulnerable that are disproportionately impacted by these issues.
15.      Institutional Sustainability. This pertains to the ability of W&S organizations to
respond to user demand for sustained services. Effective service delivery requires management
at the lowest appropriate level, such that there is (i) accountability of service providers to users,
(ii) transparency in the way decisions are taken, and (iii) adequate voice or customer feedback of
concerns to service providers. The reality is often otherwise, and commonly attributed to
shortcomings in human resource capacity at all levels, and particularly in the rural sector,
particularly after the scaffolding of project support is withdrawn. Critical gaps in monitoring
impede decision-making and progress in providing sustainable access to the poorest
consumers. 10 Less than half of countries surveyed by GLAAS 11 track progress in extending
sanitation and drinking-water services to the poor.
16.     Focus on the poor, marginalized and social inclusion. Ninety-six percent of the global
urban population uses an improved drinking water source, compared with 84 percent of the rural
population. However, four out of five people living in urban areas now have access to piped
water on premises, compared to just one in three people living in rural areas, 12 which contain a
greater proportion of the poor. Eight out of 10 people that are still without improved drinking
water sources live in rural areas. Progress on rural sanitation – where it has occurred – has
primarily benefited the non-poor, with unsatisfactory practices prevalent in many countries.
Seven out of 10 people are without improved sanitation facilities, and 9 out of 10 people practice
open defecation in many rural areas of Africa and South Asia. Many who still lack access belong
to the poorest, the most remote, and the most marginalized populations. They often pay the
highest unit costs for water because they do not have physical and institutional access to water
                                                  4
supply systems. Expenditures for rural sanitation are estimated to comprise less than 10 percent
of all financing for water and sanitation. While low-cost approaches in rural areas may partly
reflect these low expenditure levels, needs remain high and funding insufficient to reach targets.
Other key dimensions include gender and other socially disadvantaged groups, as they are
particularly affected by the poor quality of services in rural and poorer communities.
17.     Inter-sectoral/ministerial coordination. Improving W&S facilities and securing their
potential benefits requires the coordination of several sectors/ministries. For example,
coordination with the health sector is needed to promote health and nutrition-sensitive
interventions such as handwashing with soap, safe drinking water management from collection
to end-use, sanitation, and water supply. Coordination with urban development, environment,
and other sectors are also required to ensure smooth implementation of W&S interventions and
to mitigate any associated risks.
18.    WBG Policies and Interventions. The Bank Group’s strategy for water and sanitation
has evolved with client needs and its own perceived role in global development. The core
elements of this strategy over the past three decades are summarized below:
•   1980s: The Bank Group financed significant investments in water services infrastructure
    development, but there was a realization that engineering-centric solutions were not adequate to
    address the environmental, social and financial sustainability issues identified above.
•   1990s: The focus shifted to sustainable management of water and sanitation services. There was
    also an increasing attention to private sector participation in the water sector. In addition, the
    Bank’s 1993 Water Resources Management Policy Paper 13 highlighted the “Dublin Principles” of
    a demand-based approach, based on what users wanted and were willing to pay for, and applying
    the subsidiarity principle of decentralizing W&S responsibilities to the lowest appropriate level.
    By 1995, the Millennium Development Goals had been developed, and these reinforced the focus
    on increasing access to basic W&S services and the importance of coordinated efforts with other
    development partners.
•   2000s: The Bank Group’s approach recognized the need to balance infrastructure development
    for all water stakeholders with improving management of services. The 2003 Water Resources
    Strategy 14 called for Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and appropriate staffing
    for this effort. The strategy also highlighted the possible impacts of climate change on the sector.
    It stressed the need to innovate for W&S service delivery and financing, the need to improve the
    performance of utilities and user associations. IFC targeted water, waste water and sanitation as a
    strategic sector. In addition to direct investments, IFC pioneered sub-national finance
    transactions, and engaged in advisory work to structure water PPPs 15. IFC’s roadmap for
    FY2011-13 included water as an important crosscutting theme with links to water, energy, food,
    and climate change 16. In 2012, water was added to the five IFC’s strategic areas of focus and
    future growth 17. In the same year, informed by the 2030 Water Resources Group, IFC launched
    its cross-sectoral Water Sector Business Plan covering demand and supplied side opportunities 18.
•   The World Bank Sustainable Infrastructure Action Plan (SIAP: 2008) 19 reinforced the principles
    from earlier policy documents, but with a greater recognition of the inter-relations between the
    various water-related subsectors (irrigation, hydropower and environmental services) with
    emphasis on targeting the poor and facilitating public-private partnerships. The focus on
    outcomes included designing improved sectoral governance in the least developed countries
    through the WBG Governance and Anti-Corruption Implementation Plan, and improved results
    measurement of infrastructure services in all projects with WBG engagement. IFC undertook to
    leverage private finance through investment and advisory operations and through innovative
    instruments in the water sector (e.g. Infraventures and PPPs with public sector and municipal
                                                   5
                   governments). As part of its infrastructure focus, MIGA guarantees supported PPPs and
                   investments in sub-sovereign water and sanitation projects.
19.    The larger context is now set by the Sustainable Development Goals, and the recently
concluded climate summit in Paris (COP 21). The Bank Group’s strategy seeks to align with the
corporate twin goals: end extreme poverty by 2030 and build shared prosperity for the bottom 40
percent, while ensuring sustainability.
20.     Bank Group Support for W&S sector. The Bank Group has committed US$38 billion
for the W&S sector during FY2007-2016. This is 7.4 percent of all Bank Group assistance
during the period. Among the Bank Group units, the World Bank accounts for 95.2 percent of all
lending for W&S, followed by 3.7 percent for IFC and 0.93 percent for MIGA. The W&S share
for the Bank alone is 9.6 percent (US$36.2 billion), while it is lower for IFC and MIGA at 1.2
percent (US$1.4 billion) and 1.49 percent (US$0.4 billion), respectively (Table 4). The Bank
Group’s commitments for W&S have fluctuated over the last 10 years, peaking around US$5
billion per year during FY2009-11 and FY2014-15, but dropping below US$3 billion in FY2008
and FY2013 (Table 5). Bank client countries have also received support from bilateral donors,
including AUSAID, DfID, Japan PHRD, and the Korean Trust Fund.

 Table 4. W&S Share of WB,IFC,MIGA                                              Table 5. Trend in WB, IFC, and MIGA Commitments
 Commitments
                            600                                                                           6
                                   511b
                                                                                Commitment ($, billion)




                                                                                                          5
 Commitment ($, billions)




                                                                                                          4
                            400               378b
                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                          2
                            200
                                                          116b                                            1
                                  38b; 7.4% 36b; 9.6%                16.9
                                                                                                          0
                                                        1.4b; 1.2% 0.4b; 2.4%                                 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
                             0
                                  TOTAL        WB         IFC        MIGA                                                          Fiscal year
                            W&S                                                                                         WB            IFC            MIGA


 Sources: WB, IFC, and MIGA databases.


      Table 6. W&S commitments by Sub-sector, (US$ B)                                                         Table 7. W&S commitments by Region (US$B)
      Sub-sector       WB IFC MIGA              Total                                                         Region    WB    IFC   MIGA        Total
      General W&S      10.4    1.2     0.3      11.9                                                          AFR        7.1    -     0.2         7.3
      Water Supply      9.2     -       -        9.2                                                          EAP        8.2   0.4    0.2         8.9
      Flood Protection  4.9     -       -        4.9                                                          ECA        3.9   0.4     -          4.3
      WW* Treatment                                                                                           LCR        7.1   0.3     -          7.4
      and Disposal      3.2    0.2     0.1       3.6                                                          MNA        2.7   0.2   0.01         3.0
      Sanitation        2.9     -       -        2.9                                                          SAR        7.2  0.03     -          7.2
      WW Collection &                                                                                         Other           0.02                0.0
      Transportation    2.9     -       -        2.9
                                                                                                              Total     36.2   1.4    0.4        38.0
      Public Admin      2.6                      2.6
      Total            36.2    1.4     0.4      38.0

 Sources: World Bank Business Intelligence; IFC and MIGA databases. Note: *WW: Wastewater




                                                                                        6
21.    WB lending in the W&S sector 20 has been primarily for investments (US$30.8 billion; 85
percent), with about US$3.9 billion (11 percent ) for policy lending, and a nascent Program-for
Results (P4R) portfolio of US$1.4 billion (4 percent). IFC provided US$1.36 billion (96 percent)
through investments and US$0.05 billion (4 percent) through advisory services. MIGA provided
US$0.4 billion through guarantees (Annex B).
22.      The largest share of World Bank lending to the W&S sector goes to distinctly identifiable
water supply components at US$9.2 billion (25 percent), with identifiable sanitation components
considerably lower at US$2.9 billion (8 percent). If it is assumed the large amount of US$10.2
billion for ‘general W&S services’ is distributed in the same proportion as identifiable W&S
components, the amounts for water supply and sanitation would be US$2.6 billion and US$0.8
billion, respectively, accounting for 7.2 percent and 2.2 percent of all World Bank lending for
W&S services. The remaining World Bank W&S portfolio comprises flood protection,
wastewater treatment, wastewater collection, and public administration. IFC’s commitments are
mainly for ‘general water’ (US$1.19 billion; 85 percent) with the remaining US$0.22 billion (16
percent) for wastewater treatment. MIGA’s commitments are split between wastewater treatment
US$0.1 billion (25 percent) and ‘general water’ US$0.3 billion (75 percent) (Table 6).
                                                           Table 8. Projects with W&S Components:
23.     In terms of regional distribution, the largest     FY2007-2016
share of World Bank commitments went to the East           Unit             Approved Completed*
Asia and Pacific region (US$8.2 billion; 23 percent).
                                                           World Bank           627          405
South Asia (US$7.2 billion), Latin America and the
                                                           Water GP             217          156
Caribbean (US$7.1 billion) and Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                           Other GPs            410          249
(US$7.1 billion) accounted for approximately 20
percent each. Eastern Europe and Central Asia and the      IFC                  108            62
Middle East and North Africa regions received US$3.9       MIGA                   9             5
billion (11 percent) and US$2.7 billion (7 percent),       Total                744          472
respectively (Table 7).                                    Sources: WB, IFC and MIGA databases.
                                                           Note: *completed/matured includes some
24.     During FY2007-16, the World Bank’s Global          operations approved prior to FY2007.
Practice for Water has approved 217 projects for W&S
services, while other Global Practices 21 approved 410 projects containing a varying proportion of
W&S components. During this period, 405 projects (including some approved prior to FY2007)
have been completed. For IFC and MIGA, 108 operations and 9 guarantees were approved,
while 62 operations (including 32 IFC AS of which 23 are PPPs) and 5 guarantees have matured
during FY2007-2016 (Table 8).
25.     Based on the 101 projects of the World Bank’s Water Global Practice that were
completed during FY2007-2016, and were reviewed by IEG, 73 percent of projects in the water
practice had development outcomes that were moderately satisfactory or better. This was
between comparable rates for infrastructure projects in the energy and extractives (43 percent)
and transport (88 percent) practices. Of all Global Practices in Sustainable Development, the
Water practice has the lowest share (19 percent) of projects with M&E quality rated high or
substantial, among projects closed during FY11-14. For IFC, of the 5 investments and 6 advisory
services that were rated by IEG, development outcomes of 3 and 1 operations respectively were
rated moderately satisfactory or better. Both the MIGA guarantees were rated as satisfactory.
26.    Partnership programs. Partnership programs and multi-donor trust funds (channeled
through the Bank Group) support a large share of non-lending technical assistance in the W&S
                                                7
sector. Of these, the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), created in 1978, is the largest
partnership program and provides in-kind technical assistance for W&S in over 20 countries. It
has promoted innovative solutions and tested new approaches to encourage behavior change,
particularly for hygiene among the poor. During 2011-2014, WSP disbursed US$142.4 million
of which 65 percent went to scaling up rural sanitation and supporting poor-inclusive W&S
sector reforms. The Water Partnership Program (WPP) is a multi-donor trust fund providing
support to analytical work, project preparation and implementation in the water sector. Since
2009 this program has spent about US$11million (26 percent of the total funding) on the W&S
sector. The Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) supports pilot projects for
results-based financing for dealing with infrastructure bottlenecks and behavioral barriers to
W&S service delivery. GPOBA’s investment portfolio in W&S is US$75.6 million. The Public
Private Infrastructure Assistance Facility (PPIAF) – which provides project-specific support as
well as upstream technical assistance aimed at improving institutional, regulatory and legal
frameworks for PPPs – directed fifteen percent of its funds to the water sector. (Annex C). IFC
established the 2030 Water Resource Group 22 supported by bilateral development agencies,
regional development banks and private sector companies to facilitate open, trust-based dialogue
processes to drive action on water resources reform in water stressed developing economies.
27.     Previous Evaluations. An early IEG evaluation of the Bank’s W&S portfolio was
carried out in 1992. 23 A subsequent evaluation in 2002 24 covered W&S issues in the context of
the Bank’s water resource strategy. A desk-based review of the World Bank’s W&S projects was
prepared in 2003. 25 Other evaluations on municipal management 26 and social funds 27 also
covered aspects of water and sanitation. More recently, an IEG study, ‘Water and
Development’ 28 (2010) evaluated the Bank Group’s support for the broader water sector
including W&S for the period 1997-2007. Its salient findings are presented in Box 1. A summary
of W&S related findings from the other reports is in Annex D. The relevant findings from IEG’s
2010 evaluation will serve as the baseline to dig deeper into the issues related to sustained W&S
services with a focus on the poor. The evaluations of Public Private Partnerships 29 (2015) and on
Knowledge-Based Country Programs 30 (2013) will also be drawn upon.
 Box 1. Salient Findings: Water and Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Support, 1997-
 2007 (2010)
 • Lack of clarity in approaches to cost recovery for water services.
 • Sanitation received far less support than water services.
 • There is a significant urban bias in moving towards MDGs.
 • Water quality: monitoring parameters is declining in more recent World Bank projects.
 • Donors and governments preference for capital-intensive works vis-à-vis O&M.
 • Attention to economic analysis of projects is declining.
 • Poor linkage between monitoring design, implementation and corrective actions utilization.
 • Insufficient attention in Bank’s portfolio for issues of growing importance: coastal zone
    management; pollution control; groundwater conservation.

II.    PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES, AND AUDIENCE
28.    Purpose and Objective. The purpose of this evaluation is to obtain evidence-based
findings on the outcomes of the Bank Group’s support for sustained water supply and sanitation
services in client countries with a focus on the poor, develop broadly-applicable lessons and
propose recommendations to enhance the Bank Group’s effectiveness in supporting client

                                                8
countries achieve credible progress towards sustainable water and sanitation services for all, in
keeping with SDG 6.
29.    In placing emphasis on sustained services, the evaluation contributes to IEG’s
overarching SEA (strategic engagement area) of ‘sustained service delivery for the poor’ and
through its overall attention to sustainable management of water and sanitation, on the
‘environmental sustainability’ SEA. The evaluation will examine the design and outcomes of
WBG interventions in terms of service delivery models and approaches to behavior change for
sustained delivery of water and sanitation services.
30.     Stakeholder and Audience. The primary audience for this evaluation study is the Bank
Group’s Boards of Directors, management, and staff involved in W&S operations. Other
stakeholders that can benefit from this study are the Bank Group’s client governments,
multilateral and bilateral developmental banks and donors, the private sector, concerned civil
society organizations, and the ultimate beneficiaries of W&S services.

III.         EVALUATION QUESTIONS AND COVERAGE/SCOPE
31.    Specific Questions To Be Answered by the Evaluation: The study poses the following
overarching and subordinate evaluation questions:
             Overarching Question:
How effective has the Bank Group been in supporting client countries improve access to
adequate, reliable, and sustained W&S services – and going forward – how well is it equipped to
support the countries in moving towards sustained water and sanitation services for all with focus
on the poor, in keeping with Sustainable Development Goal 6?
             Subordinate Questions:
A.           Targeting Sustained Service Delivery
     i.          How targeted and relevant is the Bank Group’s support (investments, development policy
                 lending, guarantees, technical assistance, analytical work, and policy advice) for
                 providing sustained water and sanitation services to client countries that are at different
                 access levels; across urban, rural and peri-urban areas; and for ensuring focus on the poor
                 and vulnerable groups, particularly women and children?
  ii.            To what extent has the Bank Group, through country partnership strategies and other
                 means, considered issues relating to the sustainability of W&S services in the face of
                 rapid urbanization, water-stressed regions, and the need to develop climate resilience?
B.           Effectiveness in Providing Adequate, Reliable, Clean and Safe Services
          To what extent has the Bank Group supported client countries in:
     i.          the provision of access to adequate and reliable W&S services of adequate quality
                 through new/ rehabilitated infrastructure facilities; improved technical, planning and
                 management capacity; improved and innovative service delivery models; and private
                 sector participation in urban, peri-urban and rural areas ?
  ii.            securing the financial viability of the W&S sector institutions (e.g. utilities, municipal
                 and community-based W&S services) through appropriate tariff policies and regulation;
                 improved cost recovery and revenue collection and appropriate subsidies; investing in
                 operations and maintenance; improved operating efficiency and non-revenue water
                 reduction; and private sector participation?
                                                        9
 iii.        the provision of affordable W&S services through community participation, responding
             to consumer demand and willingness to pay; affordable connection fees and targeted
             subsidies?
 iv.         effecting behavior change among direct beneficiaries especially in adopting improved
             sanitation facilities, handwashing and other hygienic practices?
  v.         ensuring environmental sustainability through management of the water resources,
             particularly ground water sources, and building resilience to water variability caused by
             climate change; safe collection and treatment of wastewater; and pollution of
             groundwater and water bodies?
 vi.         improving M&E systems for better planning and targeting of improvement of W&S
             services?
C.        Delivery of WBG Assistance
     i.      To what extent have Bank Group operations in client countries been completed within the
             planned costs and time estimates? What are the factors that explain the patterns of time
             and cost overruns?
  ii.        To what extent and how effectively has the Bank Group applied economic cost-benefit
             analysis in the design of W&S projects and investments?
 iii.        How relevant and effective have global partnership programs (principally WSP, WPP,
             GPOBA, PPIAF) been in contributing to the Bank Group’s efforts for supporting
             countries to improve access to adequate, reliable, and sustainable W&S services?
 iv.         To what extent have the partnership programs improved Bank Group collaboration with
             other development partners to expand its reach in client countries?
  v.         To what extent has the Bank Group supported coordination between the ministry
             responsible for W&S services and other relevant ministries?
 vi.         To what extent has the Bank Group supported client countries in reducing the financing
             gap by leveraging and effectively deploying additional financial resources for improving
             W&S services through private sector participation and better donor coordination?
vii.         To what extent have the Bank Group units – WB, IFC, and MIGA – collaborated in
             providing support to client countries for improved W&S services?
viii.        To what extent has the Bank Group employed its human resource expertise appropriately
             to the needs of client countries?
 ix.         To what extent has the Bank Group mainstreamed environmental and social safeguards
             through its W&S projects?
32.      Assessing Performance. The criteria for assessing performance – at the level of projects,
programs and countries, and for technical assistance, analytical and advisory services – will be
consistent with the harmonized evaluation criteria with the Bank’s Operations Policy and
Country Services (OPCS) department that are used by IEG in its project evaluations. A four
point scale of high/substantial/modest/negligible will be employed for assessing Key
Performance Indicators (KPIs), for which criteria will be specified. The wide range of subject
matter that is being evaluated in this study lends itself to the use of benchmarking, “before and
after” analysis, counterfactuals, and ‘with or without scenarios.” For instance, utility
performance lends itself to benchmarking; ‘before and after analysis’ can be applied to situations
where a new demand-based approach or private sector participation has been employed for the
first time; and country case studies can be the basis for ‘with or without’ analysis. Existing
ratings of overall development outcomes of IEG’s Implementation Completion Report Reviews
and Country Learning Report Reviews will not be revisited.


                                                   10
Scope (breadth and depth of coverage, time period covered)
33.      The evaluation will cover the Bank Group’s support for sustained delivery of water and
sanitation services with a focus on the poor. It will include the Bank Group’s assistance for
W&S through projects, investments, guarantees, non-lending technical assistance, and advisory
services that have been approved or completed (matured) during FY2007-2016 (Table 8). This
time period picks up from the end-point of the last major IEG evaluation of the water sector (IEG
2010), which covered the period FY1998-2007.
34.     The subject matter of the evaluation will cover water supply, sanitation, wastewater
collection and conveyance, and wastewater treatment and disposal and urban flood protection as
indicated by the corresponding thematic codes for the projects. Environmental and pollution
issues that are integral to these activities will be covered. Broader pollution and environmental
issues in the water sector will be covered by a separate IEG evaluation on air and water
pollution. Linkages with water resources management and climate resilience will be explored,
though these issues are not central to the evaluation. The emphasis on sustained service
delivery for the poor will be in the context of service delivery to all income levels, capturing
issues of scale, viability and cross-subsidization.
35.     For the World Bank, in addition to the projects belonging to the Water Global Practice
(217 approved, and 156 completed), the evaluation will cover the water and sanitation
components of projects that belong to other Global Practices including agriculture, environment,
health, urban management, poverty, and economic management (410 approved and 249
completed projects).
36.     The contribution of analytical and advisory activities to sustained W&S service outcomes
will be assessed based on structured feedback from various respondents including the GP staff
and management, and borrowers. This assessment will be integrated with the country case study
methodology as well as the planned assessment of contribution of partnerships including the
Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) and the Water Partnership Program (WPP). The
methodology used for the global partnerships evaluation for electricity access will be drawn
upon as appropriate. The evaluation will not however, rate the overall performance of analytical
and advisory activities in the absence of a validation in the manner done for projects.

IV.    EVALUATION DESIGN AND EVALUATION ASSESSMENT
37.     Evaluation Design. The sector diagnosis and conceptual framework presented in Section
I and the evaluation questions listed in Section III are combined in a theory of change that is
presented in the results framework below (Figure 1). The results framework traces the link
between inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and development outcomes for the W&S sector.




                                               11
Figure 1. Water and Sanitation Evaluation Study: Results Framework
                                                                                       Macro-economic parameters; Exogenous Factors


                                                                                               Intermediate                                  Impacts
    World Bank Group                            Outputs                                                                 Outcomes
    •Investments; Guarantees                                                                     Outcomes
    •Economic &Sector Work;                                                                Integrated Water
                                •Sector Policy                                             Resource                  Improved and
    Policy Advice
                                •Institutions                                              Management                sustainable access
    •Technical Assistance
    •Global Partnerships        •Regulation                                                                          to W&S with             Human
                                •Tariff/Subsidy regimes                                    Financial Viability (of                            Welfare
                                __________________________________________________
                                                                                           Urban Utilities;          Adequate water           •Health
                                •Infrastructure and
                                                                                           Municipal ;and            for daily needs        •Education
                                facilities
                                __________________________________________________         community-based                                   •Gender-
      Country Government        •Capacity Building –                                       services)                 Reliable access to       related
                                planning, technical,                                                                 W&S as needed
     Leadership Goals, and                                                                 •Cost recovery
                                management
            Inputs              __________________________________________________         •Improved Revenue
                                •Service delivery                                                                    Safe water; and         Economic
                                                                                           Collection
                                mechanisms                                                                           Sanitation               •Income
                                                                                           •Operating efficiency
                                •___________________________________________________
                                                                                                                     facilities            •Productivity
                                •Private Sector                                            •Non-Revenue Water
                                Participation                                              reduction
    •Other multilateral banks   ____________________________________________________
                                                                                                                     Affordable water
    •Bilateral donors           •M&E Design and                                            Behavioral Change         tariff and access/
    •Private Sector             Implementation
                                                                                                                     ownership of
    Participation                                                                          Environment & Social
                                ___________________________________________________

                                •Donor Coordination                                                                  sanitation facility
                                                                                           Management



38.    Methodology. The evaluation will be developed from five major modules: a literature
review; Bank Group country partnership strategy analysis; project/ operations portfolio review;
review of global partnerships’ contributions; country macro and sector context review; and
country vis-a-vis Bank Group performance analysis. A detailed Case Study Matrix including
data sources and linkages to the study evaluation questions is presented in Annex E. Each of the
methodology modules is described below. The study will benefit from frameworks for
evaluating service delivery models and behavioral change among beneficiaries that will be
developed by dedicated teams in IEG, which will inform a theory of change in this respect. The
team will coordinate with IEG’s Strategic Engagement Area (SEA) for Service Delivery to the
Poor and work with the teams responsible for developing evaluative frameworks for Service
Delivery to the Poor and Behavior Change. (Details in Annex J). (Table 9).

a. Literature and Non-lending Technical Assistance Review: This is a review of the Bank Group’s
   research papers, reports, publications and other economic and sector work, as well as relevant
   literature and publications from UN organizations (WHO, UNICEF), multilateral development
   banks, bilateral donors, and academic journals. The review will cover products from FY2007-
   2016, but will reach back to earlier years needed to support individual desk and field country
   studies. Identified documents for review cover about 780 from WBG sources, 250 from external
   sources, including about 100 impact evaluations and systematic reviews. The literature review
   will also draw upon presentations in the Bank Group’s water related learning events and
   presentations, including the Water Week and other occasions. The non-lending and advisory
   services review will cover policy notes, workshops, and conferences.
b. Bank Group Country Strategy Analysis. This is a review of Country Partnership Strategies as
   well as Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report Reviews and SCDs (systematic country
   diagnostics) for all case study countries during the past 10-12 years. These documents will be
   analyzed in terms of water, sanitation and hygiene issues raised; strategies proposed, and specific
   proposals for a work program.

                                                                                            12
c. Project Portfolio Review. The portfolio review will be based on the Project Appraisal Documents
   (PADs), Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs) IEG’s ICR Reviews, Expanded
   Project Supervision Reports (XPSRs), Project Completion Reports (PCRs), Project Evaluation
   Reports (PERs) and Project Performance Assessment Report (PPARs). This review will cover all
   Bank Group projects, operations and guarantees addressing one or more of the elements of W&S,
   and have been approved or completed during FY2007-2016. The portfolio review will analyze
   the objectives and components of all projects. A key performance indicator (KPI) analysis will be
   made of all the indicators listed in the results frameworks of the projects. The key performance
   indicators will be mapped to the outputs, outcomes and impacts in the results framework and will
   then be rated. These ratings will be an important basis for addressing the evaluation questions
   and analyzing performance. A special effort will be made to identify explicit or implied
   objectives, components and indicators relating to the range of identifiable service delivery
   models, and behavior change for improved hygiene. Project components will be coded for
   various topics related to service delivery and behavioral change bases on guidance from the
   behavioral change team in IEG. Qualitative and quantitative information will be extracted and
   organized in a manner that may help compare the relative efficacy of efforts in terms of reaching
   the rural and urban poor (as well as remotely located and marginalized populations where
   applicable), supporting quality services, building sustainability, and gender impacts. To
   counteract the often weak evidence collected during and after the projects themselves and the
   institutional ratings, the results will be benchmarked to the Evidence Gap Map that the
   International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie) produced in collaboration with IEG.

 TABLE 9. EVALUATION DESIGN
      EVALUATION MODULES                      Map and Assess Results Framework                                       Evaluation
                                                        Parameters                                                    Products

                                          OUTCOMES: SUSTAINABLE SERVICES W/
 a) LITERATURE AND NON-LENDING            FOCUS ON POOR
 ADVISORY SERVICES REVIEW                 ● IMPROVED ACCESS TO W&S SERVICES AND
                                                                                                                       Main

                                                                                      Address Evaluation Questions
                                          FOCUS ON POOR – Urban and Rural
                                           * Adequate, Reliable, Safe, Affordable                                    Evaluation
                                           *Increased share of improved facilities                                     Study
 b) WBG COUNTRY STRATEGY ANALYSIS
 c) PROJECT PORTFOLIO REVIEW  Project    ● ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
                                                                                                                       Global
                                           *Water resource mgmt/ climate resilience
 Key Performance Indicators (KPI)                                                                                    Partnership
                                           *Decreased groundwater, downstream
 Analysis. including interventions for:                                                                               s Annex
                                          pollution
    1. Service Delivery Mechanisms, and
     2. Behavior Change                   ●FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY                                                   Country
 d) GLOBAL PARTNERSHIPS ANALYSIS           *Cost Recovery                                                              Case
                                           *Improved Revenue collection                                               Studies
 e) COUNTRY VIS-À-VIS BANK GROUP          ●INSTITUTIONAL SUSTAINABILITY                                                (~12)
         PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS              *Operating efficiency
  Country macro and sector profile        *Beneficiary engagement
  Country-focused portfolio analysis      *Accountability
  Country vs. WBG perf. assessment


d. Review of Partnerships’ Contributions: The team will assess the relevance and effectiveness of
   major Bank-supported partnerships in helping the WBG improve access to affordable and
   sustainable W&S services. It will focus on contributions of a cluster of four global partnership
   programs – Water Sanitation Program (WSP), Water Partnership Program (WPP), Global
   Output-based Aid (GPOBA), and Pubic Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF). Since
   all of these programs, except the WSP, have a broader focus, the review will concentrate on
                                                   13
   activities of the programs that are pertinent to the objective of the main evaluation. The
   methodology of the partnership review will be closely aligned with the evaluation framework of
   the main evaluation. The assessment will build on existing external evaluations of these programs
   as well as on new evaluative work, mostly document reviews and interviews related to their
   W&S portfolios. Where possible, country visits for the main evaluation will also bring insights to
   the contribution of these programs.
e. Country macro and sector context review : The country macro and sector profile will contain
   relevant macroeconomic, demographic and human development indicators; and the state of the
   W&S sector in the country in terms of service delivery models, policies, regulation, institutions,
   service delivery mechanisms, service coverage, tariffs, sources and levels of investment,
   contribution of other multilateral development banks and bilateral aid, private sector
   participation, and other relevant parameters. The country focused portfolio analysis will draw
   upon the KPI analysis and linkage to the results framework evaluative parameters.
f. Country vis-a-vis Bank Group Performance Analysis. This will draw upon all the preceding
   modules together with field-based findings and discussions with the Water GP staff and
   management. The study plans 12-14 desk- and field-based country case studies (listed under
   ‘sampling strategy’ below). Among others, the case studies will seek to trace the evolution of the
   water and sanitation sector in the country in its specific context, and the Bank Group ‘support in
   this process.
39.     Sampling Strategy. All Bank Group projects/investments/guarantees, non-lending
services, and advisory services approved or completed during FY2007-16 will be covered by the
evaluation. The extent of evaluative analysis will be greater for completed activities, while
ongoing activities will be examined to uncover trends and linkages to completed activities. The
key performance indicator analysis will cover 217, 62, and 5 completed/matured activities for the
World Bank, IFC, and MIGA, respectively. All IEG project-level evaluations (Implementation
Completion Report Reviews, approximately 200) will be examined, along with XPSR
validations for IFC (6 investments and 6 advisory services) and MIGA (2 guarantee operations).
The scope of IFC and MIGA activities that are covered will go beyond the sample of evaluated
operations, and will cover advisory services, efforts at supporting project preparation, venture
funding, and fostering innovation to the extent possible. A purposive sample of 12-14 countries
has been picked for desk- and field-based country studies based on balanced coverage of all
Bank lending regions; breadth of WB, IFC, and MIGA lending and non-lending involvement;
W&S access levels, income, country size, policy, regulatory, and institutional conditions; private
sector participation levels; importance of urban/rural issues and relative emphasis on water
supply vs. sanitation, fragile and conflict-affected states (FCS) situations; and presence of impact
evaluations. Overall the sample covers over 55 percent of Bank Group commitments for W&S
during FY2007-2016. The tentative long list of case study countries for field based case studies
is China, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, and Zambia, and for desk case studies is
Colombia, Egypt, Peru, Senegal, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam. (Details in Annex F).
40.      Data and Information requirements. Data and information requirements for the
evaluation can be grouped as (i) country context-related: macroeconomic, demographic and
human development indicators; (ii) country sector policy and management-related: policy,
institutional structures, regulation, budget provisions, and subsidies; (iii) country sector service-
related: service delivery models; indicators for W&S and relevant parameters in the health,
environment and urban sectors; and (iv) Bank group lending and non-lending services data, (v)
Bank Group country strategies, economic sector work and external literature; (iv) other

                                                  14
developmental partner assistance; and (v) private sector lending for the sector. Details of the data
sources are listed in Annex E, Table A. The evaluation will also draw upon quantitative and
qualitative data collected from field-based country case studies and project performance
assessment reports; and interviews with all stakeholders. Perceptions of external stakeholders
will be collected, as will interviews with government counterparts, civil society, researchers,
private sector representatives, personnel engaged in service delivery, and beneficiaries. Focus
group discussions will be held with groups of beneficiaries of Bank Group projects, where
feasible. Interviews will be conducted with sector staff – technical specialists, task team leaders,
researchers, and managers. Innovative data collection methods (such as through cell phones)
will be sought and assessed; selected PPARs and case studies will employ focus groups and pilot
sample surveys within the budget envelope. W&S services are interrelated with broader water
resource management and pollution issues; interface with nutrition, health and hygiene; and are
impacted by land-use planning and overall governance and corruption matters. The evaluation
will cover these linkages within the scope of the evaluation methodology and information
sources, while keeping the core focus on sustained delivery of W&S services. An existing “gap-
map” 31 on the measurable impacts of improved water and sanitation – based on available impact
evaluations and systematic reviews – will be used to guide further data collection and analysis.
41.     Design strengths and limitations. IEG will evaluate the Bank’s alignment with the
client country’s goals, capacity and achievements (Figure 1). This is expected to lead to a far
richer and comprehensive evaluative analysis than a more limited approach of judging the Bank
Group’s performance against its own program goals. The evaluation also uses the prism of
evaluative parameters from the results framework to examine the consistency and causality
across the Bank’s strategy, support, and performance. The design incorporates frameworks for
analyzing the ‘science of delivery’ for W&S, as well as behavioral change principally among
beneficiaries, as crucial factors for driving adequate, reliable, and sustainable outcomes on the
ground. For some of the impacts and outcomes that will be examined by the study, there may be
gaps in data that can be compared over time and across different locations and countries. To
reduce these data gaps, the study will draw upon the literature survey, impact evaluation, and
field case studies. The team will collaborate with IEG’s internal teams on gender, service
delivery, and FCS, and also the related communities of practice or other sources of expertise in
the Bank Group.

V.     QUALITY ASSURANCE PROCESS
42.      Quality Assurance Process. This document follows the IEG Quality Assurance
Standards for Approach Papers. This Approach Paper has benefited from the views of four
expert peer reviewers. The same group of reviewers will also provide feedback on the final
report. The peer reviewers collectively bring strong operations, research and evaluative expertise
spanning all aspects of water and sanitation issues across regions and especially in developing
countries: Mr. Ricardo Sancho Chavarria, Faculty of the School of International Relations
National University of Costa Rica, and former Executive President of the Costa Rican water
utility, Instituto Costarricense de Acueductos y Alcantarillados; Mr. Arthur McIntosh, W&S
expert and former staff of the Asian Development Bank; and Prof. Dale Whittington, Professor
of Environmental Sciences & Engineering, City & Regional Planning, and Public Policy, at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. This approach paper has also benefited from
preliminary consultations with several Bank Group operational and research staff, management.


                                                15
These consultations serve as a reality check for the evaluation design and will be continued
during report preparation to fill gaps in information and analysis.

VI.       EXPECTED OUTPUTS, OUTREACH AND TRACKING
43.     Planned reporting vehicles. The final evaluation report will be presented to the World
Bank Group Board of Directors’ Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE), in its
oversight role of the effectiveness of Bank Group operations. Technical briefings/presentations
will be held as requested for Board members and senior management. Presentations will be held
for sector staff at headquarters and country offices through face-to-face presentations
supplemented by videoconferencing or on-line broadcasts as feasible.
44.      Outreach/ Dissemination Strategy. A report launch event will be held at the Bank
Group headquarters for Bank staff, and staff of developmental and research organizations
represented in the area. Tailored presentations will be made as requested and when feasible in
relevant conferences, multilateral developments banks, sector institutions, and regional
institutions. Blogs, infographics, and graphics videos will be prepared with simple and clear
messages, suitable for dissemination through social media. In this effort, the advice and
collaboration of IEG knowledge and communications staff will be integrated from the early
stages of the report preparation. Specific event such as the 2018 World Water Forum or the
Stockholm Water Week will be assessed as possible dissemination platforms for the evaluation
findings.

VII.      RESOURCES
45.   Timeline. Following submission of the Approach Paper to the Board’s Committee on
Development Effectiveness (CODE), the report preparation will take approximately eight
months including field-based studies, and another three for incorporating feedback from the
WBG management and processing for submission to CODE (Table 10).

      Table 10. IEG Water and Sanitation Evaluation Timetable
      IEG Management Review of the Approach Paper – One stop                March 22, 2016
      Approach paper sent to CODE                                           June 22, 2016
      IEG Management Review of the Draft Report – One stop                  March 16, 2017
      CODE Meeting                                                          May 2017

46.     Budget ($US). The total budget for the report is estimated at US$1,128K, including staff
time, consultant fees, travel and subsistence, contingencies and dissemination (Table 11)
                              Table 11. Study Budget
                              Staff Costs                         486,000
                              Consultant costs                    328,000
                              Travel and Subsistence              150,000
                              Dissemination                        50,000
                              Contingencies                        20,000
                              TOTAL costs                       1,034,000

47.     Team and skills mix: Overall guidance is provided by Marvin Taylor-Dormond, Director,
IEGSP, and Midori Makino, Manager IEGSD. The team has a balanced mix of evaluation,
sector operations, and data analysis skills covering both the public and private sectors, and

                                                       16
consists of Ramachandra Jammi, Senior Evaluation Officer and Task Team Leader; Anahit
Aghumian, Maria Elena Pinglo, Vivek Raman, and Alexandra Horst, Evaluation Officers; Ebru
Karamete, Evaluation Specialist (ETC). Daniel Musiitwa, Senior Communications officer,
IEGKC; Vijay Jagannathan, Senior Adviser and Consultant; Jan Janssens, and Jason Cardosi,
senior consultants; Anne-Clémence Owen, Yunsun Li, and Anna Amato, Consultants. Other
experts will be co-opted as the study progresses, and as needed. The team coordinates internally
with IEG’s two framework teams for service delivery to the poor and behavior change, as well as
for FCS.




                                              17
ENDNOTES

1
  UN. 2015. P. 12.
2
  WHO. 2012. P.4.
3
  http://rehydrate.org/water/water-sanitation-hygiene.htm
4   Kim. 2012.
5
  http://www.wssinfo.org
6
  http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/watersupply/overview#1
7
  UN-Water and WHO. 2014. P. x.
8
  WHO website.
9
  Corcoran, E., ET all. P.5.
10
   WHO UNICEF USAID. 2015.
11
   UN-Water and WHO. 2014. P. ix.
12
   WHO UNICEF. 2015. P. 9
13
   World Bank. 1994d.
14
   World Bank. 2004.
15 IFC   Strategic Directions, FY08-10: Creating Opportunity.
16 IFC   Road Map FY11-13
17 IFC   Road Map FY12-14;
18 The business plan covers water demand management and efficiency opportunities, including non-revenue water
reduction, innovative water- and energy-efficient technologies such as low energy desalination, and wastewater
treatment and reuse, as well as supply-side opportunities such as distributed services and solid waste management.
19
   World Bank. 2008.
20
   WB lending in the W&S sector are the sum of commitments for the following sub-sector codes under W&S:
Public Administration – Water, Sanitation and Flood Protection (BW); Sanitation (WA); Water Supply (WC);
Wastewater Collection and Transportation (WT); Wastewater treatment and Disposal (WV); and General Water,
Sanitation and Flood Protection (WZ).
21
   AGR, Agriculture; EAE, Energy & Extractives; EDU, Education; ENV, Environment; FAM, Finance & Markets;
GOV, Governance; HNP, Health, Nutrition & Population; MFM, Macro Economics & Fiscal Management; POV,
Poverty; SPL, Social Protection & Labor; TAC, Trade & Competitiveness; TAI, Transport & ICT; and URS, Social,
Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice.
22 The business plan covers water demand management and efficiency opportunities, including non-revenue water
reduction, innovative water- and energy-efficient technologies such as low energy desalination, and wastewater
treatment and reuse, as well as supply-side opportunities such as distributed services and solid waste management.
23
   OED 1992.
24
   OED 2002.
25
   OED 2003.
26
   IEG 2009.
27
   OED 2002a.
28
   IEG 2010.
29   IEG 2015.
30   IEG 2013.
31   JICA 2015.




                                                         18
REFERENCES
Corcoran, E., C. Nellemann, E. Baker, R. Bos, D. Osborn, H. Savelli (eds). 2010. Sick
Water? The central role of wastewater management in sustainable development. A Rapid
Response Assessment. United Nations Environment Programme, UN-HABITAT.
http://www.unep.org/pdf/SickWater_screen.pdf
http://rehydrate.org/water/water-sanitation-hygiene.htm
http://www.unfpa.org
http://www.water.org
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/watersupply/overview#1
http://www.wssinfo.org/
IEG. 2008. Environmental Sustainability: An Evaluation of World Bank Group Support.
Report No. 44949. Washington, D.C.
IEG. 2009. Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed: An IEG Special Study.
Report No. 49917. Washington D.C.
IEG. 2010. Water and Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Support, 1997-2007.
Report No. 45619. Washington D.C.
IEG. 2013. Knowledge-based country programs: an evaluation of World Bank Group
experience. Report Number 79653 Washington D.C.
IEG. 2015. World Bank support for Public-Private Partnerships. Lessons from Experience in
Client Countries, FY2002–12. Report Number 93629. Washington D.C.
Kim, J. 2012. Delivering on Development: Harnessing Knowledge to Build Prosperity and
End Poverty. Key Note Speech to World Knowledge Forum Seoul, Korea. October 9,
2012.
McIntosh, A., ed. Pearls of Wisdom in Asian Water Supplies. 2013. Books on Demand
Philippines, Inc. Manilla.
OED. 1992. Water Supply and Sanitation Projects: the Bank’s Experience—1967–1989.
Report No. 10789. Washington, D.C.
OED. 2002. Bridging Troubled Waters. Assessing the World Bank Water Resources Strategy.
Report No. 24527. Washington D.C.
OED. 2002a. Social Funds Assessing Effectiveness. Report No. 24615. Washington D.C.
OED. 2003. Efficient, Sustainable Service for All? An OED Review of the World Bank’s
Assistance to Water Supply and Sanitation. Report No. 26443. Washington D.C.
3ie and JICA. 2015. Gap-Map for water and sanitation interventions.
UN. 2015. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 2015.
http://www.un.org/pga/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2015/08/120815_outcome-document-of-
Summit-for-adoption-of-the-post-2015-development-agenda.pdf
UN-Water WHO. 2014. Investing in Water and Sanitation: Increasing Access, Reducing
Inequalities. UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water


                                             19
GLAAS 2014.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/139735/1/9789241508087_eng.pdf?ua=1&ua=1
WHO UNICEF JMP. 2013. Water Quality and Health Strategy 2013-2020. Geneva,
Switzerland.http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/2013/water_quality_str
ategy.pdf?ua=1
WHO UNICEF JMP. 2015. WASH Post-2015, Proposed Indicators for Drinking Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene. Geneva, Switzerland.
http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP-WASH-Post-2015-
Brochure.pdf
WHO UNICEF USAID. 2015. Improving nutrition outcomes with better water, sanitation
and hygiene: Practical solutions for policies and programs. Geneva, Switzerland.
http://www.unicef.org/media/files/IntegratingWASHandNut_WHO_UNICEF_USAID_Nov2
015.pdf
WHO UNICEF. 2015. 25 years Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water, 2015 Update
and MDG Assessment. Geneva Switzerland.
http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/Progress_on_Sanitation_and_Drinking_Water_2015
_Update_.pdf
WHO website; http://www.wpro.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs_201203_water/en/
WHO. 2012. Global costs and benefits of drinking-water supply and sanitation interventions
to reach the MDG target and universal coverage. Geneva, Switzerland.
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/2012/globalcosts.pdf
World Bank. 1994. Water Resources Management. A World Bank Policy Paper. Report No.
12335. Washington, D.C.
World Bank. 2004. Water Resources Sector Strategy Strategic Directions for World Bank
Engagement. Report No. 28116. Washington D.C.
World Bank. 2008. Sustainable Infrastructure Action Plan FY 2009-2011. Report No. 47059.
Washington, D.C.




                                            20
Annex A

Drinking Water, Sanitation, and Handwashing Ladders
             Table 1. Water, Sanitation and Handwashing Ladders

              Drinking Water Ladder              Sanitation Ladder            Handwashing Ladder

                                                  Safely managed
             A basic drinking water
             source which is located on    A basic sanitation facility
             premises, available when      which is not shared with
             needed and free of fecal      other households and where
             and priority chemical         excreta are safely disposed in
             contamination                 situ or treated off-site
                                                          Basic
                                           Flush/pour flush to piped
Improved




                                                                                                         Improved
                                           sewer system, septic tank or
             Piped water, boreholes or     pit latrine, ventilated
             tubewells, protected dug      improved pit latrine,
             wells, protected springs      composting toilet or pit
                                           latrine with a slab not shared   Hand washing facility
             and rainwater provided
                                           with other households            with soap and water in the
             collection time is no
                                                                            household
             greater than 30 minutes                     Shared
             for a roundtrip including     Sanitation facilities of an
             queuing*                      otherwise acceptable type
                                           shared between two or more
                                           households
                                                    Unimproved
             Drinking water from
             unprotected dug wells,
             unprotected springs, carts
             with small tank/drum,
                                           Pit latrines without a slab or
             tanker trucks or basic                                         Handwashing facility
                                           platform, hanging latrines
             sources with a total                                           without soap or water
Unimproved




                                                                                                         Unimproved
                                           and bucket latrines
             collection time of more
             than 30 minutes for a
             roundtrip including
             queuing*
                   Surface water                  Open Defecation                   No facility
                                           Human feces disposed of in
             River, dam, lake, pond,       fields, forest, bushes, open
             stream, canal or irrigation   bodies of water, beaches or     No handwashing facility
             channel                       other open spaces or disposed
                                           of with solid waste
             Source: Adapted from WHO UNICEF JMP. 2015.
             *Bottled water is considered "basic" for drinking only when the household uses a basic
             source for cooking and personal hygiene




                                                         21
Annex B

Portfolio Review: Elements of WBG Assistance for Water & Sanitation
 Figure 1. WBG Support for Water and Sanitation, FY2007–2016 ($, billions)

 A. W&S Share of all WBG
 commitments                                                                  B. Trend in WB, IFC and MIGA commitments
                              IFC                                             6




                                                    Commitment ($, billion)
                              1.4
                                        MIGA                                  4
                                         0.4
                                                                              2
                    WB
                    36                                                        0
                                                                                  2007      2008   2009   2010   2011    2012     2013    2014     2015   2016
                                                                                                                  Fiscal year
                                                                                                   WB                   IFC                      MIGA

 Source: World Bank Business Intelligence; IFC and MIGA databases.
 Note: IFC = International Finance Corporation; MIGA = Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency; WB = World Bank.




 Figure 2. World Bank Support for Water & Sanitation, FY2007–2016 ($, billions)

 A. by Lending Instrument                   B. by Sub-sector                                                     C. by Region
          Program for results, 1.4                                                 Public                                              Middl
                                                                                                                                       Europ
                  Policy                                                          Wastew
                                                                                   Admin                                                  e
                                                                                     ater
                                                                                                                                       e and
                 lending                                                          Sanitati
                                                                                     2.7
                                                                                  Wastew
                                                                                  Collecti
                                                                                                                                        East
                                                                                                                                       Centr
                   , 3.9                                                           on 2.9
                                                                                   onater
                                                                                       and                                              and
                                                                                                                                          al
                                                                                  Treatme
                                                                                  Transpo                                              Lartin
                                                                                                                                       North
                                                                                                                                        Asia
                                                                                   rtation
                                                                                   nt and                                              Ameri
                                                                                                                                       Africa
                                                                                                                                         3.9
                                                                                   Flood
                                                                                  Disposa
                                                                                     2.9
                                                                                  Protecti
                                                                                                                                        Sub-
                                                                                                                                       ca  7.1
                                                                                                                                         2.7
                                                                                    l 3.2
                                                                                   on 4.9                                              Sahar
                   Invest                                                                                                                an
                                                                                   Water
                   ment,                                                           Supply
                                                                                                                                       Africa
                    30.8                                                            9.2                                                South
                                                                                                                                         7.1
                                                                                                                                        Asia
                                                                                                                                         7.2
                                                   General Water, Sanitation and Flood                                                  East
                                                            Protection 10.4                                                             Asia
                                                                                                                                       Pacifi
                                                                                                                                        c 8.2
         Total: US$ 36.2 billions                                 Total: US$ 36.2 billions                                    Total: US$ 36.2 billions

 Source: World Development Indicators; data related to 2010; United Nations 2012.




                                                                                   22
  Figure 3. IFC and MIGA Support for Water & Sanitation, FY2007–2016 ($, billions)

  A. Investment Lending                        B. by Sub-sector                              C. by Region
                                     IFCAS                                                                                               Sub-
                                                                                                                                        Sahara
                                      0.05                               Wastewater                                                        n
                                                                         Treatment                                  East Asia           Afric…
                                                                            0.22                     Europe and      Pacific
                                                                                                     Central Asia     0.45              World
IFC




                  IFCIS                                                                                 0.39
                                                                                                                  Middle East           0.02
                   1.36                                     General Water Sanitation
                                                                                                                   and North
                                                            and Flood protection 1.19                      Lartin
                                                                                                                     Africa
                                                                                                          America                       South
                                                                                                                     0.23
                                                                                                            0.28                        Asia
                                                                                                                                         0.03
                 Total: 1.4 billion                           Total 1.4 billion                             Total, 1.4 billion

  D. Guarantees issued                         E. by Sub-sector                              F. by Region
                                                                        Wastewater
                                                                        Treatment                   Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                 Middle East and
                                                                           0.1                            0.18
                      MIGA                                                                                                        North Africa
                       0.4                                    General Water,                                                          0.01
MIGA




                                                            Santation and Flood                        East Asia Pacific
                                                              protection 0.3                                 0.18
                Total: 0.4 billion                             Total: 0.4 billion                      Total: 0.4 billion

  Sources: World Bank Business Intelligence; IFC and MIGA databases.
  Note: b = billion; IDA = International Development Association; IFC = International Finance Corporation; MIGA = Multilateral
  Investment Guarantee Agency; WB = World Bank.




  Table 1. Water and Sanitation Sector: Number of projects, FY2007–2016
  Institution                                       Approved projects                               Number of Projects
                                             Number                    Amount              Active             Completed/ Matured *
                                                                      ($, billion)
  World Bank                                  627                       36.2                405                             546

            Water GP                          217                       20.2                156                             179

           Other GPs                          410                         16                249                             367

  IFC                                         108                        1.4                 62                             35
  MIGA                                         9                         0.4                 5                               4
  Total                                       744                       38.0                472                             585
  Source: World Bank Business Intelligence; IFC and MIGA databases.




                                                                     23
Annex C

Review of World Bank Group’s partnerships support to W&S Services
Purpose: The review aims to 1) learn lessons on the contribution of the partnership programs to the
Bank Group’s W&S work; 2) help improve the relevance and effectiveness of WBG W&S
partnership programs; and 3) learn lessons for the WBG as a development partner that IEG can use in
its wider engagement with WBG management on partnership issues.

Scope: The review will focus on a cluster of four global partnership programs –– Water Sanitation
Program (WSP), Water Partnership Program (WPP), Global Output-based Aid (GPOBA) and Pubic
Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF). Since all of these programs, except the WSP, have
broader or multi-sectoral foci, the review will focus on program activities that are pertinent to the
objectives of the main evaluation.

Methodology and Evaluation Questions: The methodology of the Partnerships Review will be
closely aligned with the evaluation framework of the main evaluation. Main evaluation questions to
assess the contribution of these four partnership programs are:
1) How relevant and effective have global partnership programs (principally WSP, WPP, GPOBA,
PPIAF) been in contributing to the Bank Group’s efforts in supporting countries to improve access to
adequate, reliable, and sustainable W&S services?
      •   Were design, strategies, and activities of these programs appropriate for achieving their
          intended results?
      •   What is the quality of the M&E system? How well it captures the results of the program(s)?
      •   To what extent the programs have achieved their intended results in W&S?
2) To what extent have these programs improved WBG collaboration with other development
partners to expand its reach in client countries?
      •   How well have these programs complemented the WBG’s global, regional, and country level
          work in W&S?
      •   As donor-supported programs, have these programs maintained the right balance between the
          donor priorities and client country needs in their selection of countries and activities?
The review will involve a desk study of key documents and a sample of activities for each of the
partnership programs. Key respondents having an interface with partnership activities (Bank staff,
client government and implementing agency officials, civil society and beneficiaries) will be
interviewed. To the extent possible, it will draw on the available evidence on results as reported by
external evaluation(s) of the programs, impact evaluations. 1 Where relevant, desk and field-based
country case studies will include questions and analysis on the contribution of these programs.




1   Of these four programs, only the WSP and PPIAF have relatively recent external evaluations.

                                                     24
Partnerships Review: Overview of Programs
Water and Sanitation program, (WSP) is a multi-donor partnership, established in 1978, that aims
to support poor people in obtaining affordable, safe, and sustainable access to water and sanitation
services. WSP provides in-kind technical assistance, capacity building, and leverages knowledge and
partnerships through its network of technical staff in more than 20 countries across the world. WSP’s
disbursements under its six closely-related business areas are presented in Table 1. Two of its core
business areas, scaling up rural sanitation and supporting poor-inclusive W&S sector reforms
comprise about 65 percent of program US $142.4 million spending for the last 4 years. WSP has
been principally active in four regions with Africa and East Asia and Pacific accounting for the
largest shares of disbursements at 32 percent and 24 percent respectively.

Table 1. Disbursements by WSP’s six core business areas, 2011-2014 (US$ million)
                                                                    2011   2012   2013   2014   Total
 1. Scaling up rural sanitation and hygiene                         13.2   10.7   9.8    13.5   47.2
 2. Creating sustainable services through domestic private sector   2      9      5.6    8.6    25.2
 participation (SS-DPSP)
 3. Supporting poor-inclusive WSS sector reform                     12     11.8   11.5   9.3    44.6
 4. Targeting urban poor; improving services in small towns         2.7    3.5    4.5    5.1    15.8
 5. Mitigating & adapting W&S delivery to climate change            1.1    0.6    0.4    0.1    2.2
 6. Delivering WSS services in fragile states                       0.9    1      1.8    3.7    7.4
 Total                                                              31.9   36.6   33.6   40.3   142.4

Output-Based Aid Program (GPOBA) is a global partnership program that aims to fund, design,
demonstrate, and document OBA approaches to improve the delivery of basic services to the poor in
developing countries. GPOBA provides technical assistance and investments to promote the use of
one the results-based financing approaches—output-based aid-—to provide access to basic services
for the poor. Water is the second largest sector in GPOBA’s portfolio,
after energy, comprising 24 percent of total subsidy portfolio.           Table 2. GPOBA W&S
GPOBA’s WSS portfolio: GPOBA’s WSS pilots test the potential of           Portfolio, 2007-2015 (US$
                                                                          M)
results-based financing approaches in dealing with infrastructure
bottlenecks and behavioral barriers of water supply and sanitation        Region Amount %
service delivery. Total GPOBA portfolio in the period of 2007-2015 in     AFR             45.8   61
W&S is US$75.66million with 17 investment projects. GPOBA WSS             EAP             12.3   16
portfolio (2007-2015) has 13 closed subsidy projects in the amount of     LAC              4.6    6
about US$50mln. The largest share of water portfolio is in Africa,        MENA             7.0    9
mainly Sub-Saharan region (table 2). The portfolio focuses on provision
                                                                          SAR             5.93    8
of basic services to the poor; with 65 percent (11 projects out of 17) of
funding allocated to IDA countries.                                       Total          75.66 100

Water Partnership Program (WPP) is a Bank-managed multi-donor trust fund established in 2009.
The program aims to support finding innovative solutions to complex water challenges. WPP
provides support to analytical work, project preparation and implementation across all water
subsectors. The Program’s support is provided via individual activities that are coordinated through
six regional and one global window. The program supports only Bank executed activities.
Since 2009 the program committed about $43 million for over 300 activities. Of this, 41 percent went
to global activities, mainly analytical work, Water Expert team, and dissemination of knowledge
products. W&S accounted for 26 percent of WPP funding and mostly supported activities in Africa
and South Asia where the access gap is the largest. These comprise project preparation and
supervision support to about 100 WB investment projects in W&S and knowledge work.

                                                     25
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) is a multi-donor trust fund that provides
technical assistance to governments in developing countries in support of the enabling environment
conducive to private investment (policies, laws, regulations, institutions, and government capacity).
It also supports governments to develop specific infrastructure projects with private sector
participation. The support to activities in Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for 41 percent of approved
country- and region-specific activities. Over the last five years, on average, about 60% of PPIAF
funding went to support infrastructure development strategies and policy reforms. Fifteen (15%)
percent of PPIAF funds supported technical assistance in the water sector. These include project-
specific support at different stages of the project-cycle as well as upstream technical assistance aimed
at improving institutional, regulatory and legal frameworks for PPPs. PPIAF’s support in the area of
W&S cover four areas: non-revenue water, small-scale water providers, wastewater and sewerage,
and solid waste.




                                                  26
Annex D

Salient Findings from previous IEG Evaluation of W&S sectors.

Water Supply and Sanitation Projects: the Bank’s Experience—1967–1989 2(1992): This
evaluation noted a shift in the Bank’s focus from working through government agencies in the
W&S sector to increase sector regulatory capacity and encouraging private sector participation in
an effort to provide efficient, sustainable service for all, with a special emphasis on the poor.
Social funds – Assessing Effectiveness (2002) 3. Impacts in the sanitation sector varied between
sewerage and latrines. No net health benefits could be detected from social funding investments
in sewerage systems, although investments in latrines tended to reduce the incidence of diarrhea.
Bridging Troubled Waters. Assessing the World Bank Water Resources Strategy (2002) 4: This
study placed W&S within the context of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM).
The report concluded that the water supply sub-sector had not sufficiently documented its effect
on poverty alleviation; that the regulation sector experience had not been evaluated; that sector
pricing policies were inconsistently applied; and that private sector participation had not yet been
demonstrated as sustainable.
Efficient, Sustainable Service for All? An OED Review of the World Bank’s Assistance to Water
Supply and Sanitation (2003) 5. This review noted that regulation must become less prescriptive
and ought to focus on implementation. It noted that private sector participation had shown
promising results and remained an important tool to improve coverage and quality; it also noted
operators require special incentives to serve the poor.
Environmental Sustainability: An Evaluation of World Bank Group (2008) 6: This evaluation noted
that the Bank Group should adopt a more coordinated approach to policy dialogue with
governments. This would enable further structural reforms for public-private partnerships in the
sector as well as ensure that industry views are represented.
Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed: An IEG Special Study 7(2009). This
report covered W&S components of World Bank projects among other activities, but did not
offer findings or recommendations of specific interest to the sector.
PPP evaluation: This evaluation noted that, as a general rule, the presence of a strong regulatory
framework was necessary for PPP projects to succeed in the water sector. Sector reform efforts
were found to be particularly prominent in the water sector, indicating reliance of PPPs on
reform in this area. However, these sector reform efforts showed the lowest success in achieving
their objectives because of sector complexity. 8




2
  OED. 1992
3
  OED 2002a
4
  OED. 2002
5
  OED. 2003
6
  IEG. 2008
7
  IEG. 2009
8
  IEG 2015

                                                27
Annex E
Detailed Design Matrix
A. Data Sources and Limitations
                                                                       EVALUATION MODULES
   DATA        Literature / NLTA      WBG Sector         Project Key Performance                   Desk/Field Case Studies                       Global
 ATTRIBUTES          review             Strategy            Indicator Analysis                                                                Partnerships
                                       Analysis           and Portfolio Review                                                                    Study
 DATA          WB’s Imagebank;    WBG Country       WB’ s Business Intelligence    Literature and NLTA review: Country specific          WSP, WPP,
 SOURCES       Water Global       Partnership        IFC and MIGA databases         data; impact evaluation and systematic review data    PPIAF reports
               Practice            strategies         WBG Operations                 Project Data: same as KPI analysis and Portfolio      and databases;
               WB’s Business      Staff             documents: Project Appraisal    Reviews;                                              GPOBA
               Intelligence        Interviews         Reports (PADs);                 Field-based info/data: Interviews with WBG staff;     portfolio
               Academic                              Implementation Completion       Govt officials; implementing agency staff; civil      documents;
               databases                              and Results Reports (ICRs);     society; beneficiaries; site visits; selected focus   Integrated with
               Google Scholar                        Aide Memoires; IFC’s            groups                                                Interviews for
                                                      Extended Project Supervision    Cross-Country Sector ; Economic; Human                Desk/field case
                                                      Reports (XPSRs); MIGA’s         Development; Demographic Data:                        studies
                                                      Project Completion Reports      Joint Monitoring Program of WHO-UNICEF;
                                                      (PCRs);                         IBNET
                                                       IEG Reviews of ICRs.          Other Water sector organizations;
                                                      XPSRs and PCRs;                  ADB; AfDB; IaDB; USAID; DFID etc.
                                                      IEG’s field-based Project      World Development Indicators;
                                                      Performance Assessment          Country Data: Ministry websites;
                                                      Reports (PPARs);
                                                      Previous Sector Studies
 DATA          None significant    None significant   Impacts: There is expected to be relatively low attributable data for health,         Attribution of
 LIMITATIONS                                          nutrition, economic, and gender impacts of W&S services;                              interventions by
                                                      Outcomes: Data may be limited and context specific. Many gaps are expected for        each of the
                                                      data on Adequacy, Reliability, and Affordability of W&S services. Similarly, data     above entities to
                                                      on Environmental and Institutional Sustainability may be limited and context          outcomes may
                                                      specific.                                                                             be insufficient.




                                                                           28
B. Evaluation Module inputs to Addressing Evaluation Questions.
                                                                                                                              EVALUATION MODULES




                                                                                                                                                                 Project Key Performance
                                                                                                                                           WBG Sector Strategy




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Global Partnerships
                                                                                                                                                                    Indicator Analysis
                                                                                                                       Literature / NLTA




                                                                                                                                                                                           Desk/ Field Case
                                                                                                                                               Analysis
                                              EVALUATION QUESTIONS




                                                                                                                                                                                               Studies
                                                                                                                             review




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Study
  Overarching Question: How effective has the Bank Group been in supporting client countries improve access to adequate, reliable, and sustainable
 W&S services – and going forward – how well is it equipped to support the countries in moving towards sustainable water and sanitation services
 for all, in keeping with Sustainable Development Goal 6?
                                                      A. Targeting Sustainable Service Delivery
 A i. How targeted and relevant is the Bank Group’s support (investments, policy lending, guarantees, technical
 assistance, analytical work, and policy advice) for providing sustained water and sanitation services to client countries
                                                                                                                                            
 that are at different access levels; across urban, rural and peri-urban areas; and for ensuring focus on the poor and
 vulnerable groups, particularly women and children?
 A ii. To what extent has the Bank Group, through country partnership strategies and other means, considered issues
 relating to the sustainability of water and sanitation services in the face of rapid urbanization, water-stressed regions,                 
 and the need to develop climate resilience?
           B. Providing Adequate, Reliable, Clean and Safe Service: To what extent has the Bank Group supported client countries for…
 B i. … the provision of access to adequate and reliable W&S services of adequate quality through new/
 rehabilitated infrastructure facilities; improved technical, planning and management capacity; level of connection                           
 fees; improved and innovative service delivery models; and private sector participation?
 B ii. …securing the financial viability of the W&S sector (e.g. utilities, municipal and community-based W&S
 services) through appropriate tariff policies and regulation; improved cost recovery and revenue collection; investing
                                                                                                                                              
 in operations and maintenance; improved operating efficiency and non-revenue water reduction; and private sector
 participation?
 B iii. …the provision of affordable W&S services through community participation, responding to consumer
                                                                                                                                              
 demand and willingness to pay; appropriate connection fees and targeted subsidies?
 B iv. …effecting behavior change among direct beneficiaries especially in adopting improved sanitation facilities,
                                                                                                                                             
 handwashing and other hygienic practices?




                                                                        29
                                                                                                                              EVALUATION MODULES




                                                                                                                                                                 Project Key Performance
                                                                                                                                           WBG Sector Strategy




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Global Partnerships
                                                                                                                                                                    Indicator Analysis
                                                                                                                       Literature / NLTA




                                                                                                                                                                                           Desk/ Field Case
                                                                                                                                               Analysis
                                             EVALUATION QUESTIONS




                                                                                                                                                                                               Studies
                                                                                                                             review




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Study
B v. …ensuring environmental sustainability through management of the water resources, particularly ground water
sources, and building resilience to water variability caused by climate change; safe collection and treatment of                                                                                               
wastewater; and pollution of groundwater and water bodies?
B vi. … improving M&E systems for better planning and targeting of improvement of W&S services?                                                                                                                
                                                         C. Delivery of WBG Assistance
C i. To what extent have Bank Group operations in client countries been completed within the planned costs and
                                                                                                                                                                     
time estimates? What are the factors that explain the patterns of time and cost overruns?
C ii. To what extent and how effectively has the Bank Group applied economic cost-benefit analysis in the design of
                                                                                                                                                                     
W&S projects and investments?
C iii. How relevant and effective have global partnership programs (principally WSP, WPP, GPOBA, PPIAF) been in
contributing to the Bank Group’s efforts for supporting countries to improve access to adequate, reliable, and                                                                                                   
sustainable W&S services?
C iv. To what extent have the partnership programs improved WBG collaboration with other development partners
                                                                                                                                                                                                               
to expand its reach in client countries?
C v. To what extent has the Bank Group supported coordination between the ministry responsible for W&S services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and ministries for health, nutrition, urban management, water resources, and the environment?
C vi. To what extent has the Bank Group supported client countries in reducing the financing gap by leveraging and
effectively deploying additional financial resources for improving W&S services through private sector participation                                                                         
and better donor coordination?
C vii. To what extent have the Bank Group units – WB, IFC, and MIGA – collaborated in providing support to client
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
countries for improved W&S services?
C viii. To what extent has the Bank Group employed its human resource expertise appropriately to the needs of client
                                                                                                                                           
countries?
C ix. To what extent has the Bank Group mainstreamed environmental and social safeguards through its W&S
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
projects?



                                                                       30
Annex F

Country Case Study Matrix




                                                                                                                                                                                       WB Net WATSAN Commitment
                                                         Performance Assessment Report




                                                                                                                                                      WB Lending Project Cost (M$) –
                                                                                                                       # of WB Projects - Other GPs
                                                                                         # of WB Projects - Water GP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sanitation Access Urban (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sanitation Access Rural (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # of IFC Advisory Services
                                                            Past/Planned IEG Project




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Water Access Urban (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                          Amount (M$) – All GPs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Water Access Rural (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # of MIGA Guarantees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # of IFC Investments




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Income Category**
                                     Desk Case Study/
                                     Field case Study/
                  Country




                                                                                                                                                                All GPs
                            Region




          1    China        EAP      Field                                                 43                             43                         22,859                           6,350                        11                           0                          7                UMI                 98                       87                               93                    77
          2    Colombia     LAC      Desk                                                  5                              10                         2,611                            1,248                        0                            0                          0                UMI                 97                       85                               74                    81
          3    Egypt        MNA      Field                                                  7                              4                          1,729                             823                         1                            3                          0                LMI                 100                      97                               99                    95
          4    Ghana        SSA      Desk                                                  9                              7                           849                              509                         0                            0                          1                LMI                 93                       20                               84                    15
          5    Haiti        LAC      Field                                                 3                              14                          436                              133                         1                            0                          0                LI***               65                       34                               48                    28
          6    India        SAS      Field                                                 19                             22                         14,823                           4,508                        4                            8                          0                LMI                 97                       63                               93                    40
          7    Indonesia    EAP      Field                                                  10                             33                         14,662                           1,570                        2                            1                          0                LMI                 94                       80                               72                    48
          8    Nigeria      SSA      Field                                                 5                              13                         3,905                            1,376                        0                            0                          0                LMI                 81                       57                               33                    25
          9    Peru         LAC      Desk                                                  8                              7                          1,775                             598                         1                            0                          0                UMI                 91                       83                               69                    76
          10   Senegal      SSA      Desk                                                  4                              6                           910                              383                         0                            0                          0                LMI                 93                       65                               67                    48
          11   Sri Lanka    SAS      Field                                                 5                              12                         1,700                             659                         0                            0                          0                LMI                 99                       88                               95                    95
          12   Uzbekistan   ECA      Desk                                                  6                              0                           561                              441                         0                            0                          0                LMI                 99                       100                                                    100
          13   Vietnam      EAP      Desk                                                   17                             22                         6,243                            2,935                        0                            2                          0                LMI                 99                       94                               97                    78
          14   Zambia       SSA      Field                                                 4                              1                           189                              151                         0                            0                          0                LMI                 86                       51                               56                    36
          * IEG field-based Project Performance Assessment Report
          **Income Categories are Low Income (LI), Lower Middle Income (LMI), Upper Middle Income (UMI) and Upper Income (UI)
          *** Fragile and Conflict-affected State




                                                                                                                                                            31
