 LE A R N ING PR O DUC T




Tax Revenue
 Mobilization
          Lessons from
     World Bank Group
 Support for Tax Reform
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction   This work is a product of the staff of The World   RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
and Development / The World Bank               Bank with external contributions. The findings,    The material in this work is subject to copyright.
1818 H Street NW                               interpretations, and conclusions expressed in      Because The World Bank encourages
Washington, DC 20433                           this work do not necessarily reflect the views     dissemination of its knowledge, this work
Telephone: 202-473-1000                        of The World Bank, its Board of Executive          may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org                    Directors, or the governments they represent.      noncommercial purposes as long as full
                                                                                                  attribution to this work is given.
                                               The World Bank does not guarantee the
                                               accuracy of the data included in this work.        Any queries on rights and licenses, including
                                               The boundaries, colors, denominations, and         subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
                                               other information shown on any map in this         World Bank Publications, The World Bank
                                               work do not imply any judgment on the part         Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
                                               of The World Bank concerning the legal             20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
                                               status of any territory or the endorsement         pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                               or acceptance of such boundaries.
Tax Revenue Mobilization: Lessons from
World Bank Group Support for Tax Reform

An IEG Learning Product




                                          i
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................................................. V

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ VI

OVERVIEW........................................................................................................................................... VII

1. INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................................. 1
            World Bank Group Approach .................................................................................................................................... 1
            Methodology of the Review ....................................................................................................................................... 4


2. FINDINGS ........................................................................................................................................... 8
            Description of World Bank Group Support ................................................................................................................ 8
            Tax Reform and Domestic Revenue Mobilization ..................................................................................................... 9
            Relevance ............................................................................................................................................................... 12
            Efficacy of World Bank Support in Raising Tax Revenue ....................................................................................... 15
            Monitoring and Evaluation ....................................................................................................................................... 19
            Analytical and Diagnostic Underpinnings and IMF and World Bank Collaboration ................................................. 22
            Synergies between DPOs and Investment Projects ............................................................................................... 24
            Efficiency and Equity ............................................................................................................................................... 27


3. LESSONS ......................................................................................................................................... 31
            Operations ............................................................................................................................................................... 31
            Country and Corporate Strategy ............................................................................................................................. 36


REFERENCES...................................................................................................................................... 40

Boxes
Box 1.1. Recent International Partnerships on Tax Policy and Administration Reforms .......................... 3
Box 1.2. Definitions ................................................................................................................................. 5
Box 1.3. Guiding Questions for the Review ............................................................................................. 6
Box 3.1. Future Evaluation Work on World Bank Group Support to Domestic Resource Mobilization .. 39

Appendixes

APPENDIX A. WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION
REFORMS ............................................................................................................................................ 43

APPENDIX B. METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................... 54




                                                                                                                                                                                     iii
CONTENTS


APPENDIX C. DESIGNING TAX REFORMS: OVERARCHING RESULTS CHAIN AND TRADE-
OFFS ..................................................................................................................................................... 64

APPENDIX D. REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15 ........... 65

APPENDIX E. REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15 .. 78

APPENDIX F. LIST OF RELEVANT IEG EVALUATIONS ................................................................... 89

REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................................... 89




iv
Abbreviations
DPL    development policy loan
DPO    development policy operation
DRM    domestic resource mobilization
GDP    gross domestic product
ICR    Implementation Completion and Results Report
ICRR   Implementation Completion and Results Report Review
IEG    Independent Evaluation Group
IFC    International Finance Corporation
IMF    International Monetary Fund
M&E    monitoring and evaluation
MFM    Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
OECD   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PPAR   Project Performance Assessment Report
PRSC   Poverty Reduction Support Credit
SCD    Systematic Country Diagnostic
VAT    value-added tax




                                                                v
Acknowledgments
This Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) learning product was produced by a team
led by Claude Leroy-Themeze. It was carried out under the direction of Auguste
Kouame, director, Marie Gaarder, former acting director, and Anjali Kumar, acting
manager, and under the guidance of Caroline Heider (director-general, Evaluation).

Team members included Anna Amato (researcher and analyst); Surajit Goswami,
Maciej Grabowski, and Pradeep Mitra (IEG consultants); and Yumeka Hirano and
Felix Oppong (economists). William Hurlbut provided editorial assistance, and
Aimee Niane formatted the document and provided administrative support.

The report benefited from peer review by Mario Mansour (deputy chief, Tax Policy
Division, Fiscal Affairs Department, International Monetary Fund), Blanca Moreno-
Dodson (lead economist, Governance Global Practice, World Bank), and Steven
Webb (public sector specialist).




vi
Overview
The mobilization of domestic              activities are coded in World Bank
resources through reforms in taxation     databases and the limited depth and
is essential to ensuring sustainable      breadth of existing Independent
financing of development. Several         Evaluation Group (IEG) evidence on
international initiatives are under way   World Bank Group support to tax
that focus attention on constraints to    reforms. Thus, a number of the
growth, particularly in low-income        guiding questions identified in the
economies, where domestic taxes and       Concept Note could not be addressed
foreign private and market-related        properly. The learning note therefore
borrowing do not expand enough to         focused on describing World Bank
compensate for declining flows of         Group support to tax reforms and on
official development assistance. The      questions related to development
World Bank Group is engaged in these      effectiveness.
efforts.
                                          This learning note is timely and
This learning note reviews World          pertinent to the work of several of the
Bank Group support to tax policy and      World Bank Group’s global practices.
administration reform over FY2005-15,     It is relevant to Macroeconomics and
covering development policy               Fiscal Management (MFM) and Trade
operations (DPOs), investment             and Competitiveness, and is closely
projects, and International Finance       related to issues that factor into
Corporation (IFC) Advisory Services       political economy analyses to inform
on business taxation. It draws mainly     Systematic Country Diagnostics.
on three sources:
                                          Given the limitations of the available
      A systematic review of             data and evaluative material, both the
       Implementation Completion          findings and the lessons drawn from
       and Results Report Reviews         them are provisional and need to be
       (ICRRs) of World Bank              confirmed through deeper and more
       operations and EvNotes for IFC     thorough evaluation work.
       Advisory Services
      Related Project Performance
       Assessment Reports (PPARs)
      Relevant country case studies
       from various IEG evaluations.      Description of World Bank Group
                                          Support
The review has been limited by
weaknesses in the way project


                                                                                vii
OVERVIEW


Over FY2005-15, the vast majority of      services addressing other issues
World Bank support to tax policy and      related to regulatory environment.
administration reform (205 projects in
107 countries; total commitments of       The review for this learning note
$28.4 billion) has been provided          covers 98 World Bank operations for
through programmatic DPOs, with           which an ICRR is available (80 DPOs
investment projects representing 11       and 18 investment projects) and 17 IFC
percent of the total. For most of the     Advisory Services on business
operations bearing the tax theme code,    taxation for which an EvNote had
the tax reform component was a minor      been prepared. World Bank reviewed
part of the operation, predominantly      operations were implemented in 52
in the 10–14 percent range. About two-    countries. Total commitments for the
thirds of the commitments for tax         reviewed projects were $16.8 billion or
operations were delivered by the          59 percent of the commitments for
MFM Global Practice while                 operations supporting tax policy and
Governance delivered 15 percent. In       administration reform while tax
terms of project numbers, the majority    commitments were $2.9 billion or 54
of the approved operations were in the    percent of the tax commitments for the
Latin America and the Caribbean (32       full portfolio. The composition of the
percent) and Sub-Saharan Africa (30       reviewed portfolio does not differ
percent) Regions. But in terms of         significantly from the full portfolio in
commitments, 42 percent of the            terms of financing instruments, share
approved operations were in Latin         of tax code, global practice,
America and the Caribbean; the next       characteristics of recipient countries
largest in commitment terms were          such as Region, income category, and
Europe and Central Asia (19 percent)      tax-to-GDP ratio.
and East Asia and Pacific (16 percent).
                                          Findings
More funds for tax reforms were
committed in middle-income countries      Tax components in World Bank
(78 percent) than in low-income           operations have been designed to (i)
countries (5 percent). World Bank         enhance revenue to enable fiscal
support for tax reforms has tended to     consolidation or create/maintain fiscal
go to countries where the tax-to-GDP      space for priority expenditure (in 60
ratio is 10 to 20 percent (about 90       out of the 80 reviewed DPOs) and/or
percent of total tax commitments). IFC    (ii) improve investment climate or
Advisory Services in business taxation    strengthen export competitiveness and
are much smaller than World Bank          improve trade integration. Together
operations and are usually a small part   these objectives were expected to
of investment climate advisory            contribute to accelerated growth and
                                          higher employment while fiscal


viii
                                                                         OVERVIEW


consolidation was often considered a       compliance or tax collection, they may
prerequisite for securing sustained        have contributed to these results.
budget support and laying the
foundation for future growth. Support      Given the subject matter, the diversity
for tax reform in federal states was       of tax reform objectives, and the large
also provided with broadly similar         share of DPOs in the portfolio of
objectives in particular, fiscal           support for tax reforms, illustrative
consolidation and/or an improved           country examples (13 countries
investment climate.                        covering 36 operations) have been
                                           chosen mostly from DPOs targeting an
With a few exceptions, reviewed            increase in tax collection among
DPOs did not specifically address the      countries other than fragile and
efficiency and equity of tax systems.      conflict-affected situations and
They usually supported measures on         resource rich developing countries,
tax policy or tax administration, or       which were excluded from the
both in the pursuit of raising             analysis to avoid duplication with
government revenue and/or                  previous IEG evaluations.
strengthening the investment climate.
In most DPOs, fiscal consolidation was     The relevance of the tax objectives in
also pursued through reform of public      most operations was substantial or
expenditures.                              higher while the relevance of project
                                           design was modest. There was little
The development objectives of most         question about the relevance of
investment projects focused on             objectives, especially when the
improving the effectiveness and            operation was part of a programmatic
efficiency of public administration,       series that constituted flagship
with tax administration reform             operations under the country
objectives as part of these wider public   partnership framework and were well
finance management objectives. Tax         aligned with the government’s reform
administration reforms were expected       program. Generally, when the tax
to reduce the costs of compliance for      component focused on tax
taxpayers and of tax administration,       administration measures, the
while reducing tax evasion and             relevance of the design was
avoidance. Only two investment             substantial, but it was weaker when
projects explicitly targeted increased     including tax policy measures.
tax collection. IFC Advisory Services      Moreover, while relying mostly on tax
aimed to reduce costs and time for         administration reforms was often
businesses to comply with tax              realistic and increased the chance of
regulation. Although they did not          success, it rarely addressed the major
target increased government revenue        structural weaknesses of the country
and almost never tracked increases in      tax system in terms of its capacity to


                                                                                ix
OVERVIEW


raise adequate tax revenue, while also      present in almost all reviewed
raising its efficiency and its equity.      operations. First, the tax-to-GDP ratio,
                                            the most common outcome indicator,
The tax components of DPOs have             is too broad to measure the impact of
been rather less successful than the        the tax reforms supported by World
overall operations of which they were       Bank operations. Second, in the
a part. Tax objectives were achieved in     absence of satisfactory
72 percent of DPOs while 81 percent of      output/outcome indicators, M&E was
these operations met their                  often confined to monitoring prior
development objectives. DPOs tended         actions and triggers. Third, while in
to be more successful in supporting         some cases the tracking of progress
tax administration reforms than tax         indicators and actions was good, it
policy changes, possibly because the        was less successful in tracking results
latter encountered significant              and little evaluative material is
backtracking and political opposition.      available to explain why objectives
                                            were or were not achieved. Only in
Even when successful, implementation
                                            one case were specific indicators
of investment projects was marred by
                                            added to measure the direct effect of
significant delays and only 4 out of the
                                            tax administration improvements on
15 implemented projects were not
                                            tax revenue collection.
restructured.
                                            A substantial body of analytical and
As for the rest of the portfolio,
                                            diagnostic work typically informed
monitoring and evaluation remains a
                                            the design of DPOs, but there is little
work in progress. Improvement
                                            or no reference to such work on tax
occurred over time in programmatic
                                            policy and administration issues in
DPO series. Successful monitoring and
                                            ICRRs. Most of this work may have
evaluation (M&E) practices in
                                            been done by the International
operations include reliance on strong
                                            Monetary Fund (IMF), especially for
government monitoring systems,
                                            countries with an IMF program or
alignment with the government’s
                                            where there was a specific tax revenue
results and monitoring frameworks,
                                            mobilization objective. For 70 percent
and harmonizing with donors
                                            of the reviewed DPOs with an
providing budget support. While a
                                            objective to raise national tax
strong Bank team in the field facilitates
                                            collection, prior actions and triggers
good monitoring, challenges remain,
                                            on taxation might have been based on
including data limitations and
                                            analysis carried out for parallel IMF
inadequate monitoring frameworks
                                            operations. This is the case in stand-
linked to institutional capacity
                                            alone crisis response DPOs but also in
limitations. Some challenges were
                                            countries where the World Bank has
more specific to tax components and


x
                                                                         OVERVIEW


been supporting tax reforms over a         Considerations of tax system
long period of time. The Indonesia         efficiency and equity are
development policy loan (DPL) series       conspicuously missing from ICRRs
is the only exception. The analysis of     and most probably from ICRs and
the macroeconomic basis for the            project documents. While improving
operation in the ICR is described by       the structure of the tax system would
the ICRR as being quite limited and it     have been expected in the context of
takes the view that the program            programmatic DPO series spread over
should have included stronger fiscal       several years and even decades, few
measures in particular to further          policy operations supported
increase revenues. The 2013 IMF            improvement of efficiency (10 out of
Article IV report highlights the need to   80 reviewed DPOs in four countries),
deal with macroeconomic framework          all among those that supported an
as well as diagnostic work on              increase in tax collection. Among the
measures to address those imbalances,      operations that aimed at increasing tax
including on tax policy and                revenue while improving efficiency of
administration. Such analysis would        the tax system, none monitored
be expected in the World Bank’s            and/or reported on progress made
project documents.                         toward efficiency targets. Many DPOs
                                           in Latin America and Caribbean
Potential synergies between DPOs and       countries supported a mix of tax
investment projects with tax               policy and tax administration
components could be observed in only       measures that usually—with the
four countries. However, several           notable exception of Colombia—
observations are possible from that        included measures and prior actions
experience: an investment project in       providing for the elimination or at
parallel with a DPL in Armenia may         least reduction of tax exemptions.
have helped achieve DPO outcomes;          These largely failed to meet those
the investment project preceding a         goals. There was little reference made
DPL in Guatemala may have informed         in ICRRs to improving equity of the
the design of the tax component            tax system. The FY2005 Jamaica and
and/or supported the implementation        Colombia FY2014 stand-alone DPOs
of the subsequent DPL series; potential    are notable exceptions. Jamaica’s DPO
synergies between the investment           sought to reduce the unfairness of the
project and the DPO in São Tome and        income tax system toward lower-
Principe have not been fully exploited;    income groups. The Colombia DPO
and potential synergies have been          aimed to improve the progressivity of
mooted by the lack of government           the tax system and reduce the cost of
ownership in Pakistan.                     formal employment creation.




                                                                                xi
OVERVIEW


Lessons                                     administration measures that can be
                                            introduced under the executive
Lessons are drawn both from the             authority can deliver short-term
existing evaluation evidence (ICRRs         results. A number of country
and PPARs when available) and the           examples, especially in Latin America
findings of this review. Given the          and the Caribbean, where political
limitations of the available data and       opposition to structural tax reforms
evaluative material, the lessons drawn      has been strong and the tax-to-GDP
are provisional and need to be              ratio low compared to countries with
confirmed through deeper and more           similar level of development, illustrate
thorough evaluation work. The review        that point (such as Costa Rica and
raises issues not only for the design       Guatemala). For longer-term
and implementation of operations but        investment projects, sustaining
also for country programs and World         government ownership was an even
Bank Group strategic engagement in          greater challenge.
tax policy and administration reforms.
                                            Correcting structural and systemic
OPERATIONS                                  issues requires long-term sustained
While government ownership is a             engagement. While some positive
prerequisite for any policy reform, it is   results could be achieved through
particularly important for politically      limited and short-term tax
sensitive tax reforms. For many DPOs        administration measures or ad hoc
and their tax components, success           policy measures those have been
depended on government ownership            largely ineffective against structural
of the objectives and the program. This     tax system issues that require a
was the case in Dominican Republic          comprehensive and internally
stand-alone DPO and Guatemala DPO           consistent tax reform program. This is
series. Lack of government ownership        obvious for stand-alone DPLs with no
of program objectives in Colombia’s         follow-up as in the Costa Rica and
first DPL series and in the Pakistan tax    Dominican Republic stand-alone
program limited positive results. Tax       DPOs but it is also true in countries
reforms are not only technical, and         where the World Bank has been
institutional but also political and        supporting tax reforms over extended
government support for these reforms        periods through both programmatic
may fluctuate during project life.          DPL series and investment projects as
Design, monitoring, and supervision         in the Colombia and Guatemala DPO
should take that into consideration.        series.
Commitment can be supported
through close alignment with the            Maintaining good monitoring and
government’s reform program. Tax            supervision can help and has
                                            sometimes been missing. Maintaining


xii
                                                                          OVERVIEW


good monitoring and supervision            boost revenues (Costa Rica and the
helped DPOs and complex investment         Dominican Republic).
projects. Weaknesses in monitoring
and supervision hampered success.          STRATEGY
Extensive supervision of                   Tax policy and administration
implementation and of progress             reforms are usually necessary but not
toward achieving the triggers by a         sufficient. To bring sustainable
team with deep knowledge of the            improvement in government revenue,
country context and substantial            other well-functioning institutions,
quality monitoring contributed to          such as the judicial system, are
good results in some DPLs. For             necessary and other pervasive issues,
complex and ambitious investment           such as corruption, must be addressed
projects, which frequently had to be       across the public sector.
restructured, with extension of the
closing date, close monitoring and         The Bank may need in-house capacity
supervision and ability to adjust the      to conduct analytical and diagnostic
project’s design, if needed, were          work to support tax components in
especially important. Positive             DPOs, especially where the IMF does
experiences include the Paraguay DPO       not have a relevant program. DPOs’
and Mauritania investment project. In      prior actions and triggers in taxation
contrast, supervision weaknesses were      might have been based on the Fund’s
detrimental in Dominican Republic          analytical and diagnostic work where
and the most recent DPO series in          the IMF was implementing a parallel
Indonesia.                                 operation. This raises the question of
                                           whether the World Bank has the
Crisis can be an opportunity to further    capacity to perform analytical and
tax reforms and calls for flexibility.     diagnostic work related to taxation
The negative impact of the 2008 global     and might benefit from cultivating
economic crisis on growth and fiscal       such expertise. Recently, the World
position of a number of countries          Bank has taken a step in this direction
prompted large budget support from         by introducing analytical tools and
the international financial institutions   techniques to assess domestic resource
to maintain fiscal space for priority      mobilization (Taun Minh et al. 2016).
public expenditure. For a number of
countries, having a comparatively low      The potential synergies between DPOs
tax rate for their level of economic       and investment projects need to be
development and a long history of          better exploited. The Bank needs to
failed tax reforms, the dire fiscal        better coordinate the timing and
situation provided incentives to make      content of its support to tax revenue
politically sensitive tax reforms to       mobilization. Close partnerships with
                                           other international organizations at


                                                                                xiii
OVERVIEW


the country level are also important in   income and, to a lesser extent, middle-
this regard.                              income countries, because of the
                                          comparatively low proportion of
Trade-offs between increasing             people who pay personal income
government revenue and improving          taxes. In such contexts, redistribution
tax system efficiency on the one hand     objectives are more effectively fostered
and increasing equity on the other        through pro-poor public expenditure
would be clear entry points for World     than tax reforms. A holistic evaluation
Bank involvement in tax resource          of World Bank support to public
mobilization, especially under the        finance is needed to assess the World
shared prosperity agenda. The             Bank’s role and contribution. The
omission of equity considerations         review work done for this learning
from the tax policy and administration    note could be expanded in a number
component of DPOs might reflect a         of directions through an evaluation of
judgment that there are limits to         Bank Group Support to Public Finance
redistribution that can be brought        envisaged for FY2018.
about through tax reform in low-




xiv
1. Introduction
Taxation has become a major area of development support and advice since the 2011
Global Partnership for Development Effectiveness (OECD 2011). Several reasons for
this are likely: the potential benefits for state-building, growing desire to reduce
reliance on foreign development assistance, the fiscal impact of trade liberalization,
the financial and debt crisis in countries that provide development assistance, and
the acute financial needs of some developing economies.

“From Billions to Trillions: Transforming Development Finance Post-2015,” an
initiative spearheaded by the multilateral development banks and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) has increased the urgency for attention to taxation in
emerging and developing economies. This initiative, as well as the 2015 Financing
for Development Conference, has highlighted the need for emerging and developing
economies to support achievement of the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals
through domestic resource mobilization (DRM). This has helped focus attention on
constraints to growth, particularly in low-income economies, where domestic taxes
and foreign private and market-related borrowing do not expand enough to
compensate for declining flows of official development assistance.

The note reviews existing evaluative information on the World Bank Group’s support
to tax policy and administration reform produced by the Independent Evaluation
Group (IEG) over FY2005–15. Within the limitations of that information, it identifies
the drivers of performance as well as lessons to inform the future work of the World
Bank Group. While limited in scope and depth, this note is designed to open the way
for more thorough and deeper evaluation work, in particular through an evaluation of
World Bank Group Support to Public Finance envisaged for FY2018.

The rest of this chapter covers the World Bank Group approach and the
methodology used for the review. Chapter 2 describes the findings of the review
focusing on interventions designed to raise tax revenue. Chapter 3 presents the
lessons drawn from both the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICRs)
when relevant to the tax components and the findings of this review.


World Bank Group Approach
Over the review period, the World Bank did not have a specific strategy for DRM or
tax policy and administration reform. Its corporate strategies in the 2000s did not
mention DRM until 2013 when it was identified as part of a medium-term financial



                                                                                     1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
sustainability framework that aligns with the twin goals (World Bank 2013b). In that
context, revenue mobilization was considered part of the country’s overall macro -
fiscal policy framework and, to some extent, part of creating an enabling
environment for private sector development.

The World Bank supported DRM on a case-by-case basis. Such efforts were
prioritized in the context of consultations for the country partnership framework
and through ongoing policy dialogue on the macro-fiscal framework and investment
climate.1 So far, no specific guidelines, policy documents, or harmonized
frameworks have sought to guide World Bank work on DRM.

In IMF-World Bank collaboration at country level, tax policy formally has been a
responsibility shared between the two institutions since 1989.2 In practice, the IMF
has led on tax policy and administration reforms for diagnostics, advice, and
technical assistance, in part because of its technical expertise and the nature of its
programs, which emphasized short-term revenue and expenditure measures. The
World Bank, meanwhile, has been perceived as focusing its financing on tax
administration reform through longer-term investment projects.

More recently the World Bank and the IMF have actively engaged in the global
effort to design the 2030 development agenda. Each institution has committed to
new initiatives related to revenue mobilization, both within their respective remits
and jointly, to support partner countries in reaching their Sustainable Development
Goal. With increasing demand for tax reforms, the World Bank Group is expected to
play a greater role in supporting such reforms with a more integrated approach
internally and enhanced collaboration with other international institutions. The
launch of the World Bank-IMF Joint Initiative to Support Developing Countries in
Strengthening Tax Systems in July 2015, and the IMF, the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), the United Nations, and World Bank
Group Platform for Collaboration on Tax in 2016 (box 1.1) are early steps in this
direction.

The World Bank Group recently accelerated development of an integrated approach
to support clients and engagement in the global policy dialogue on taxation. A
Global Tax Group has been created to champion tax work in countries. That group
has been involved in preparing, implementing and monitoring DRM tools for
country-level work and taking stock of World Bank Group support to DRM. DRM
has become an International Development Association (IDA) 18 Special Theme as
part of IDA18 commitment to enhance resilience of IDA countries and spur growth
(World Bank 2017).




2
                                                                                         CHAPTER 1
                                                                                      INTRODUCTION

 Box 1.1. Recent International Partnerships on Tax Policy and Administration Reforms
 In July 2015, the World Bank and the IMF committed to a joint initiative to help countries
 strengthen their tax systems. Raising additional revenues is crucial to finance development in a
 sustainable manner. The World Bank-IMF initiative has two pillars: (i) deepening the dialogue
 with developing countries on international tax issues, aiming to help increase their voice in the
 international debate on tax rules and cooperation, and (ii) developing improved diagnostic tools
 to help member countries evaluate and strengthen their tax policies (World Bank 2015b).
 In April 2016, the IMF, the OECD, the United Nations, and the World Bank Group committed
 to jointly intensify their cooperation on tax issues and launched the Platform for Collaboration
 on Tax. The aim of the platform is to support developing countries in strengthening their tax
 capacity and dealing with key international tax issues.
 Source: World Bank 2016c.


One of the pillars of the World Bank–IMF Joint Initiative to Support Developing
Countries in Strengthening Tax Systems includes the development of “improved
diagnostic tools to help member countries evaluate and strengthen their tax policies”
(World Bank 2015b). Common diagnostic tools have been developed by the World
Bank and the IMF, such as the Tax Administration Diagnostic Assessment Tool,
which was launched in 2015 and is now operational in 30 countries. A Tax Policy
Assessment Framework is under preparation. Other tools used by the World Bank
include the fiscal incidence analysis developed with the Commitment to Equity
Assessment, the Custom Assessment Trade Tool kit, an integrated tool for
measuring customs performance across countries and over time and the Integrated
Assessment Model for Tax Administration.3

International Finance Corporation (IFC) engagement on business taxation has been
done through advisory services on investment climate reforms. The IEG evaluation
of World Bank Group support to investment climate reforms found that IFC support
was implemented through advisory services projects that tended to be standardized,
narrowly focused, short-term, and rapidly implemented (World Bank 2015 a). The
same evaluation noted that World Bank Group support to investment climate
reforms tended to be heavier in the regulatory areas, such as business registration,
taxation, and trade, which are covered by the most common diagnostic tools: Doing
Business and Enterprise Surveys.

IFC Advisory Services projects on business taxation have focused on tax
administration reforms rather than on tax policy. Those reforms have usually been
carried out along with other investment climate reforms and covering issues such as
starting a business, dealing with construction permits, and resolving insolvency.




                                                                                                     3
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
The tax payment aspects of the Doing Business indicators (payments, time, and total
tax rate for a firm to comply with all tax regulations) generally guides the business
tax work that often includes drafting and enacting tax laws. Harmonization of the
legal environment is sometimes addressed through regional projects (as in East
Africa). Similar business taxation interventions have also been used for advisory
services projects at the subnational level (India).

IFC relied more on government requests or stakeholder consultations when
designing investment climate projects than the World Bank did. Historically, IFC’s
investment climate projects have relied on the Facility for Investment Climate
Advisory Services diagnostic reports on administrative barriers. Over time, Doing
Business indicators have become a de facto diagnostic tool for IFC. Among the
projects that used a diagnostic tool to design interventions, 62 percent used the
Doing Business assessments.

Over the review period, IFC has increased its collaboration with the World Bank on
country strategy, culminating with the launch of the World Bank Group’s new joint
approach to country engagement in July 2014.4 It has done so through participation
in the development of the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework.
Where there was none, IFC has relied on its Regional Strategies to guide its activities
at the country level, but in this case there was no framework for assessing the
development impact of its interventions at that level.


Methodology of the Review
The note reviews World Bank Group support to tax policy and administration reform
(Thematic code 28 as defined by Operations Policy and Country Services [OPCS]; see
box 1.2.) approved and closed over FY2005–15, as provided through development
policy operations (DPOs), investment projects, and IFC Advisory Services on business
taxation (see appendix B for details). Except for five illustrative country examples,5 it
draws on three main sources: (i) a systematic review of ICRRs of identified World
Bank operations and EvNotes for IFC projects; (ii) Project Performance Assessment
Reports (PPARs) covering operations identified above and listed in appendix F, and
(iii) relevant country case studies from various IEG evaluations listed in appendix F.

The review has applied the World Bank Group evaluation framework embedded in
ICRs. The effectiveness of tax components (relevance and efficacy) has been assessed
based on the same effectiveness criteria as for operations and using IEG evaluation
evidence contained in ICRRs and relevant PPARs (see details on methodology in
appendix B).



4
                                                                                          CHAPTER 1
                                                                                      INTRODUCTION


 Box 1.2. Definitions
 Tax Policy and Administration Thematic code 28: This includes activities aimed at
 improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and fairness of public revenue systems, including tax
 policies and tax and customs administration at national and subnational levels of government.
 This category also includes activities related both to the economic analysis of tax policies and
 to the design and functioning of institutions related to tax and customs administration as well
 as the links between policies and institutions, and between tax and customs.
 It excludes activities related to the economic analysis of individual tariff policies (which falls
 under Trade and Integration) or activities that involve minor changes in tax rates or coverage,
 or changes in revenue administration that are not intended to affect or address systemic issues
 of revenue policy or administration.
 Efficiency: In this note, it refers to raising revenue while minimizing economic distortions in
 labor, consumption, saving, and investment decisions by individuals and businesses. In some
 project documents, tax efficiency also refers to minimizing the cost of complying with the tax
 code by reducing its administrative burden.
 Equity: Two criteria are essential for a tax system to be perceived as equitable—horizontal
 and vertical equity. Horizontal equity means that taxpayers who are similarly situated pay the
 same amount in taxes. Vertical equity requires that those who have greater capacity to pay
 bear a higher tax burden.
 Source: OPCS 2011; Tuan Minh 2016.


The review has been hampered by weaknesses related to the coding of operations
and the limited depth and breadth of existing IEG evaluation evidence on World
Bank Group support to tax reforms (appendix B). Cross-checking with the OPCS
database on prior actions and a series of PPARs covering tax issues in operations not
coded for tax suggest that using the tax policy and administration theme code
assigned by task managers to identify tax components probably leads to
underestimating actual World Bank support to tax reforms.6 As a result of the
limitations of existing IEG evaluation evidence, a number of the guiding questions
identified in the Concept Note could not be addressed properly. The learning note
therefore focused on the description of the tax portfolio and tax components and on
questions related to development effectiveness (box 1.3). Given the subject matter,
the diversity of tax reform objectives, and the overwhelming share of DPOs in the
portfolio of support for tax reforms, illustrative country examples have been chosen
mostly from among the DPOs targeting an increase in tax revenue collection.




                                                                                                      5
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

    Box 1.3. Guiding Questions for the Review
    Descriptive questions. What are the specific tax-related objectives supported by the World
    Bank Group? What is the content of the tax-related programs supported by the World Bank
    Group? What is the results chain?
    Development effectiveness. Includes two subsets of questions:
    Design or relevance: On which basis taxation was prioritized? To what extent, project design
    was based on appropriate knowledge and diagnostic work by the World Bank or other
    development partners? To what extend tax reform measures supported by the operation were
    part of a comprehensive tax reform strategy and cognizant of a country tax system approach?
    What attention was given to timing and sequencing? To what extent the World Bank Group
    operation was coordinated at the diagnostic and design stages with other development
    organization support in this area including IMF, Regional Development World Banks,
    EuropeAid, OECD, and the United Nations Development Programme?
    Implementation or efficacy: Have the tax operations achieved their intended objectives? To
    what extend have these operations contributed to increase government revenue in a
    sustainable way? Are there any unintended positive or adverse impact?
    World Bank Group performance: What is the World Bank Group performance in ensuring
    quality at entry? Supervision? In partnering with the government and other development
    institutions?
    Borrower performance: What was the government ownership and commitment? What was
    the performance of the implementing agency?
    Monitoring and evaluation: What are the key challenges in designing, implementing and
    using an effective monitoring and evaluation system at the project level? To what extent the
    impact of the tax reform has been evaluated? To what extent the impact of the World Bank
    Group contribution to the country-level results have been evaluated?
    Lessons: What are the key challenges is raising tax revenue collected and key success drivers?
    What are the lessons for replicating good practice in other countries? What are the lessons
    regarding partnerships? In terms of evaluating the impact of tax reforms?
    Source: IEG 2016.




1Over the review period, the World Bank terminology changed two times from country
assistance strategy to country partnership strategy and to the Country Partnership
Framework. Given these changes in terminology did not modify fundamentally the nature
of the exercise, as far as domestic resource mobilization is concerned, unless otherwise
mentioned, this note uses the latest terminology.
2As set out in a concordat that defined the terms of cooperation between the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank The “Concordat” refers to the joint
memorandum from the president of the World Bank and the managing director of the IMF
entitled Bank/Fund Collaboration in Assisting Member Countries (SM/89/54, Revision 1
and R89-45), March 31, 1989.


6
3The Commitment to Equity methodology was designed to analyze the impact of taxation and
social spending on inequality and poverty in individual countries (Lustig and Higgins 2013).
Led by Nora Lustig since 2008, the Commitment to Equity project is an initiative of the Center
for Inter-American Policy and Research and the Department of Economics, both at Tulane
University, along with the Center for Global Development and the Inter-American Dialogue.
The Commitment to Equity project is housed in the Commitment to Equity Institute at Tulane.
For more details, visit www.commitmentoequity.org. It has and has been developed and used
since 2008, closely working with the World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank and
United Nations Development Programme.
4IEG’s forthcoming evaluation of Systematic Country Diagnostic and Country Partnership
Framework Process will provide insights on World Bank and IFC collaboration at country level.
5 For five countries in the Latin America and the Caribbean Region—Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and Peru—additional material was used from the World
Bank’s advisory and analytic work in the country, as well as work by the IMF and OECD, as
listed in the references.
6Vietnam: Public Financial Management Reform Investment Projects (2016); Vietnam PRSCs 6-
10 (2015); Uganda PRSCs 5-9 (2015); Tanzania PRSCs 1-8; Zambia public financial management
reform investment project (2016).




                                                                                                 7
2. Findings
This section covers both descriptive and evaluative findings. It describes the
characteristics of the portfolio and reviewed operations as well as the structure and
content of tax components. The evaluative findings cover two dimensions of
effectiveness (relevance and efficacy) and the quality of monitoring and evaluation.
It also reviews three aspects of effectiveness of particular interest in the case of tax
reforms, namely analytical and diagnostic underpinnings, synergies between DPOs
and investment projects, and efficiency and equity.


Description of World Bank Group Support
Over the FY2005–15 periods, the World Bank supported tax policy and
administrative reforms through 205 projects in 107 countries. These projects had
total commitments of $28.4 billion, of which $5.4 billion targeted tax reforms. The
bulk of that support was provided through DPOs, with investment projects
accounting for a relatively small share of the total commitments (appendix A).
Three-quarters of the DPO commitments were delivered through programmatic
operations rather than through stand-alone operations. Two Program-for-Results
(PforRs) operations with tax components were approved and are still active and
therefore are not included.

This portfolio has several notable features:

     Tax reform was a relatively minor component of most operations,
       predominantly in the 10–14 percent range (tax code share) and about 19
       percent of total commitments (19 percent for DPOs and 23 percent for
       investment projects).
     About two-thirds of the commitments for tax operations were delivered by
       the World Bank’s Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice;
       the Governance Global Practice delivered 15 percent.
     In number terms, the majority of the operations were in Latin America and
       the Caribbean (32 percent) and Sub-Saharan Africa (30 percent). In
       commitment terms, Latin America and the Caribbean had the largest share
       (42 percent), followed by Europe and Central Asia (19 percent) and East Asia
       and Pacific (19 percent).
     More funds were committed to tax reforms in countries classified as middle-
       income at the time the project was approved than in those classified as low-
       income. World Bank support for tax reforms has tended to go to countries


8
                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                               FINDINGS
       where the tax-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratio is between 10 and 20
       percent.

IFC Advisory Services in business taxation are much smaller than World Bank
operations and are usually a small part of investment climate advisory services
addressing other issues related to the regulatory environment.

The review of World Bank support covers 98 closed operations for which an ICRR is
available (see appendix A). The total commitments for reviewed projects amounted
to $16.8 billion, or 59 percent of the commitments for operations supporting tax
policy and administration reform, while tax commitments amounted to $2.9 billion,
or 54 percent of the total tax commitments (table A.1; figure A.6).

The composition of the reviewed portfolio does not differ significantly from the
overall portfolio. Among reviewed operations, DPOs accounted for 80 percent of total
operations (80 operations) and 96 percent of commitments to tax reforms ($2.8 billion).
Investment projects represent 18 percent of the reviewed operations (18 operations)
and 4 percent of the total tax commitments reviewed ($122 million) compared with 36
percent and 11 percent respectively in the overall portfolio.1 About three-quarters of
DPO support to tax reforms was delivered through programmatic series in terms of
both numbers of operations and commitments. (For more details see appendix A.)


Tax Reform and Domestic Revenue Mobilization
World Bank Group operations supported a variety of tax-related objectives,
including increasing tax revenue. The full variety of tax objectives can be mapped to
the overarching results chain described in appendix C and summarized below.

Support for tax reforms was part of operations mostly designed to meet one or more
of several macro objectives: promoting fiscal sustainability and macroeconomic
stability; improving private sector investment climate; strengthening export
competitiveness; or improving governance and transparency in public resource
management.

The type of measures supported can be organized into two categories: improving tax
policy which include broadening the tax base and simplifying tax rates, and
strengthening tax administration. In effect, these measures are usually not
independent, especially when considering the medium and long-term development
perspective—as should be the case for World Bank Group operations.




                                                                                      9
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
Some additional governance objectives were common, such as increasing
transparency, equity, and fairness as a means to strengthen state legitimacy and
effectiveness. The World Bank’s interventions targeted taxation and revenue
mobilization objectives mostly at the national government level and sometimes at
the state level in federal states (Argentina, Brazil, India, Nigeria, and the Russian
Federation). However, some few operations targeted provincial, district, and
municipal governments. For example, the Peru Programmatic Decentralization and
Competitiveness series supported fiscal decentralization measures at regional (25
regions) and municipal levels, which include provincial municipalities (196
provinces) and district municipalities (1,869 districts).

The reviews of DPOs conducted for this note highlighted two aspects of taxation.
First, tax policy measures, by changing rates or broadening the base, help raise
revenue. Second, investment climate assessments show that tax policy and
administration are an element of the business environment that managers of firm
report as a constraint of more than average importance to their operations. Since all
firms in a country face the same tax system, tax policy and administration have the
characteristics of a public good and, therefore, their provision is a matter of public
governance.

Tax components in World Bank operations have been designed to further an
improved investment climate or, if they seek to enhance revenue, to enable fiscal
consolidation (the latter accounting for 60 DPOs out of 80; a list of which is in
table B.1). The relative emphasis depended on country and context and varied over
time in the same country. For example, the World Bank provided support to
Jamaica2 to address fiscal distress arising from the 2008 global crisis through both
tax policy and tax administration measures designed to raise tax collection while
increasing the fairness of the tax system. In Indonesia, tax policy and tax
administration measures were used to both raise revenue and improve the
investment climate with the emphasis shifting away from raising non-oil and gas tax
revenue (Development Policy Loans [DPLs] 1–2) toward reducing the tax burden
and enhancing voluntary compliance by strengthening tax administration to help
achieve the development outcome objective of improving the investment climate
and promoting investment and exports (DPLs 3–8). More emphasis to increasing
non-oil and gas tax revenue was given in the subsequent programmatic
Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and Investment (DPLs 1–2. Guatemala’s
first programmatic series featured a tax reform component that sought to improve
tax collection through both tax policy and tax administration measures. The series
also supported measures to strengthen customs and improve business taxation as
part of an investment climate reform package designed to facilitate trade and
improve export competitiveness. The second series had similar objectives with a


10
                                                                               CHAPTER 2
                                                                                FINDINGS
reversed prioritization of the creation of fiscal space through raising tax collection
over growth. The third series, had an objective on strengthening tax administration
and tax policy to increase tax revenue and finance social policies. Both DPO series in
Peru aimed at fostering fiscal sustainability and strengthening economic
competitiveness. Fiscal sustainability was to be achieved through public finance
reforms including tax reforms and both series targeted an increase in tax collection.
Tax policy measures aimed at broadening the tax base mostly through eliminating
tax exemptions while tax administration measures aimed at improving tax
compliance. In Armenia, in addition to raising tax revenue to ensure fiscal
sustainability, the link in World Bank–supported DPOs was also from the reform of
the administration of tax and customs to strengthening governance.

Investment projects supporting tax and customs administration reforms aimed to
improve effectiveness and efficiency of public finance administration, though not
specifically increasing tax revenues (list in table D.4). They indirectly served the
general goals of tax systems, such as collecting financial resources, promoting
private investment and employment, and increasing transparency, accountability,
and fairness. Improving the effectiveness and efficiency of tax administration was
expected to reduce the cost of compliance for taxpayers and public revenue
administration, while also reducing tax evasion and tax avoidance and providing a
level playing field for business. Out of the 18 project reviewed, only 2 had an explicit
tax collection target (Cambodia and Philippines).

IFC Advisory Services on business taxation were typically packaged with services
designed to improve business regulations and the investment climate and were
unrelated to increasing tax revenues (see appendix E, table E.2). The business taxation
components aimed to reduce costs and time to comply with tax regulations related to
corporate income and other profit taxes, as well as social contributions and labor taxes
and sometimes other taxes paid by the employer as well.3 These interventions included
the creation of tax brackets, reducing frequency of reporting from monthly to
quarterly, combining taxes, rationalizing administrative processes—through
elimination of duplicate inspections by tax authorities, simplification of code, and
providing “commentary” to improve comprehension or reduce uncertainty—
introduction of information technology and mobile methods of payment, and
introduction of taxpayer appeals systems.

Given the short-term nature of IFC Advisory Services, the links with macro and
broader development objectives were rarely made. For instance, the link with
improved firm-level productivity was not made in Albania. Similarly, the link to
increased investment from domestic and foreign sources was not made in Albania or
Republic of Yemen. Except for Rwanda and the Republic of Yemen, the IFC projects


                                                                                      11
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
did not explicitly link project activities to the objective of increasing government
revenue. Even then, these macro objectives were not tracked under the project
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and there were no results chains or
counterfactuals.

Given the subject matter, the diversity of tax reform objectives, the overwhelming
share of DPOs in the portfolio of support for tax reforms, and because support to
business taxation reforms has already been evaluated as part of the investment
climate evaluation, the rest of this chapter focuses on support to increasing tax
revenues through DPOs (World Bank 2015 a). In particular, illustrative country
examples have been chosen from among the 60 identified DPOs targeting an
increase in tax revenue collection to reflect the diversity of country contexts, regions,
and time periods (preglobal crisis, FY2005–08; crisis response, FY2009–10; and
postcrisis, FY2011–15). To avoid duplication with other IEG evaluation work, no
country example has been selected from among fragile and conflict-affected
situations or resource-rich developing countries. However, to allow for meaningful
comparisons in the Latin America and the Caribbean Region, countries with
significant natural resources, such as Colombia and Peru, have been included. The
13 illustrative country examples and the corresponding 36 reviewed operations are
highlighted in table B.1.

The review of tax components in investment projects is in appendix D and the
review of Business Taxation in IFC Advisory Services is in appendix E.


Relevance
Among the reviewed operations, especially for tax components that aimed to raise tax
collection, the relevance of objectives was usually substantial and relevance of design
was modest. Though the assessment of relevance in ICRRs typically applies to an
entire operation, it is usually possible to infer the relevance of the tax components,
especially where the component was part of flagship programmatic DPO series under
the country partnership strategy or taxation was a significant project development
objective. In such cases, the ICRR has a more substantial discussion of how it arrived
at the overall rating, even if the tax objective is not separately rated. This is usually the
case when the tax component was aimed primarily at raising tax revenue to improve
fiscal sustainability or to increase or maintain fiscal space for priority public
expenditure.

For most of the reviewed operations, the relevance of objectives was substantial or
higher. Generally, the DPOs, especially when part of a programmatic series, were



12
                                                                               CHAPTER 2
                                                                                FINDINGS
flagship operations and were well aligned with the government’s reform program
and, where they existed, with poverty reduction strategy programs. Where that was
true, there was little question about the relevance of objectives. This was the case for
the Indonesia DPL series, the Armenia Poverty Reduction Strategy Credit (PRSC)
and DPO series, as well as the Mozambique PRSC series.

Guatemala illustrates the point regarding the relevance of tax objectives derived
from the prominence of tax objectives in the country development strategy. Raising
tax revenue collection to fund an increase of public expenditure has been a
prominent reform objective since the 1996 peace agreement that ended 30 years of
civil war. The peace agreement even set a quantified goal: raise tax collection from 8
percent of GDP to 12 percent. In addition to a very low structural tax ratio,
Guatemala does not have any natural resource sectors to contribute to government
revenue.

The World Bank supported these objectives through a series of operations over
FY2005–15. The program included three flagship programmatic series with the
importance of the tax component increasing from a 14 percent share in the FY2006–
08 Broad-Based Growth DPL series to 33 percent in the FY2009–10 Fiscal and
Institutional DPL series and 50 percent in FY2013–14 Fiscal Space for Greater
Opportunity DPLs (table B.1).

The support to tax reforms aimed primarily at raising government revenue to create
fiscal space for higher public expenditure, including public investment to accelerate
growth and higher pro-poor expenditure during the global economic crisis as tax
revenue declined. Raising tax revenue was a major outcome objective in each of the
seven operations and tax-to-GDP ratio was an outcome indicator. In the FY2013–14
Fiscal Space for Greater Opportunity DPO, raising tax revenue was a project
development objective— “strengthening tax administration and tax policy.”
Creating fiscal space is still an outcome objective in the ongoing FY2013–16 Country
Partnership Strategy; its results framework was significantly revised and
consolidated in the Performance and Learning Review to focus on three objectives,
including enhancing tax administration.

The design relevance of tax components focused on tax administration measures
was generally substantial but weaker when including tax policy measures.
Moreover, while relying mostly on the tax administrative reforms was often realistic
and increased the chance of success, it rarely addressed the major weaknesses of the
country tax system in terms of capacity to raise adequate tax revenue, or improve
efficiency, and equity.




                                                                                      13
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
Guatemala’s experience also illustrates these points. Political opposition to
comprehensive tax policy reform was strong and vested interests were aligned to
maintain the status quo. Under the circumstances, the DPL series never sought
comprehensive reform and relied mostly on strengthening tax administration. The
relevance of the overall operation design was substantial in the first two series but
the ICRRs offer little information on the tax components, possibly because their
share of these operations was relatively small. Even if the tax-related objective of the
FY2013–14 series included strengthening tax policy, the ICRR argues that this
subobjective was not clearly defined and suggests that the government’s primary
objective was to raise tax collection through tax administration measures, not to
address economic efficiency and equity. Moreover, according to the ICRR, the
relevance of the design was modest because until the longstanding governance
problems that impair tax collection are addressed, technical and institutional
reforms like those supported by the DPOs would have only limited impact. The
ICRR finds that the program design did not contain any significant activities related
to this governance issue.

In the Jamaica DPL series, the policy measures consisted largely of structural and
institutional measures involving multiyear sequences and could not have been
expected to affect near-term fiscal performance. The ICRR found that the operation
underestimated capacity and institutional constraints in implementing a demanding
program.

In Colombia, two DPO series (seven operations) aimed primarily at increasing tax
revenue to reduce the fiscal deficit and improve fiscal sustainability through a
combination of tax policy and tax administration measures. Some tax reform
measures supported by these operations also targeted reductions in economic
distortions stemming from the tax system to improve competitiveness and reduce
the cost of labor as a way to strengthen economic growth (see appendix B, table B.1).

While the relevance of objectives was high, shortcomings in the design of tax reform
components in Colombia were repeated over time: extremely complex operations
with multiple and quite disparate objectives mirrored in diverse conditions; overall
direction of tax policy reforms not fully and clearly defined; and unclear links from
tax policy actions to program objectives, including some policy changes or reversals
contrary to the tax reform objectives and other internal inconsistencies. For the most
recent stand-alone operation (FY2014), many of the complex and highly technical
reforms would suggest structuring the operation as a programmatic series to sustain
dialogue and allow more time to achieve meaningful results, which was not the case
as no follow-up operation was envisaged.



14
                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                               FINDINGS

Efficacy of World Bank Support in Raising Tax Revenue
Given that World Bank Group support to tax policy and administration reform was
delivered as part, often a minor part, of broader operations, the ICRs and ICRRs do
not separately assess the effectiveness of tax components except when they constitute
a separate development objective. As indicated, to get an overview of the results of
World Bank support, all ICRRs of identified operations have been reviewed and the
evaluative material available has been used to assess the efficacy of tax reform
components. For World Bank operations, success is defined in the learning note as the
efficacy of the tax component or, following the World Bank’s evaluation framework
for operations embedded in ICRs and ICRRs, the extent to which stated outcome
objectives of these tax components were achieved.4

The tax components of DPOs seem to have been less successful than the overall
operation of which they were part. Tax objectives were achieved in 72 percent of
DPOs while 81 percent of these operations met their objectives.

DPOs that focused on raising tax revenue through tax administration measures were
mostly successful at national and subnational level; those that supported tax policy
to raise tax collection or improve tax system efficiency or equity were less successful.
As the evaluative material on prior actions is often limited in ICRRs, this has been
supplemented by a review of OPCS database on prior actions which are also coded
by OPCS for tax policy and administration theme. A selection of successful and
unsuccessful examples follows.

EXAMPLES OF SUCCESS
Prior action on tax administration in the Paraguay DPL required the tax office to
improve its capacity to audit large taxpayers and to increase the number of large
taxpayers audited. The results expected from these actions were achieved: of the
large taxpayers audited, the government conducted additional assessments on 75
percent, exceeding its goal of 70 percent; and the tax-to-GDP ratio, subject to
available information, met its target.

Enhancing revenue generation capacity was a subobjective of Mozambique’s second
PRSC series (PRSC 3-5). A Central Revenue Authority that integrates the general
administration of taxes and customs in a single entity was created (PRSC 3 prior
action) by law and regulations in September 2006 and became operational in
November 2006. Project development objective indicators (Creation of the Central
Revenue Authority and increase revenue as a share of GDP) were met; revenue-to-
GDP ratio reached 17.8 percent in 2009 against a target of 16.8 percent and compared
with a baseline of 15.6 percent in 2006. Tax reform implementation was good and


                                                                                      15
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
characterized by continuous efforts to improve the efficiency of the tax
administration, consolidation of taxes, and modernization of customs procedures to
facilitate trade. As part of the reforms, the 2007–2010 Information Technology Plan
(PDTI) for the Central Revenue Authority provided for the development of an
adequate system to manage and control information that supports all taxes (Prior
Action PRSC 4). Tax legislation was also strengthened following the December 2006
approval of new legislation on the fiscal regimes for the mining and oil sectors, the
new laws became effective in mid-2007 and regulations have since been approved to
implement them. In December 2007, parliament also approved new tax laws on
value-added tax and personal income tax. The new value-added tax (VAT) Code
simplified the previous code and clarified the list of VAT-exempt transactions and
exemptions for specific goods. The new Personal Income Tax Code simplified the
system of direct income taxation, and updated the income thresholds and tax
brackets. Without detailed analysis of the impact of tax reforms, it is not possible to
attribute the increase in revenue-to-GDP ratio solely to tax reforms as other
important factors affect government revenue especially in a resource-rich country. It
also not possible to attribute progress to specific tax reforms and/or donor
interventions.

Under Guatemala’s first and second DPO series, substantial progress was made in
improving tax administration. Under the first series, the number of taxpayers
increased and the percentage of late filers of VAT and income tax for large and
medium taxpayers fell. Under the second series, a number of actions were taken:
software was introduced for electronic submission of income tax withholding for
firms to ease paperwork requirements; electronic submission of income tax
withholding declarations was mandated; cross-checks between VAT declarations
and income tax submissions were performed; and a customs management system on
imports and exports, was implemented in major ports accounting for at least 30
percent of Guatemala’s total customs traffic. However, there is little information on
progress made in meeting some outcome indicators. For instance, progress on
reducing VAT evasion was not reported. In both series, the ICRRs reported
achievement of a tax-to-GDP ratio target, but attribution to World Bank–supported
tax measures cannot be ascertained. Under the first series, the tax revenues, which
were to equal or exceed 11 percent of GDP, increased from 11.5 percent of GDP in
2005 to 11.9 in 2006 and 12.1 percent in 2007. But because of the financial crisis, tax
revenues, especially customs revenues, fell to 11.3 percent of GDP in 2008. Under the
second series, the tax-to GDP target had to be revised to not falling below 10.4
percent.

Highly successful fiscal reforms were implemented in Orissa State of India. Revenue
increased from 6.3 percent to 9.2 percent of the state’s GDP. The rise in the ratio of


16
                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                               FINDINGS
tax revenue-to-GDP resulted from multiple factors: systematic efforts to modernize
the tax administration, which led to an increase of the state’s revenue from 5.6
percent of its GDP in 1999–2000 to 9.2 percent in 2007–2008; anticorruption measures
that contributed to improved tax compliance; the increase in central tax revenue and
of the share of poor states; and investment climate reforms that led to an acceleration
of private sector-led growth and buoyant revenue collection. While these
developments are encouraging and are a good example of the value the World Bank
can add in large federal countries where subnational engagement can be critical to
delivering assistance, the ICRR notes that Orissa’s strong fiscal and economic
performance in the period reviewed cannot be attributed solely to the project.

LESS SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLES
Under two programmatic series in Peru, the tax-to-GDP ratio increased nearly as
targeted. However, limited progress was made in eliminating tax exemptions; the
main tax measure supported by the programs underpinning these targets.
Furthermore, without an evaluation of the contribution of tax reforms implemented,
it is not possible to disentangle how much of the variation in the tax ratio is due to
variations in mineral prices, making it difficult to attribute any improvement to tax
measures supported by the operations.

Modest progress was made in increasing non-oil tax revenue collection and
improving tax system efficiency under Colombia’s second DPO programmatic
series. The Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) indicates that the
value of the non-oil tax revenues relative to GDP—12.9 percent in 2013—was below
the revised target (13.5) but above the initial one (12.5). This modest improvement is
attributed to the elimination of tax credits for investments, as well as to closing
loopholes in the financial transaction tax. However, the ICR does not provide
information on the status of an expected phase-out of the financial transaction tax (a
major distorting tax introduced during the first DPO series) and the wealth tax or on
the impact of new tax initiatives not supported by the operation on tax performance.

It is too early for a definitive assessment of Colombia’s 2012 tax reform supported by
the FY2014 stand-alone DPL, but the impact on equity seems likely to have been
positive though modest. Among its other provisions, the tax law passed in
December 2012 amended the income tax schedule to make it more progressive,
lowering effective rates for the bottom 99.6 percent of tax payers and raising them
for the top 0.4 percent; introduced revenue-neutral changes to the VAT with a
higher rate on luxury goods; introduced a new corporate profits tax; and reduced
payroll taxes for low wage workers to stimulate formal sector employment.




                                                                                    17
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
A performance indicator measuring direct taxes paid by the top 0.4 percent of income
earners was not reported. However, government data show a modest rise in effective
tax rates for the top 30 percent of earners and a sharp fall for the bottom 10 percent.
Also, the share of income tax revenue paid by the top 10 percent rose from 56.8
percent to 58.4 percent. Such results strongly suggest a more equitable tax burden. At
the same time, effective income tax rates remain very low, limiting the overall
redistributive effect, while taxation at the very top of the income distribution remains
highly regressive. Changes in the VAT are thought to have had little distributional
impact and no data are presented about collections from the luxury tax. Revenue from
the new corporate tax reached 1.6 percent of GDP in 2014, well above the target of 0.6
percent. The incidence of the corporate tax reforms is not known, though likely the
impact on equity was positive. According to official data from the National Statistical
Office, the Gini coefficient declined from 0.538 to 0.522 in 2012–15, while simulation
studies and labor market data indicate a shift of employment from the informal to
formal sector.

After decades of tax reforms in Colombia, the main structural tax problems are still
prominent and non-oil tax collection remains low by international and regional
standards. Tax revenue-to-GDP ratio was estimated at 14.5 percent in 2015, below the
precrisis level (15.2 percent). In their latest country reports, the OECD and the IMF
urge Colombia to undertake comprehensive reform of the tax system to increase
fairness, growth, and revenues (OECD 2015, IMF 2016 a). Increased tax collection
could be achieved by reducing tax evasion—estimated between 2 and 4 percent of
GDP (OECD 2015)—and reducing or eliminating distortionary tax exemptions
estimated at 1.5 percent of GDP (IEG crisis response evaluation Colombia case study,
World Bank 2010).

Jamaica’s tax reforms made limited progress due to backtracking and difficulties in
implementation. In all three DPOs, tax policy and administration improvement was
a separate development objective. Tax administration has improved, but no progress
has been made in tax policy reform and in improving uniformity of the tax code. The
stated intention of the government to move away from industry-specific incentives
to a more general system, and to gradually reduce their amount as part of the
comprehensive tax reform, has not been met. Total discretionary tax exemptions and
statutory waivers, a major cause of low tax revenue collection, exceeded revenue
collected in 2011.

The reform program reflected the government’s agenda and priorities at the time the
operation was designed, and the World Bank operation helped catalyze these
reforms with technical and financial assistance. The Ministry of Finance made
considerable efforts to move the agenda forward, but that effort was adversely


18
                                                                             CHAPTER 2
                                                                              FINDINGS
affected by the government’s inability to focus on the reform agenda in the run-up
to elections. Moreover, pending legislation had to be resubmitted after the
opposition won the control of parliament by a landslide and a new government was
formed in January 2012. These events illustrate the inherently political nature of tax
reforms. Despite this, it is difficult to explain why progress was slow in some areas
that were well under the government’s control such the preparation of a white paper
on comprehensive tax reform. Tax collection agencies were merged into the Tax
Administration of Jamaica, but this agency is yet to become a semiautonomous
authority as envisaged under the DPL program. This is due to the need to resubmit
related legislation to the new government. Progress in raising tax revenue and
improving fiscal sustainability was marginal.


Monitoring and Evaluation
Successful M&E practices in operations include reliance on strong government
monitoring systems, alignment with the government results and monitoring
frameworks, and harmonizing with donors providing budget support. While a
strong World Bank team in the field facilitates good monitoring, challenges remain,
including data limitations and inadequate monitoring frameworks to track results
linked to institutional capacity limitations.

While M&E was integral to the first (DPL 1–4) and second (DPL 5–6) programmatic
DPL series in Indonesia starting in FY2005, the ICRR for the first operation notes
that results frameworks and a detailed discussion of M&E were not widely used in
World Bank operations at that time. But by the sixth DPL the quality of M&E had
improved. The M&E framework relied on government statistics and surveys, while
the presence of a strong World Bank team in the field allowed for close monitoring
of the program overall.

The ICRR for the first Mozambique programmatic PRSC series notes that the
monitoring framework was well formulated in the program matrix for the
operation. However, indicators were not developed well enough to gauge the
impact of many of the reforms supported by the series. The quality also improved
over time. The ICRR for PRSC5 notes that the indicators and actions were aligned
with a subset of the government plan for reducing absolute poverty selected by
government and donors group providing budget support. Thus, the PRSCs
remained consistent with the government’s own monitoring framework and aligned
with the donors who provided general budget support. However, although a
number of monitoring instruments were adequate to track the implementation of
measures and main outputs, they fell short of allowing the measurement of results.



                                                                                    19
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
Further improvements in institutional capacity were needed to strengthen the
mechanisms for M&E and the government’s capacity to coordinate the overall M&E
framework and improve results orientation.

M&E was negligible for Armenia’s programmatic PRSCs. While M&E design did a
commendable job of providing baseline and target values for most of the indicators,
the target values were unrealistic in many cases and a good many had to be dropped
after PRSC2 and some target values had to be revised. Monitoring of progress in
program implementation was done by the World Bank while ascertaining compliance
with triggers for the subsequent operation, but the monitoring was hampered by data
difficulties. The analysis of the results framework suggests that not enough attention
was paid to collecting, analyzing, and using the data on results indicators
systematically.

M&E quality improved slightly in the subsequent DPO series in Armenia. But the
monitoring framework was still insufficient for tracking results. A number of results
indicators inadequately measured the intended outcomes and some objectives could
not be thoroughly assessed due to their poor definition. The ICR offers little
discussion of the use of data to either improve results or guide policy.

Some M&E challenges were more specific to tax reform components and present in
almost all operations that were reviewed. Colombia exemplifies the limitations of
the tax-to-GDP ratio as an outcome measure and of confining M&E to monitoring
prior actions and progress indicators. In Peru, while tracking of progress indicators
and actions was good, tracking of results was less successful and little evaluative
material is available to explain why objectives were or were not achieved.
Guatemala’s FY2009–10 programmatic DPL series is a rare case where specific
indicators were added to measure the direct effect of tax administration
improvements.

Beyond monitoring prior actions and triggers, M&E of progress in tax reforms in the
context of Colombia’s DPOs has been hampered by several limitations: lack of
comprehensiveness; lack of evaluation of the impact of various measures on tax
collection; insufficient time to allow for the full impact of tax measures to materialize.
The tax-to-GDP ratio was too broad to assess the impact of tax reforms on tax
collection. It was improved in the second series, which focused on non-oil tax-to-GDP
ratio. As for monitoring progress in increasing the equity of the tax system, indicators
proposed in the last DPO were not reported in the ICR.

The 2008 PPAR on the first series demonstrates how assessing efficacy on the basis of
compliance with prior actions and shortsighted progress indicators or weak outcome



20
                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                               FINDINGS
indicators such as the tax-to-GDP ratio can be misleading. While all ICRRs (except for
the fourth DPO) found that tax reform and administration objectives were achieved,
the PPAR found a lack of progress on tax reforms supported by the operations.

While the central government had made a serious effort to increase tax revenues since
the early 1990s, with good results—tax revenues rose from 10.3 to 14.9 percent of GDP
over 1995–2005—this improvement could not be attributed to the DPO series.
According to the 2008 PPAR, most of the increase in the tax collection beyond the
increase related to the acceleration of economic growth resulting from improved
terms of trade, would be explained by the very rapid improvement in tax
administration supported by a World Bank technical assistance project rather than by
the structural tax policy reforms supported by the DPO series which did not lead to
significant improvement of the tax system. While the government complied with the
formal conditions by enacting the 2002 and 2003 tax reform laws5, one of the laws left
in place most of the existing distortions in the tax legislation and the other worsened
the deficiencies of the system by increasing the tax on financial transactions.

The quality of M&E in Peru’s second DPO series was high. According to the ICRR, it
relied on an extensive and strong government M&E system, which is also used by
other donors. The World Bank monitored actions and reviewed implementation
progress based on various sources published by independent institutions. The ICRR
says nothing specific to the tax component but the discussion in the efficacy section
reports that there was no monitoring of the indicators that would have allowed (i)
an analysis of the results, (ii) an estimation of the impact of tax reforms, and (iii)
their contribution to the fiscal sustainability objective. Thus there is no evaluative
material to explain why progress on eliminating tax exemptions, one of the main tax
objectives, had been so limited.

The quality of M&E of Guatemala operations was substantial. The monitoring of
progress toward the targets and of actions to be taken was good. However, as the
reviewed ICRRs often noted, it focused on output rather than outcomes, thus
providing limited evidence to inform or measure the expected benefits. On tax
reform objectives, the ICRR for the third series provides some useful insights. The
replacement of tax-to-GDP ratio in DPL1 by the income tax-to-GDP ratio in DPL2 to
measure progress in strengthening tax policy and administration and raising tax
collection was inappropriate as the tax reform covered both direct and indirect taxes
as well as overall tax administration. The ICRR advocates keeping the broader
measure (tax-to-GDP ratio) and complementing it with specific targets for both the
direct tax ratio and the indirect tax ratio, as well as tax collection efficiency
indicators such as tax collection–to–tax administration cost ratio. The indicator on



                                                                                     21
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
the number of taxpayers could have been better defined to allow comparison with
prior rates of increase and to isolate trend effects.

On the positive side, monitoring has been used to conduct a number of activities to
better understand the impact of reforms, including analyses of the quality of tax
administration, and tax compliance. However, the results of these analyses have not
been reported in the ICR or in the ICRR.


Analytical and Diagnostic Underpinnings and IMF and World Bank Collaboration
A substantial body of analytical and diagnostic work typically informed the design
of DPOs, but there is little or no reference to such work on tax policy and
administration issues in ICRRs. Most of this work may have been done by the IMF,
especially for countries with an IMF program or where there was a specific tax
revenue mobilization objective. In those cases, prior actions on taxation might have
been based on analytical work by the IMF.

In both the Armenia PRSC1 and the Mozambique PRSC1, the ICRRs do not mention
any specific analytic work related to taxation. Although the Armenia operation was
based on a public expenditure review, poverty assessments, and a transport sector
review none mentioned taxation. The Mozambique operation was also based on
extensive analytic work but none of it, including a country economic memorandum
that might have been expected to mention it, covered tax-related issues.

In most other countries, especially when there was an IMF program, it is usual for
tax diagnostic work to be done by the IMF and the prior actions on taxation in DPOs
implemented in conjunction with IMF-supported programs might have been based
on the IMF’s own analytical work. Overall, 70 percent of the reviewed operations
with an objective to raise tax collection at the national level were implemented in
parallel with an IMF program.

Unfortunately, very few ICRs or ICRRs refer to World Bank collaboration with the
IMF or other donors on tax reforms, particularly the use of diagnostics, advice, policy
dialogue, or technical assistance. According to IMF reports and IEG PPARs, the IMF
led this work for stand-alone crisis response DPLs with no World Bank follow-up
macro-fiscal operations, such as in Costa Rica and Dominican Republic, but also in
countries where the World Bank has supported tax reforms over a longer period, such
as Peru and Colombia.

Costa Rica has had no follow-up operation to the 2008 crisis response stand-alone
DPL that targeted an increase in tax revenue. All recent diagnoses highlight the


22
                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                               FINDINGS
urgent need for fiscal consolidation, which would require raising tax revenue
collection. According to its May 2016 Article IV report, the IMF continues to provide
policy recommendations on macro-fiscal issues, including the strategy of fiscal
consolidation and tax reform with no mention of a role for the World Bank in these
areas (IMF 2016 a).

While the IMF Stand-By arrangement in the Dominican Republic expired in 2012
and the latest Article IV review was concluded in 2013, the IMF is providing
capacity building and technical assistance, including on strengthening the revenue
base and on customs administration (IMF 2013). Also, the 2013 PPAR highlighted
the critical role that the IMF played in monitoring and supervising macro-fiscal
policies and providing advice on tax reforms under the World Bank’s DPL.

Peru benefited from an IMF program, which provided a sound macroeconomic
framework. The World Bank worked closely with the IMF at all stages. The dialogue
concentrated on the macroeconomic background, setting of triggers, and assessing
risks, and estimating fiscal implications of the World Bank’s operations. Tax issues
were analyzed in the 2002 public expenditure review and the ongoing Systematic
Country Diagnostic covers a diagnosis of the tax system on both efficiency and equity
dimensions. In between, the thrust of technical assistance and advice on tax reforms
seems to have been provided by the IMF or donors other than the World Bank.

The 2008 PPAR for Colombia’s first DPL series concluded that most significant
progress in strengthening tax administration had been achieved with the support of
technical assistance projects funded by the World Bank and other donors, in
particular, the Inter-American Development Bank and IMF technical assistance and
advisory services rather than as a result of tax policy changes supported by DPOs.
ICRRs of more recent DPLs are silent on the technical assistance and advice
provided by the IMF and other donors. Such IMF support is apparently quite
significant. For instance, the most recent IMF Article IV report (IMF 2016 a) indicates
that for the past two years, it has conducted six technical assistance missions on tax
policy, custom administration, tax administration, 2012 tax reform, and attention to
new challenges for tax policy (IMF 2016 a). While the 2015 Systematic Country
Diagnostic for Colombia covers tax policy and administration issues, it refers mostly
to other external sources rather than in-house work, in particular OECD 2015.

The Indonesia DPL series present a rare case where there was no parallel IMF
program. The series, for which public expenditure, financial management, and
procurement were the dominant themes, sought to support reform efforts in
strengthening public financial management and enhancing poverty alleviation and




                                                                                        23
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
service delivery, with the public financial management objective calling for prior
actions in tax administration designed to improve tax compliance.

Although it had no program at the time, the IMF’s 2013 Article IV report for Indonesia
observed that “recent market volatility and reserve losses highlight the need to deal
decisively with macroeconomic imbalances and contain financial stability risks.”
These macro-fiscal risks were recognized in the DPL program documents, which
argued that the macroeconomic framework was adequate, as the World Bank was
dealing with macroeconomic issues through another (unspecified) operation.

However, the analysis of the macroeconomic basis for the operation in the ICR is
described by the ICRR as being quite limited. Moreover, the ICRR takes the view that
given the DPL series focus on public finances, and the fact that tax administration
formed part of its title, the program should have included stronger tax policy
measures to further increase revenues noting that this had become a primary focus of
the government.


Synergies between DPOs and Investment Projects
The reform of tax policy and administration requires a combination of changes in
policy and more time-consuming changes in the institutions tasked with
implementing them. The World Bank’s support through most DPOs had a broad
policy agenda going well beyond tax reform. To a much lesser extent, its support
through investment lending was designed to develop institutional capacity, including
that required to implement tax reforms. Support to capacity building also took the
form of nonlending technical assistance. However, IEG does not evaluate such
nonlending technical assistance.

There is little evidence of substantial positive synergies between DPOs and
investment projects focused on tax reforms. First, very few countries in the reviewed
portfolio had DPO series and investment operations that overlapped. Even
extending the review period for investment projects to those that closed over
FY2005–15, only few have overlaps. Second, when there was an overlap, the
investment project usually preceded the DPL series (Colombia, Guatemala, São
Tomé and Principe, and Pakistan). In no case did an investment project specifically
support a DPO series.

This limited experience summarized below supports several observations: an
investment project in parallel with a DPL may help; an investment project preceding
a DPL may inform the design of the tax component or support the implementation
of the DPL series; potential synergies between the investment project and the DPO


24
                                                                              CHAPTER 2
                                                                               FINDINGS
have not been fully exploited; and potential synergies have been mooted by the lack
of government ownership.

In Armenia, an investment project in parallel with a DPL may have helped. The
thrust of the series was on regulation and competition policy. But tax policy and
administration also was considered important. A commendable feature of the PRSC
design was that it did not shy away from taking on Board reforms that were badly
needed but faced opposition from vested interests, such as the reform of the tax and
customs administration.

The Armenia’s PRSC design was also well integrated with other lending and
analytical activities supported by the World Bank under the country assistance
strategy. In many areas, such as education, health, irrigation, and utilities, the PRSC
supported policy and institutional reform, while investment operations in those
areas financed infrastructure and technical assistance. Notwithstanding the declared
importance of tax policy and administration, however, no World Bank-financed
operation was designed to enhance capacity in tax and customs administration.

Overall progress in strengthening Armenia’s tax and customs institutions was
modest at best. Several of the institutional reform initiatives supported under the
PRSCs—introduction of a self-assessment system, streamlining of the large taxpayer
unit, and direct trader input—were slow to take off and were still to be fully
mainstreamed by early 2010 when the ICRR was posted.

Progress under a subsequent DPO series supporting the adoption of international
management standards to improve public sector efficiency and effectiveness in tax,
customs, and public expenditure management was also modest. The slow progress
reflects not only the complexities of the underlying institutional reforms but also,
and more important, pushback from vested interests. According to the ICR, the
prevalent perception was that tax administration has improved, but not significantly
so.

While, the evaluative material does not support a clear inference that an investment
project to strengthen capacity in tax and customs administration in parallel with the
PRSC series would necessarily have yielded better outcomes such an operation
could have been an additional instrument in the World Bank’s arsenal.

In Guatemala, the tax components objectives of both the first DPL series and the
investment project which was approved eight years before, were substantially
achieved. Given the sequencing, the DPL series, which targeted mostly tax
administration strengthening, may have built on progress made under the
preceding investment project and may have used knowledge gained through the


                                                                                     25
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
implementation that project to design the tax component supported by the first DPL
series.

Colombia’s first DPL series was implemented in parallel with a public finance
technical assistance project designed to support the strengthening of the tax and
customs administration and public expenditure management. The DPO series had a
tax administration improvement component. The actions supported by the program
were taken from the modernization plan of the National Tax and Customs Office at
the Ministry of Finance, which was supported through the World Bank-funded
investment project. According to the 2008 PPAR, most significant progress in
strengthening tax administration had been achieved with the support of the World
Bank and other donor-funded technical assistance projects and IMF technical
assistance and advisory services rather than as a result of tax measures supported by
the DPOs.

The São Tomé and Principe DPO was designed to complement and support the
investment project. In seeking to introduce a simpler and more equitable tax system,
the DPO supported legislation creating new personal and corporate income tax
codes, both of which were adopted in 2009. The legislation set a rate on corporate
profits of 25 percent and established progressive personal income tax rates covering
all sources of income. The investment project, which aimed in part to increase the
capacity of the ministry of planning and finance to collect tax revenue, was able to
strengthen revenue administration using the new tax codes and procedures
resulting from the DPO prior actions. The tax-to-GDP ratio increased by 3
percentage points between 2005 and 2012.

This highlights the importance of DPLs in providing leadership on policy change.
Some of the DPO prior conditions removed bottlenecks that had impeded the
implementation of the investment project for three years. However, given that the
technical assistance project had been approved much before the DPO, it could not
play a supporting role relative to the DPO. The scope of the DPO was deemed too
ambitious, given the limitations of the country’s institutions, and its overall design
failed to adequately address institutional weaknesses. Potential synergies between
the DPO and technical assistance investment project were not fully exploited.

In Pakistan the tax content of a single-tranche DPO was very high (30 percent).
Originally conceived as part of a new PRSC series, the DPO was converted to a
stand-alone operation late in the processing cycle. The tax content of Pakistan
investment project was also high (40 percent). However, their implementation
overlapped by only a year: FY2005–12 for the investment project and FY2010–11 for
the DPO.


26
                                                                            CHAPTER 2
                                                                             FINDINGS
The tax aspects of the investment project aimed to improve organizational efficiency
and effectiveness of revenue administration, promote compliance through
strengthened audit and enforcement capacity and transparent and high-quality tax
services, and improve integrity and fairness of tax administration. These objectives
were far-reaching and ambitious and the project was substantially restructured and
scaled down in FY2011, a feature that further limited synergies with the DPO.

The project resulted in an increase in the number of taxpayers, reduction in customs
clearance time, and improved efficiency in completing administrative appeals.
However, resistance to reform, in particular an inability to secure consensus within
the government for a broad-based VAT, is cited as a factor compromising efficacy. In
fact, the tax-to-GDP ratio was lower at the completion of the project than in 2004.

The DPO, in addition to tax policy and administration, had debt management and
fiscal sustainability as its other major theme. Its implementation was marked by
half-hearted execution of the key actions needed to reduce the fiscal deficit, with
frequent delays and backtracking due to resistance by vested interests.
Consequently, it was not successful. There is no indication of synergies between the
two World Bank projects and, in any event, lack of government ownership rendered
the question moot. Under the circumstances, it is doubtful that better coordination
between the DPO and the investment project would have made much difference.


Efficiency and Equity
Efficiency. Conspicuously missing from ICR reviews of World Bank DPOs that
include tax policy and administration is any reference to actions to improve the
efficiency of the tax system. While consideration of such choices may not be
available to policy makers in the context of a single budget support operation
triggered by an emergency, such as the 2008 global economic crisis, improving the
structure of the tax system would have been expected in programmatic DPO series
that are spread over several years or even decades.

Among the DPOs that supported an increase in tax collection, very few aimed at
doing so while reducing tax system distortions. For those very few operations that
aimed at increasing tax revenue while improving tax system efficiency, none
monitored or reported on progress toward achieving efficiency targets. In Latin
America and the Caribbean countries, many of the DPOs supported an increase in the
tax ratio through a mix of tax policy and tax administration measures that in most
cases, with Colombia being a notable exception, included measures and prior actions
providing for the elimination or at least reduction of tax exemptions, a measure that



                                                                                    27
CHAPTER 2
FINDINGS
would have de facto contributed to reduce economic distortions and improve
efficiency. These attempts largely failed.

One Jamaica DPO was to reduce distortions and enhance the efficiency of the tax
system. However, the policies incorporated in prior actions to accomplish that
objective called for measures to reduce compliance costs and bring more corporate
and personal income taxpayers into the system. Increased ease of compliance,
desirable though it is in its own right, is different from the notion of whether the tax
system raises revenue at the lowest possible distortionary cost, which is the standard
notion of efficiency of the tax system.

Indeed, the ICR noted that uniformity of the tax system had not been achieved in the
earlier stand-alone DPO, hence leading to the adoption of a uniform tax code as a
prior action in the DPL series that followed. This is not surprising in the context of a
single budget support operation. But neither was uniformity achieved by the end of
the follow-up programmatic DPL series. The ICRR noted that large waivers and
exemptions continued. The evaluative material for the three DPLs does not explain
what is meant by uniformity of the tax code. But the context suggests that
nonuniformity referred to ad hoc exemptions introduced during implementation of
the tax reform; a feature that, with the exception of supplementary excise taxes on
items such as alcohol, fuel, and tobacco, would also be ruled out by an efficient tax
system.

Both Peru DPL series aimed at making the tax system more neutral (less
distortionary) and stable (more independent from mineral price cycles) through tax
policy and tax administration measures targeted at eliminating tax exemptions. Tax
policy measures focused on broadening the tax base by eliminating sectoral and
regional tax exemptions.

Under the first series, tax collection had been increasing steadily and reached 15
percent of GDP in 2006, well above the program target of 13 percent of GDP. However
much of the improvement was attributed to high mineral prices and the objective of
eliminating sector tax exemptions was only partly met. According to the ICRR of the
second series, substantial progress was made toward making the tax system more
neutral and stable, suggest modest progress. The target for central government tax
revenue to increase from 13.6 percent of GDP in 2005 to 16 percent end-2011 was
formally met (15.5 percent end-2011), but this represented only a 0.5 percentage point
increase compared with the level in 2006. The ICRR also noted that tax revenue
fluctuated between 14 and 16 percent of GDP over 2007–11, which was relatively low
compared with countries at a similar stage of development. Moreover, progress on
eliminating tax exemptions was limited as even though some exemptions in certain


28
                                                                                     CHAPTER 2
                                                                                      FINDINGS
regions were eliminated, new ones were added. In any case, actual progress in
reducing exemptions was not monitored and not reported in the ICRR.

Equity. ICRRs of World Bank DPOs that include tax policy and administration do
not refer to improving equity of the tax system. As for tax efficiency, very few
operations had equity as an explicit or implicit tax objective. The exceptions are a
Jamaica stand-alone DPO (FY2005) and a Colombia stand-alone DPO (FY2014), and
these provide little insight.

 The Jamaica FY2005 DPO supported a tax reform package designed to reduce the
unfairness of the income tax system toward lower-income groups by supporting
measures that raised the tax threshold by over 35 percent and increased rates for
high-income earners. They also imposed taxation of dividends, presumably in the
fields of this being a form of withholding tax on shareholders, who would typically
be higher-income earners. These actions would have had the effect of increasing the
progressivity of the personal income tax. Customs duties and license fees on selected
luxury products were raised as well. The ICR does not provide sufficient evidence of
whether changing rates reduced the tax burden on lower-income groups. According
to the report on the poverty and social impact of fiscal reforms (World Bank 2012),
the impact of tax reform on poor households was limited due to excise taxes
affecting items that are by and large demanded in larger proportion by better-off
households.

The Colombia stand-alone DPL of FY2014 aimed at improving the progressivity of the
tax system and reducing the cost of formal employment creation. As indicated above,
while it is too early for a definitive assessment of the 2012 tax reform, the ICRR
concludes that the impact on equity seems likely to have been positive though
modest. While encouraging, these results would need to be consolidated and
confirmed in particular through follow-up operations, a perspective that was not
discussed in the ICRR.


1Given that on average investment projects have a life of over 6 years, the filter applied for
selecting operations to be reviewed or being approved and closed over the FY2005–15 tend
to limit the number of investment projects reviewed.
2The first DPL—the Fiscal and Debt Sustainability DPL—was a single-tranche standalone
operation but the government’s medium-term reform program was ultimately supported by
this and the two succeeding First and Second Programmatic Fiscal and Debt Sustainability
DPLs. Thus, the three operations taken together can be regarded in effect as a programmatic
DPL series.




                                                                                             29
3 Including property taxes, property transfer taxes, dividend tax, capital gains tax, financial
transactions tax, waste collection taxes, vehicle and road taxes, and any other small taxes or
fees.
4For Bank operations, success is defined in the Note as the efficacy of the tax component or,
following the World Bank’s evaluation framework for operations embedded in ICRs and ICRRs,
the extent to which stated outcome objectives of these tax components were achieved. For IFC
Advisory Services, success of business taxation components is defined as for the overall
Advisory Services project.
5The most important objectives of the December 2002 tax law (788) was the elimination of
exemptions and the expansion of the tax base for the VAT. The December 2003, tax law (863)
made further improvements in tax policy, but also introduced new distortions to the tax system.




30
3. Lessons
Lessons are based both on the lessons highlighted in the ICRRs when relevant for
tax components of the reviewed operations and drawn from the findings of the
review. Given the limitations of the available data and evaluative material, the
lessons that can be drawn are provisional and need to be confirmed through deeper
and more thorough evaluation work. It should be kept in mind that lessons in the
available documents usually apply to the overall operation and not specifically to
the tax component, which typically accounts for a small part of the reform program
supported by the operation.

The review raises issues not only for the design and implementation of operations
but also for country assistance programs and World Bank Group strategic
engagement in tax policy and administration.


Operations
GOVERNMENT OWNERSHIP AND COMMITMENT
While government ownership is a generic prerequisite for any policy reform, it is
particularly important for politically sensitive tax reforms. For many DPOs,
success depended on government ownership of the objectives and the program.
ICRRs of both the Dominican Republic stand-alone DPO and the Guatemala DPL
series highlight this lesson.

In contrast, lack of government ownership of program objectives in Colombia’s first
DPL series limited positive results. The 2008 PPAR concludes that while the
government was committed to improving the country’s fiscal condition, it did not
actually share the objective of reducing fiscal rigidities, including on the revenue
side. Inefficiencies in the tax system actually worsened as a result of laws enacted
under the DPO program which included increasing the tax rate on financial
transactions. Lack of government ownership in the Pakistan stand-alone DPO also
compromised success.

For investment projects, which are usually implemented over a much longer period
than DPOs, sustaining government ownership was a major challenge. (See
appendix D.) The Mexican investment project illustrates the importance of political
ownership. When governmental interest for the project waned, it was eventually
cancelled. In the Philippines’ case the political ownership was weak during the tax
administration reform project, which led to unsatisfactory outcome. A country’s


                                                                                    31
CHAPTER 3
LESSONS
political situation and government ownership are important success factors and
should be accommodated in the project design. Hence, detailed assessment of the
political situation and government ownership may help.

Commitment can be ensured through close alignment with the government’s reform
program. Tax administration measures that can be introduced under the authority of
the executive can deliver short-term results. A number of country examples,
especially in the Latin America and the Caribbean Region, where political
opposition to structural tax reforms has been strong and the tax-to-GDP ratio has
been low compared with countries at a similar level of development, illustrate that
point. The first DPL series in Guatemala shows that policy lending is more likely to
achieve its objectives when it supports the government’s reform program and the
time frame for implementation takes into account the political barriers to reform and
the capacity of the government to carry out the reforms. Costa Rica’s stand-alone
DPL supported focused and limited tax objectives. This choice was realistic and
reasonable and, according to the ICRR, helped sustain government ownership and
enhanced the prospects for positive results.

Tax reforms are not only technical and institutional in nature but also political.
Government support for tax reforms may fluctuate during the life of a project, a
possibility that design, monitoring, and supervision should reflect. The Guatemala
Tax Administration technical assistance project addressed the creation of a new tax
administration in the difficult and sometimes hostile environment of Guatemalan
politics. Government support for the project’s activities waxed and waned with
changes in government: the project was approved under a supportive government
but most project activities were halted under the subsequent government that was
hostile to reforms. Then, under a third, more favorable government, project
implementation resumed and the project objectives were eventually met. The political
shifts were a major reason for a five-year extension of the closing date and a nine-year
overall project duration.

STRUCTURAL AND SYSTEMIC TAX ISSUES
Correcting structural and systemic issues requires long-term substantial
engagement. While some positive results could be achieved through limited and
short-term tax administration measures or ad hoc policy measures, those have been
largely ineffective against structural issues. Tax systems with structural flaws
require a comprehensive and internally consistent tax reform program, including
politically sensitive and controversial reforms. This is obvious for stand-alone DPLs
where there has been no follow-up, such as Costa Rica and Dominican Republic, as
well as in countries where the World Bank has been supporting tax reforms over
extended periods both through programmatic DPL series and investment projects,


32
                                                                             CHAPTER 3
                                                                              LESSONS
such as Colombia and Guatemala. In Colombia some of such ad hoc measures have
even worsened the tax system.

The Costa Rica stand-alone DPL had been designed as a prelude to broader tax
policy reform that the government was undertaking at the time the ICR was
prepared (March 2011). The broader tax policy has still not been approved and thus
has not been implemented. The tax reform approved in 2012 was nullified by the
Constitutional court and the 2015 tax reform package submitted to the parliament in
2015 has not yet been approved. Although the 2008 public expenditure review
(World Bank 2008) says little about tax revenue mobilization, it notes that reaching
consensus on revenue-enhancing tax reforms had proven difficult and cited a
previous failed attempt (the tax reform bills submitted to the Congress in 2006 had
not yet been discussed by the time of the public expenditure review). All recent
diagnoses highlight that fiscal consolidation is urgently needed and that entails
raising tax revenue collection (IMF 2016 a, 2016b; OECD 2016; and World Bank
2015).

The ICRR for the Dominican Republic stand-alone DPL concludes that most of the
objectives of the operation’s tax component were achieved, some through measures
taken under the DPL and others outside of its scope, but there is little evidence of
progress on reducing exemptions, the main tax measure in the program. The ICR
noted that the design of the tax policies was imprecise and lacked concrete targets or
policies. Although tax exemptions were identified and quantified as a prior action,
without a practical implementation plan there was little reason to expect that tax
policy and administration would improve and contribute to improved fiscal
sustainability. The 2013 PPAR noted that the achievement of tax subobjectives was
difficult to assess. It pointed out that while efforts were launched in a number of
areas, including improving tax collection, expected results would take much longer
to materialize than the period of the operation. Moreover, it highlighted a history of
back and forth on tax policies and administration depending on budget urgencies
and the influence of interested and powerful groups and that this was unlikely to
change.

Although the World Bank provided extensive support to Colombia on tax reforms
over the review period through DPLs, investment projects, and more recently
advisory services on business taxation (table B.1.), achievement of tax objectives was
modest at best and comprehensive reform of the tax system is still needed. Lowering
tax evasion, estimated at 2 to 4 percent of GDP (OECD 2015), and reducing or
eliminating distorting tax exemptions, estimated at 1.5 percent of GDP (World Bank
2010), could significantly increase tax collection.



                                                                                    33
CHAPTER 3
LESSONS
The ICRRs for the Guatemala operations point out the limits of short-term actions,
such as those carried out as part of the series programs, in supporting politically
controversial reforms. Given the difficulty of getting consensus and congressional
approval for comprehensive tax reform, the DPLs focused mainly on strengthening
tax administration. The DPLs also supported some tax policy measures but mostly
expedient ones, including the creation of ad hoc temporary taxes. Despite the support
to tax administration reforms and absent comprehensive tax policy reforms, the tax-
to-GDP, at 11 percent, is still below the 12 percent target set in the 1996 Peace Accords
and has not yet recovered from its precrisis level (12.1 percent in 2006 and 2007).

For investment projects, the design of tax system reform programs should
consider the country’s tax administration capabilities and limitations. Experience
suggests a gradual approach to enhancing these capabilities. Modernization of
revenue administration was one of the two components in the Cambodia project.
The achievement of it was substantial, in part due to careful design, recognition of
the limited public sector capabilities in this postconflict country, and through an
implementation program based on a series of relatively simple activities such as
administrative circulars or through promotion of banking sector for tax payments.

MONITORING AND SUPERVISION
Maintaining good monitoring and supervision helped in DPLs and complex
investment projects, such as the Paraguay DPL and Mauritania investment project.
By contrast, weaknesses in monitoring and supervision contributed to less success in
the Dominican Republic and Indonesia Institutional, Tax Administration, Social and
Investment (Indonesia) DPL series.

 The Paraguay DPL is a positive example of a DPL with a large tax share (32 percent),
extensive supervision during implementation, and close monitoring of progress
toward achieving the triggers. The team brought to the task deep knowledge of the
country context and its substantial quality monitoring contributed to good results.

For complex and ambitious investment projects, which frequently had to be
restructured and the closing date extended, close monitoring and supervision and
the ability to adjust the project’s design when needed were especially important.
Mauritania illustrates this point. The project anticipated reforms across five
ministries, and was supposed to be completed within three years. The closing date
was extended twice and the project was restructured. The project lacked a clear
results framework and M&E activities were not properly designed. This led to
challenges in implementation, project management, and cooperation with country
agencies. In time, good results were achieved through close supervision and
monitoring that helped identify and implement adjustments to the project design.


34
                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                                                LESSONS
The 2013 PPAR for the Dominican Republic stand-alone DPL pointed out that
monitoring arrangements were challenging to design in the time horizon of a single-
tranche operation and a crisis context. M&E was not fully designed by the operation,
as neither the World Bank nor the government collected and analyzed input, output,
and impact data in a sound and timely manner. As a result, the World Bank was
slow to identify and resolve threats to the achievement of the relevant development
outcomes. Weak monitoring and supervision was partially compensated by stronger
supervision in areas where there was policy overlap with World Bank sectoral
interventions in social sectors and health or with other donors’ support. This
included IMF support for macro-fiscal issues, tax collection, and fiscal sustainability.
In addition, owing to World Bank follow-up from the latter interventions, some
important measures supported by the DPL were eventually implemented and
results were achieved.

The quality of supervision and M&E for the Indonesia Institutional, Tax
Administration, Social and Investment (Indonesia) DPL series was low, which absent
a parallel IMF program, may have contributed to modest achievement of the overall
program and of tax objectives. The ICRR concludes that more systematic supervision,
monitoring, and reporting may have led to better results. Systematic formal
supervisory reporting can assist monitoring when there are significant modifications
to the program. There were changes in design between the first and second operation,
and the cancellation of the third DPL had implications for results and policy dialogue
that could profitably have been brought to management attention in a timely manner.

TAX REFORMS UNDER CRISIS CIRCUMSTANCES
Crisis can be an opportunity to further tax reforms and calls for flexibility. The
negative impact of the 2008 global economic crisis on growth and the fiscal position
of a number of countries prompted large coordinated budget support from the
international financial institutions to maintain fiscal space for priority public
expenditure. For some countries, having a comparatively low tax rate for their level
of economic development and a long history of failed tax reforms, the dire fiscal
situation provided the impetus and incentives for politically sensitive tax reforms to
boost revenues. In Guatemala and Peru, the World Bank was already engaged in
supporting tax reforms but in Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic this was not
the case. The crisis opened a window of opportunity to successfully introduce tax
revenue mobilization measures.




                                                                                      35
CHAPTER 3
LESSONS

Country and Corporate Strategy

Tax policy and administration reforms are usually necessary but not sufficient to
bring sustainable improvement in government revenue. Other well-functioning
institutions, such as the judicial system, are necessary and other pervasive issues,
such as corruption, must be addressed across the public sector.

The tax component of the Guatemala series was less successful in improving tax
collection in the third DPO series than in its two predecessors as progress in tax
policy and administration reforms was hampered by persistent governance
weaknesses that were not addressed. According to the ICRR, the evidence points to
improvements in income tax compliance offset by a deterioration of indirect tax
compliance, particularly in customs. The ICR’s assessment is that weak governance
of tax administration continues to undermine tax collection efforts.

One of the factors that negatively affected the performance of the São Tomé and
Principe stand-alone DPO was its weak design, which did not take into account
public sector institutional weaknesses and did not address those weaknesses.
Despite the fact that weak institutional capacity had been identified as an important
risk for the implementation of the grant, the program design did not include
adequate provision for strengthening the staffing of those institutions responsible
for addressing the main policy areas. The ICR also noted that the DPO design and
targets were too ambitious given the weakness of the country’s institutions.

On the other hand, the tax component of the Nigeria investment project was
successful as part of a project with a broader objective of supporting administrative
reforms, including procurement reform and support to the anticorruption agency.

The World Bank may need in-house capacity to conduct analytical and diagnostic
work to underpin tax components in DPOs, especially where the IMF does not
have a relevant program. As noted in the findings, most of the analytical and
diagnostic work on taxes may have been done by the IMF, and the definition of
DPOs’ prior actions and triggers may have been based on IMF work, raising the
question of the World Bank’s capacity to do this work in house. Furthermore, as
noted in the Indonesia example, the World Bank is expected to conduct its own
assessment of the macroeconomic framework in countries where development
policy lending is envisaged. Where that framework is deemed adequate, it can
proceed with DPOs without an IMF program. However, where the DPO has tax-
related actions, the government is concerned about the inadequacy of tax revenue,
and the IMF’s Article IV report highlights the need to deal with macroeconomic
imbalances, a fuller treatment of the macroeconomic framework as well as



36
                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                                                LESSONS
diagnostic work on measures to address imbalances, including in tax policy and
administration, would be expected in the World Bank’s project documents.

When there was an IMF program in parallel with the DPOs, prior actions and
triggers on taxation might have been based on the IMF’s analytical and diagnostic
work. If this is the case, it raises the question of whether the World Bank has the
capacity to perform analytical and diagnostic work related to taxation or needs to
cultivate such expertise in the context of the enhanced focus on domestic resource
mobilization. Recently, the World Bank presented analytical tools and techniques to
assess DRM that can be mainstreamed in public expenditure reviews and analytic
and advisory reports (World Bank 2016). While this is a step in the direction of more
in-house capacity to conduct such work, it would benefit from being part of a more
comprehensive strategic engagement program.

The potential synergies between DPOs and investment projects need to be better
exploited. The review has shown there was little experience with mutually
supportive DPOs and investment projects in tax revenue mobilization and that most
technical assistance was provided by the IMF, regional development banks, and
other bilateral donors. Under such circumstances, the World Bank would need to
better coordinate the timing and content of its support to tax revenue mobilization.
It also raises questions about how the World Bank is partnering with other
international organizations at the country level in this area. The recent joint paper on
enhancing the effectiveness of external support in building tax capacity in
developing countries (IMF and others 2016) shows how the level of support at the
country level is low and fragmented. Hence, the World Bank may want to clarify its
strategic positioning.

Trade-offs between increasing government revenue and improving tax system
efficiency on the one hand and increasing equity on the other could be clear entry
points for World Bank involvement in tax resource mobilization, especially under
the shared prosperity agenda.

It is nevertheless surprising that ICR reviews of World Bank–supported operations
in tax policy and administration reform do not refer to the trade-offs and choices
involved in reforming the tax system to increase its efficiency. For example,
measures to alter the corporate income tax rate would typically include whether
changes are required in depreciation allowances, since the two, together with the tax
treatment of dividends, affect the burden of corporate taxation. As another example,
closing exemptions in an existing VAT, by broadening the base, generally raises
revenue with less damage to efficiency than ad hoc taxation of intermediate inputs.




                                                                                      37
CHAPTER 3
LESSONS
To this must be added that the trade-off with equity is virtually absent from the
evaluative material on which this note is based. Evidence of a more rapid growth of
income among the top 1 percent in emerging and developing countries suggests that
tax systems should be made more progressive. That such choices were considered in
analytical work underpinning tax-related lending certainly cannot be ruled out. But
this is to be read in conjunction with an earlier observation that ICRRs do not refer
to analytic and advisory work the World Bank may have done on taxation.

The omission of equity considerations from the tax policy and administration
component of DPOs might reflect a judgment that there are limits to redistribution
that can be brought about through tax reform in low-income and, to a lesser extent,
middle-income countries, on account of the comparatively low proportion who pay
personal income taxes. In such contexts, redistribution objectives are thought to be
more effectively fostered through pro-poor public expenditure than through tax
reforms.

Some support for this view is provided by the DPL program in Indonesia, an
example of using tax reforms to create fiscal space that is then used to further equity
objectives through public expenditure. The first programmatic DPL series (DPL 1 –4)
was initiated when the country was graduating from IMF-supported programs
following the Asian financial crisis and during a transition from autocracy to
democracy. The reform focus of the program evolved as these changes took place.

The three development objectives of DPLs 1 and 2 were macroeconomic stability
and creditworthiness, the investment climate, and public financial management and
anticorruption. The World Bank’s support for reform of tax policy and
administration was directed primarily toward improving the investment climate
and secondarily toward raising non-oil and gas revenue to help bring about fiscal
consolidation. But as macroeconomic stability took hold, and fiscal space was
created for more pro-poor spending, DPLs 3 and 4 added a fourth area, improved
public service delivery, to the list of development objectives. Reflecting further
evolution of the program, the second DPL series (DPL 5–6) added another objective,
to improve service delivery to the poor. This objective called for increased funding
for poverty programs and improved poverty measures and targeting of poverty
programs.

As indicated in paragraph 1.4, the review work done for this learning note could be
expanded in a number of directions through an evaluation of World Bank Group
Support to Public Finance envisaged for FY2018 (box 3.1).




38
                                                                                        CHAPTER 3
                                                                                         LESSONS

Box 3.1. Future Evaluation Work on World Bank Group Support to Domestic Resource
Mobilization
Deepen evaluation work on taxation. First, the scope could be extended to cover more
systematically all support to tax policy and administration reforms, that is, tax components of
operations: (i) with other tax objectives beyond tax revenue mobilization; (ii) not coded for tax
theme code 28 by including DPOs with tax-related prior actions or covering tax reforms
(textual analysis of project description and project development objectives).

Second, the desk review of tax-coded operations based on ICRRs could be complemented by a
more thorough evaluation of selected operations. Priority could be given to programmatic
DPOs that specifically target an increase in tax revenue, in particular those that either had this
as a development objective or as tax-related prior actions. A more thorough review could
help answer some of the questions that emerge from this note including: (i) to what extent was
World Bank support to tax reform sustained over a period sufficient to reform the structure of
tax systems and (ii) to what extent were operations designed on the basis of thorough
diagnostic work led by the World Bank as opposed to being reliant on analytical work of other
development partners, such as the IMF? This would necessarily include a review of related
analytical work and nonlending technical assistance provided by the World Bank in this area.
This work should be done at the country level covering overall World Bank Group support to
tax reforms (World Bank operations and advisory services and analytics and IFC Advisory
Services) over a meaningful period that could serve as inputs to country case studies for
upcoming thematic or country program evaluations. More generally, this calls for
programmatic clustered project evaluations by country rather than for single projects or DPO
series.

Expand the evaluation scope to nontax revenue. Evaluation work could cover resource
mobilization through user fees, subsidies, and other domestic financing instruments. (See the
Concept Note for this report, World Bank 2016 a.) The scope could also be expanded to
resource revenue in resource-rich countries where revenue from natural resources can
represent up to 95 percent of government revenue (IMF 2011).




                                                                                                39
References
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, and Lant Pritchett. 2015. “How Business Is Done in the Developing
       World: Deals versus Rules.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (3): 121–40.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2011. “Revenue Mobilization in Developing Countries.”
        Washington, DC: IMF.
———. 2013. “Dominican Republic, Staff Report for the Article IV Consultations.” Washington, DC:
     IMF.
———. 2016 a. “Colombia Staff Report for the Article IV Consultations.” Washington, DC: IMF.
———. 2016b. “Costa Rica, Staff Report for the Article IV Consultations.” Washington, DC: IMF.
IMF, Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development, United Nations, and World Bank
       Group. 2016. “Enhancing the Effectiveness of External Support in Building Tax Capacity in
       Developing Countries.” Washington, DC: IMF.
Lustig, Nora, and Sean Higgins. 2013. “Commitment to Equity Assessment (CEQ): Estimating the
        Incidence of Social Spending, Subsidies and Taxes. Handbook.” CEQ Working Paper No. 1,
        July 2011; revised September 2013.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2011. Busan Partnership for
      Effective Development Co-Operation Fourth High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, Busan,
      Republic of Korea, 29 November-1 December 2011.
———. 2015. “Economic Surveys—Colombia.” January 2015. Paris: OECD.
———. 2016. “Economic Surveys—Costa Rica.” February 2016. Paris: OECD.
Operation Policy and Country Services (OPCS). 2016. OPCS. “Sector and Theme Classification.”
       OPCS website. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Tuan Minh, Le, Leif Jensen, G.P. Shukla, and Nataliya Biletska. 2016. “Assessing Domestic Resource
      Mobilization: Analytical Tools and Techniques.” MFM Global Practice Discussion Paper No.
      15, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2008. “Costa Rica, Public Expenditure Review, Enh ancing the Efficiency of
       Expenditures.” Report No. 40774-CR. March 31, 2008. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2010. Colombia Country Case Study. Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Response to the Global
     Economic Crisis. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2012. “Jamaica Poverty and Social Impacts of Fiscal Reforms.” Poverty Reduction and
     Economic Management. Caribbean Country Management Unit, Latin America and the
     Caribbean Region, Report No. 67809 -JM. May 22, 2012. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2013 a. “Patronage or Reform? Political Economy of Policy Performance in the Dominican
     Republic, Institutional and Governance Review.” Latin America and the Caribbean Region.
     Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2013b. “A Global Program Evaluation of IFC's Investment Climate ‘Business Operations’
     Product.” IFC Evaluation Report. Brief. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/795581468158387771/A-global-program-
     evaluation-of-IFCs-investment-climate-business-operations-product




40
                                                                                        REFERENCES

———. 2015 a. Investment Climate Reforms: An Independent Evaluation of World Bank Group Support to
     Reforms of Business Regulations. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015b. “World Bank and the IMF Launch Joint Initiative to Support Developing Countries in
     Strengthening Tax Systems.” Press Release No: 2016/021/MFMGP, World Bank,
     Washington, DC.
———. 2016a. “Domestic Resource Mobilization: Concept Note.” Washington, DC: World Bank
     Group.
———. 2016b. “Peru, Systematic Country Diagnostic, Concept Note.” Andean Country Unit, Latin
     America and the Caribbean Region. May 17, 2016. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2016c. “The Platform for Collaboration on Tax: Concept Note.” Washington, DC: World Bank
     Group.
———. 2017. Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, Resilience and Opportunity. Washington, DC: World
     Bank Group.




                                                                                                    41
Appendix A. World Bank Group Support to Tax
Policy and Administration Reforms
1.     This appendix provides an overview of the World Bank’s portfolio
composition and of the reviewed operations by lending instrument, size of tax
component, global practice, period of approval (precrisis, crisis, postcrisis), Region,
country income category, country tax-to-GDP ratio and country status (fragile and
conflict states, resource-rich developing countries).

World Bank Support to Tax Policy and Administration Reform
2.     The analysis for the learning note focuses on World Bank Group projects
coded with the theme “tax policy and administration” (code number 28; see data
limitations in box B.1). During FY2005–15, the World Bank approved 205 projects
that include a “tax policy and administration” component for a total commitment
amount of $28.4 billion (table A.1). About 20 percent of this amount, or $5.4 billion,
was allocated to tax policy and administration reforms.
Table A.1. World Bank Support for Tax Policy and Administration Reform by Instrument, 2005–2015
                                          Comm.           Tax comm.                       Closed
            Lending         Projects     amount             amountb         Countries projects ICRs ICRRs
          instrument          (no.)a  (US$, millions) (US$, millions)          (no.)       (no.)    (no.)  (no.)
      Overall projects
              DPL              130        25,673              4,814             57          121        87    80
           Investment           73         2,549               581              48           42        25    18
              PforR              2          160                 25               2            0         0     0
              Total            205        28,382              5,420             81c         163       112    98
     Reviewed projects
              DPL               80        16,188              2,782             57           80        80    80
           Investment           18          581                122              15           18        18    18
              PforR              0           0                   0               0            0         0     0
              Total             98        16,769              2,904             52 c         98        98    98
Sources: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG database.
Note: Comm. = commitment; DPL = development policy loan; ICR = Implementation Completion and Results Report; ICRR
= Implementation Completion and Results Report Review; PforR = Program-for-Results.
a. Includes Additional Financing.
b. These are amounts extrapolated from percentage shares of projects coded with Theme 28, Tax Reform.
c. These numbers exclude overlaps.

3.     The vast majority of the World Bank support to tax policy and administration
reform is provided through programmatic DPOs. Out of the 205 projects in the
portfolio, DPLs account for 46 percent of the operations and 65 percent of total
commitments. With an 18 percent share of total projects, stand-alone DPLs
committed 24 percent of total tax project funds. Investment projects, which represent


                                                                                                               43
APPENDIX A
WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS
36 percent of total projects, had only 11 percent of total commitments (figures A.1
and A.2). In per unit terms, the commitment per project for DPL series and DPL
standalones is almost the same at $38 million and $39 million respectively.

     Figure A.1. Portfolio by Lending Instrument,    Figure A.2. Portfolio by Lending Instrument,
     Number of Projects                              Tax Commitments




     Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG   Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG
     database.                                       database.
     Note: PforR =Program-for-Results                Note: PforR =Program-for-Results

4.     While about 20 percent of the commitment amount was allocated to tax
policy and administration reforms, the share of tax components in projects is heavily
concentrated below the 25th percentile of total project cost, with the highest
concentration in the 10–14 percent group (80 projects out of 205), indicating that for
most of the projects, tax reform was a minor component (table A.2.).




44
                                                                                     APPENDIX A
                             WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS
Table A.2. World Bank Support for Tax Policy and Administration Reform by Share of Tax Code,
2005–15
                                                Commitment        Commitment
                             Projects             amount            for tax        Countries
   Percentage group (%)        (no.)           (US$, millions)   (US$, millions)     (no.)
      Overall portfolio
             0–9                  15                1,104              62             14
           10–14                  80               14,473            1,776            47
           15–19                  20                2,957             519             18
           20–25                  37                5,010            1,134            28
           26–50                  48                4,601            1,739            27
             >50                   5                 237              189              5
            Total                205               28,382            5,419            81a
     Reviewed portfolio
             0–9                   4                475                31              4
           10–14                  44               8,458             1,061            31
           15–19                  11               2,468              434             11
           20–25                  20               3,625              814             15
           26–50                  19               1,744              564             14
             >50                   0                 0                 0              0
            Total                 98               16,769            2,903            52a
Source: Business Warehouse and IEG database.
a. These numbers exclude overlaps.

5.     Among global practices, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management (MFM)
and Governance committed the highest proportion of project funds to tax reform
(table A.3). Out of the total tax reforms commitment of $5.4 billion, 71 percent ($3.8
billion) was committed by MFM and Governance committed 15 percent ($819
million). The other global practices committed the remaining 14 percent ($753
million). Immediately after the 2008 financial crisis, lending increased dramatically
and has remained high to the present. The share of commitments by MFM reached
81 percent during the financial crisis as part of the World Bank crisis response.




                                                                                               45
APPENDIX A
WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS
Table A.3. Tax Commitments by Global Practice (US$, millions)
    Global practice              FY2005–08            FY2009–10            FY2011–15   Total
    Overall portfolio
  Macroeconomics &                  593                   1,234              2,021     3,848
  Fiscal Management
      Governance                    272                    165                382      819
  Poverty and Equity                112                      0                258      370
  Finance & Markets                 100                      8                 75      183
       Education                                           121                  7      128
   Transport and ICT                 29                      0                  0       29
 Social, Urban, Rural,               14                      0                  5       19
     and Resilience
       Trade and                      0                      0                17        17
    Competitiveness
 Energy & Extractives                 4                                        1         5
       Agriculture                                           1                           1
         Total                     1,124                  1,530              2,766     5,419
  Reviewed portfolio
 Macroeconomics and                 593                   1,187               343      2,123
  Fiscal Management
      Governance                    129                     46                184      358
  Poverty and Equity                112                                                112
  Finance & Markets                                                           75        75
       Education                                           121                         121
 Social, Urban, Rural,               14                                                 14
     and Resilience
         Total                      847                   1,354               602      2,804
Source: Business Intelligence as of February 2016.
Note: FY = fiscal year; ICT = information and communications technology.

6.     World Bank commitments and number of projects with tax content has been
increasing regularly over the period peaking in FY2009–10 and in FY2014 (figure
A.3). The trend may reflect a stronger demand for tax work by the clients and a
deepening response from the World Bank Group.




46
                                                                                              APPENDIX A
                                      WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS

            Figure A.3. Number of Projects and Commitments by Fiscal Year

                             1200                                                            30
                             1000                                                            25



             US$, millions




                                                                                                  No. Projects
                             800                                                             20
                             600                                                             15
                             400                                                             10
                             200                                                             5
                               0                                                             0
                                    2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                                  No. Projects      Tax Comm $m

            Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.


7.      The majority of tax-coded operations were approved in the Sub-Saharan
Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean Regions (respectively 30 and 32 percent
of total tax-coded projects). In commitment terms the Latin America and the
Caribbean Region led with 42 percent of the total, while Sub-Saharan Africa
represented only 9 percent (table A.4). Over time, commitments on tax in the Latin
America and the Caribbean Region reached almost 50 percent of total commitments
for tax-coded projects during the crisis period. Europe and Central Asia is second in
total commitments with three projects approved on average each year and an
average size of $95 million. The average size of operations in the Region increased
regularly over time and reached $95 million in FY2011–15. Over the FY2005–15, both
as a share of total commitments and in absolute amounts, East Asia and Pacific
declined regularly from 35 percent of in FY2005–08, or $389 million, to 6 percent, or
$154 million, over FY2011–15 although the average number of projects approved
annually remained stable at around three.

8.     The World Bank committed more funds to tax reforms in middle-income
countries than low-income countries. Most of the projects and their corresponding
high commitment amounts went to lower middle-income countries. Although, low-
income countries received 24 percent of tax projects, they received only 5 percent of
commitments (figures A.4 and A.5).

9.    World Bank support to tax reforms has been targeted mostly to the countries
whose tax-to-GDP ratio is between 10 to 20 percent (table A.5).




                                                                                                                 47
APPENDIX A
WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS
Table A.3. Tax Commitments by Global Practice
US$, millions
    Global practice            FY2005–08                   FY2009–10                FY2011–15                 Total
    Overall portfolio
    Macroeconomics                  593                       1,234                   2,021                   3,848
        and Fiscal
       Management
       Governance                   272                        165                     382                    819
   Poverty and Equity               112                          0                     258                    370
       Finance and                  100                          8                      75                    183
         Markets
        Education                                              121                       7                    128
    Transport and ICT                29                          0                       0                     29
      Social, Urban,                 14                          0                       5                     19
        Rural, and
        Resilience
        Trade and                     0                          0                      17                     17
     Competitiveness
        Energy and                    4                                                  1                     5
        Extractives
        Agriculture                                              1                                              1
           Total                   1,124                      1,530                   2,766                   5,419
  Reviewed portfolio
    Macroeconomics                  593                       1,187                    343                    2,123
        and Fiscal
       Management
       Governance                   129                         46                     184                    358
   Poverty and Equity               112                                                                       112
   Finance & Markets                                                                    75                     75
        Education                                              121                                            121
      Social, Urban,                 14                                                                        14
        Rural, and
        Resilience
           Total                    847                       1,354                    602                    2,804
Source: Business Intelligence as of February 2016.
Note: *Post 2008 global financial crisis. FY = fiscal year; ICT = information and communication technology.




48
                                                                                                APPENDIX A
                                        WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS

 Figure A.4. Tax Projects and Commitments by Country                                      Figure A.5. Share of Tax Commitments by Country
 Income Category, Overall Projects                                                        Income Category, Overall Projects
              100                                                  3,000                                                        Low
                                   79                                                                                            5%
              80                                                   2,500
                                              62




                                                                           US$ millions
                                                                                                                       High
                                                                   2,000
     Number



              60     48                                                                                                10%
                                                                   1,500
              40
                                                                   1,000
              20                                           12
                                                                   500                                        Upper           Lower
               0                                                   0                                          Middle          Middle
                    Low       Lower          Upper        High                                                 38%             47%
                              Middle         Middle

                           No. Projects               Tax Comm

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG database.
Note: List of Countries by Income category downloaded from World Bank Website April 2016; Low-income = $1,045 or
less (18 countries); Lower-middle-income=$1,046 to $4,125 (29 countries); Upper-middle-income =$4,126 to $12,735 (26
countries); High-income = $12,736 or more (5 countries).
Table A.5. World Bank Support to Tax Policy and Administration Reform, by Country Tax-to-
GDP Ratio, 2005–2015

     Category                     Projects               Commitment amount                     Commitment for tax                   Countries
   (percentage)           (no.)     (share, %)        (US$, millions)    (share, %)         (US$, millions)    (share, %)     (no.)    (share, %)
  Overall projects
        0–10[              24            12                1,321                    5            181                3           9         11
       10–15[              72            35               13,150                   49           2,882              53          23         28
       15–20[              83            40               10,536                   39           1,863              34          33         40
       20–25[               8             4                1,135                    4            159                3           6          7
         >25               12             6                 296                     1            296                5           5          6
       other*               6             3                 279                     1             37                1           6          7
        Total             205                             26,716                                5,420                          82
 Reviewed projects
         0–10[         9          9             540              3                 90             3                             2          5
        10–15[        39         40            7,656            46               1,424           49                            13         35
        15–20[        39         40            7,180            43               1,158           40                            15         41
        20–25[         4          4             880              5                129             4                             3          8
          >25          6          6             462              3                 97             3                             3          8
        other a        1          1              51              0                  6             0                             1          3
         Total        98                      16,769                             2,903                                         37
Sources: World Development Indicators, Government Finance Statistics, International Monetary Fund.
a. Regional projects.


10.    This portfolio includes a significant number of fragile and conflict-affected
situations (FCS) and resource-rich developing countries. FCSs and resource-rich
developing countries each accounted for about 20 percent of the total number of



                                                                                                                                         49
APPENDIX A
WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS
countries reviewed (table A.6). Out of the 205 tax projects, 38 projects were
committed to 18 FCS for a total amount of $191 million. There were 41 projects in 18
resource-rich developing countries for $1,078 million. On average, the per unit tax
project amount in FCS was low, just $5 million, compared with overall tax project
unit amount of $26 million for resource-rich developing countries and an average of
$33 million for the other countries in this portfolio.

Table A.6. World Bank Support to Tax Policy and Administration by Country Status, 2005–2015
                                                                                                               Average tax
                                                                                                                amount per
                                                 Countries               Projects            Tax amount           project
                Projects                            (no.)                  (no.)           (US$, millions)    (US$, millions)
             Overall projects
      Fragile and conflict                            18                     38                   191                    5
      Resource rich                                   17                     41                  1,078                26.3
      Other states                                    52                    126                  4,151                32.9
      Total                                          81 a                   205                  5,420                26.4
            Reviewed projects
      Fragile and conflict                            10                     14                   135                  9.6
      Resource rich                                   10                     21                   709                 33.8
      Other states                                    34                     65                  2,068                31.8
      Total                                          52b                     98                  2,904                29.6
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG database.
Note: List of FCS countries taken from the World Bank FCS website; downloaded April 2016; list of resource-rich developing
Countries (IMF 2012).
a. Five countries are both fragile and conflict-affected situations and resource-rich countries: Guinea-Bissau, Mali Sudan,
Timor-Leste, and Republic of Yemen, therefore the total adds up to 81.
b. The total excludes overlaps for two countries, which are both fragile and conflict-affected and resource-rich states: Mali
and the Republic of Yemen.
WORLD BANK SUPPORT REVIEWED BY IEG

11.     The learning note focused on existing IEG evaluation material, in this case
tax-coded projects approved and closed during FY2005–15 for which the
Implementation Completion Report has been reviewed by IEG and an
Implementation Completion and Results Report Review (ICRR) is available. Out of
the total tax-coded projects (205), 163 were closed, of which 112 have ICRs and 98
have ICRRs (table A.1.). The tax commitment for these projects amounted to $2.9
billion, or 54 percent of the overall tax portfolio (table A.1. and figure A.6).




50
                                                                                                APPENDIX A
                                        WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS

            Figure A.6. World Bank Support to Tax Reforms, FY2005–15

                               30,000

                               25,000



               US$, millions
                               20,000

                               15,000

                               10,000

                                5,000

                                   0
                                             Overall Commitment                Tax Commitment

                                              All operations      Reviewed operations

            Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.

12.     As for the overall portfolio, the bulk of World Bank support to tax reforms
was delivered through DPOs (80 percent of total operations and 96 percent of
commitments compared with 64 and 89 percent for the entire portfolio respectively).
The share of programmatic DPO series is also larger both in number of projects and
amount committed at 65 percent and 71 percent respectively compared with the
overall portfolio (46 percent of projects and 60 percent of commitments for the
overall portfolio). Investment projects represent only 18 percent of the number of
reviewed tax-coded projects for total commitments amounting to 4 percent of the
total reviewed compared with respectfully 35 percent and 11 percent in the overall
portfolio.

13.    The composition of the reviewed portfolio by tax share compared with the
overall portfolio is tilted toward smaller tax components in terms of number of
projects but more significantly in terms of commitment amounts, reflecting an
increase of tax share in projects approved more recently. By commitment amounts,
the share of projects with a tax share of 26 percent or above is only 19 percent in the
reviewed portfolio against 33 percent in the overall portfolio.

14.    The composition of the reviewed tax portfolio by global practice is not
different from the one of the overall tax portfolio. The reviewed portfolio contains
slightly more MFM operations in the postcrisis period than the overall portfolio (88
percent versus 81 percent of commitments) while Governance is overrepresented in
the reviewed portfolio (31 percent versus 14 percent; this may reflect the significant
delays in implementing tax administration reform projects).

15.   In terms of number of projects, the share of tax projects in Latin America and
the Caribbean is higher in the reviewed portfolio compared with the overall


                                                                                                       51
APPENDIX A
WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS
portfolio (respectively 43 percent and 32 percent) and lower in Sub-Saharan Africa
(21 percent versus 30 percent). In terms of commitment amounts, Latin America and
the Caribbean has the highest share, as in the overall portfolio, or 44 percent. Europe
and Central Asia and East Asia and Pacific come second with 21 percent and 18
percent respectively, similar to the overall portfolio.

16.    The coverage of countries by income category is broadly the same for
reviewed projects and the overall tax portfolio. The share of tax-coded projects
reviewed for low-income countries was slightly lower by number than in the overall
portfolio (16 percent versus 23 percent for the overall project) and the share of
projects in high-income countries was slightly higher by commitment amounts (17
percent versus 10 percent for the overall portfolio).

17.     As for the overall portfolio, tax-coded projects were delivered mostly to
countries whose tax-to-GDP ratio is comprised between 10 and 20 percent. By
country status, there is no significant difference between the reviewed projects and
the overall portfolio, except a slightly lower number of reviewed projects in FCS (14
percent for reviewed projects compared with 19 percent in the overall portfolio). The
reviewed projects were delivered in countries with a great variation of tax-to-GDP
ratios (figure A.7).




52
                                                                                                 APPENDIX A
                                         WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO TAX POLICY AND ADMINISTRATION REFORMS

Figure A.7. Tax-to-GDP Ratio by Country, 2005

                         Nigeria
                     Congo, DR
                           Sudan
                Central African
                   Madagascar
                          Liberia                                                       Resource Rich
     Africa

                Sao Tome & Pr
                       Tanzania
                            Niger                                                       Fragile/Conflict
                        Rwanda
                   Gambia, The                                                          Both FCS & RR
                    Mauritania
                        Burundi
                           Benin
                             Mali
                  Mozambique
                      Mauritius
                           Kenya
                     Cambodia
                     Indonesia
                    Philippines
    E. Asia/
    Pacific




               Solomon Islands
                           Tonga
                       Vietnam
                      Mongolia
                       Armenia
                      Tajikistan
                           Russia
                         Poland
   Europe/
   Central




                        Ukraine
                         Albania
                    Macedonia
                         Turkey
                         Belarus
                    Uzbekistan
                             Haiti
                      Paraguay
                    Guatemala
                        Ecuador
                    El Salvador
   America/




                      Colombia
                     Costa Rica
                        Panama
   Latin




                             Peru
                      Honduras
              Dominican Repub
                         Mexico
                            Brazil
                       Uruguay
                       Grenada
                     Argentina
                        Jamaica
               West Bank/Gaza
                         Yemen
 East/




                         Tunisia
 Mid




                          Jordan
                   Afghanistan
                    Bangladesh
                       Pakistan
                            India
     S.




                                     0       5        10        15         20          25          30      35
                                                                % Tax to GDP
Source: World Development Indicators, AIV, Government Finance Statistics, cepalstat.
Note: GDP = gross domestic product.




                                                                                                                53
Appendix B. Methodology
1.      This note covers only tax revenue. Because learning notes of this type are
limited to using Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluation material and the
World Bank Group internal organization, the scope of this review has been
restricted in several dimensions. (See the Concept Note for this learning note, World
Bank 2016 a.) First, while domestic resource mobilization includes all government
resources, tax and nontax, the World Bank’s nontax interventions are mostly
bundled in sector or thematic operations and difficult to find, in particular there is
no specific theme code to identify them. A preliminary review of IEG thematic and
sectoral evaluations found a wide variation in their treatment of resource
mobilization through taxation, user fees, and subsidies.

2.     Second, although revenue from natural resources can represent up to 95
percent of government revenues in resource-rich countries (IMF 2011), this area has
been left out of the scope of this learning note for several of reasons: data on
resource-related receipts are limited; taxing natural resources raises specific and
complex challenges; the World Bank portfolio is difficult to identify, and evaluation
evidence is limited.

3.     The third restriction comes from the absence of IEG evaluative material
regarding analytical work and nonlending technical assistance provided by the
World Bank for domestic resource mobilization. Based on an initial scoping of
World Bank Group support and mapping of IEG available evaluative material, the
learning note focuses primarily on support to nonresource taxation.

4.     Scope. The note reviews World Bank Group support to tax policy and
administration reform in operations approved over FY2005–15, provided through
development policy operations (DPOs), Investment Projects, and International
Finance Corporation Advisory Services on business taxation. It draws on three
sources: A systematic review of ICRRs of World Bank operations and EvNotes;
Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs) when available; and country case
studies from various IEG evaluations (appendix F).

5.     Tax code limitations. The World Bank Group support is identified using the
“tax policy and administration” operation theme code (number 28) under “Public
Sector Governance.” Like for other sector and theme codes, this code is highly
arbitrary. Cross-checking with the OPCS database of prior actions and a series of
PPARs covering tax issues in operations not coded for tax suggest that using the tax
policy and administration theme code assigned by task managers to identify tax


                                                                                    54
                                                                                          APPENDIX B
                                                                                       METHODOLOGY
components probably leads to underestimating actual World Bank support to tax
reforms. (See data limitations in box B.1.) During FY2005–15, the World Bank
approved 205 projects that include a “tax policy and administration” component for
a total commitment amount of $28.4 billion. About 20 percent of this total
commitment amount, or $5.4 billion, was allocated to tax policy and administration
reforms).


 Box B.1. Identifying the Portfolio: Data Limitations
   All World Bank lending projects are coded in the operational database (also known as
    Business Warehouse or Business Intelligence) according to sectors and themes covered by
    the projects. The selection and the attribution of a share for sectors and themes is left to the
    discretion and judgment of the task team leader. Hence, application of the codes is highly
    arbitrary.
   The primary focus of most DPOs is on public expenditure and public financial
    management. Thus, a significant number of operations with tax content may have been
    coded under theme “Public Expenditure, Financial Management, and Procurement” (code
    27), especially if the tax content is small.
   There are coding inconsistencies within DPO series. For programmatic DPO series, which
    constitute the bulk of the identified portfolio, it would be reasonable to expect that
    supporting a medium-term tax reform program would require that each DPO in the series
    is coded for tax. But most of the time it is the contrary, especially for operations with a
    small tax share. For instance, Peru Decentralization and Competitiveness programmatic
    DPL series (total disbursements equivalent to $400 million) consisted of three DPLs
    (P082871, P083949, and P089826) all of which supported a medium-term tax reform
    program. Only the third operation was coded for the theme tax policy and administration
    (13 percent).
   There are significant inconsistencies between DPO coding and related prior actions
    coding. A comparison between the coding for operations and for prior actions for DPOs
    approved and closed over FY2005–15 for which an ICRR is available found that a
    significant number of operations whose prior actions were coded for tax policy and
    administration, were not coded for the same theme code.



6.     The note reviews tax-coded projects approved and closed during FY2005–15
for which an Implementation Completion and Results Report has been reviewed by
IEG and an ICRR is available. Out of the total tax-coded projects (205), 163 were
closed, of which 112 have an ICR and 98, an ICRR.

7.     The note is based on a quasi-comprehensive desk review of 98 ICRRs (World
Bank operations) covering 80 DPOs and 18 investment projects and 17 EvNotes (IFC
Advisory Services). This desk review was guided by descriptive and evaluative
questions listed in box B.2. When all the DPOs in a series were not coded for tax, the
review was extended to all the DPOs to cover the overall tax reform program
supported by the series.


                                                                                                   55
APPENDIX B
METHODOLOGY

 Box B.2. Guiding Questions for the Review
 Descriptive questions. What are the specific tax-related objectives supported by the World
 Bank Group? What is the content of the tax-related programs supported by the World Bank
 Group? What is the results chain?
 Development effectiveness. Includes two subsets of questions:
 Design/Relevance: On which basis taxation was prioritized? To what extent, project design
 was based on appropriate knowledge and diagnostic work by the World Bank and/or other
 development partners? To what extend tax reform measures supported by the operation were
 part of a comprehensive tax reform strategy and cognizant of a country tax system approach?
 What attention was given to timing and sequencing? To what extent the World Bank Group
 operation was coordinated at the diagnostic and design stages with other development
 organization support in this area including IMF, Regional Development World Banks,
 EuropeAid, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and United Nations
 Development Program?
 Implementation/Efficacy: Have the tax operations achieved their intended objectives? To
 what extend have these operations contributed to increase government revenue in a
 sustainable way? Are there any unintended positive or adverse impact?
 World Bank Group Performance: What is the World Bank Group performance in ensuring
 quality at entry? Supervision? In partnering with the government and other development
 institutions?
 Borrower Performance: What was the government ownership and commitment? What was
 the performance of the implementing agency?
 Monitoring and evaluation: What are the key challenges in designing, implementing and
 using an effective M&E system at the project level? To what extent the impact of the tax
 reform has been evaluated? To what extent the impact of the World Bank Group contribution
 to the country-level results have been evaluated?
 Lessons: What are the key challenges is raising tax revenue collected and key success drivers?
 What are the lessons for replicating good practice in other countries? What are the lessons
 regarding partnerships? In terms of evaluating the impact of tax reforms?

 Source: Concept Note for this learning note, IEG, 2016.


8.     ICRRs limitations. The desk review was also hampered by the limited depth
and breadth of available evaluation evidence on tax reforms. The review had to rely
on second- or third-hand data, information, and analysis from ICR (self-evaluation)
to ICRRs (IEG validation) on at best marginal subobjectives. (See box B.3 for more
details.) Because of these limitations, the review findings and lessons are
preliminary and would need to be firmed up through more comprehensive,
thorough and rigorous evaluation work.




56
                                                                                      APPENDIX B
                                                                                   METHODOLOGY

Box B.3. Existing Evaluation Material: ICR Reviews Limitations
   Little or no detail on the tax measures and the underlying tax reform program overall
    design. The tax results chain is often not explicit and the links between outputs and
    outcomes are not always clear.
   No detailed information on tax-related prior actions and triggers.
   No information on tax-related diagnostic work and or analytical work.
   No information on coordination with other development partners in the area of tax
    reforms.
   No information on tax-related technical support by the World Bank and or other donors.
   Parallel IMF program in most of the cases but usually not mentioned in the ICRR.
   Sketchy discussions of results achieved in tax reforms let alone the project contribution to
    outcomes such as the targeted increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio.
   Ratings on relevance of objectives typically apply to an entire operation, of which the tax
    policy and administration component is only a part and, in most cases reviewed here, a
    small part.
   Although the link between measures on tax policy and administration and revenue raising
    is in principle clear, the evaluative material on which this note is based has only a few
    examples specifying the prior actions on tax policy that were supported in the World
    Bank’s operation.
   As with the discussion of relevance, the assessment of monitoring and evaluation refers to
    an entire operation and not to its tax component; Discussion of monitoring and evaluation
    is uneven in the evaluative material with usually little concerning the use of M&E data to
    improve results or guide policy.
   Results may not be easily interpreted. The ICRRs do not provide enough information and
    details. In particular, the links between outputs and outcomes and impact are not always
    clear.
   ICRRs of World Bank–supported operations in tax policy and administration reform do
    not make reference to the trade-offs and choices involved in reforming the tax system in
    the direction of efficiency.
   Nor do ICRRs of World Bank DPOs that include tax policy and administration
    components make reference to improving equity of the tax system.
   Lack of consistency in standards applied by different ICR reviewers. A very common case,
    is for DPLs targeting an increase in the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio. Efficacy would be rated
    completely differently for similar achievements. One ICRR review would conclude that
    because the increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio could not be attributed to the tax measures
    implemented, the tax component was not successful while another ICRR would rate it
    successful. Similarly, efficacy of DPL missing the tax ratio target can be assessed as
    successful because the tax measure was successfully implemented while another ICRR
    would assess the tax objective as not achieved.
   As a result of these ICRRs limitations in the area of tax reforms, assessment of those
    reforms in the ICRR can be quite misleading. For example, the conclusions of the ICR and
    the ICRRs for the Republic of Yemen: Institutional Reform DPL, FY2008 (P101453) are
    contradicting.
   Except for Colombia and Dominican Republic, PPARs when available (6), did not bring
    much additional relevant evaluative material on World Bank’s support to tax reforms.
    Both Colombia and Dominican Republic PPARs diverge from the ICRRs on the
    assessment of efficacy for the tax component. For example, 2008 Colombia PPAR on one



                                                                                               57
APPENDIX B
METHODOLOGY
     stand-alone structural fiscal adjustment loan and a Fiscal and Institutional programmatic
     series further highlights how ICRRs can be misleading. These four operations supported
     the removal of fiscal rigidities on both the revenue and expenditure side. On the revenue
     side, these four operations were aiming primarily at increasing tax revenue to reduce the
     fiscal deficit and improve fiscal sustainability through a combination of tax policy and tax
     administration measures. The ICRRs assessed the tax component as successful but the
     PPAR concludes that the increase in the tax collection as a percent of GDP beyond the
     increase associated with the improved terms of trade and overall economic performance
     was the result of the very rapid improvement in tax administration and a highly
     unsatisfactory progress in the structural reform of the taxes policies themselves. Moreover,
     the PPAR attributes the progress made in improving tax administration to the support of
     World Bank and other donor-funded technical assistance projects and IMF technical
     assistance and advisory services rather than tax policy changes supported by DPOs. To
     sum up, the PPAR contains much more relevant information to assess the efficacy of the
     tax component than the ICRRs which leads to opposite conclusions regarding the efficacy
     of the tax component and more broadly the outcome of the DPLs series.



9.      The review database and assessing the efficacy of tax components. For the
purpose of this note, a comprehensive database has been constituted with the results
of the review of ICRRs and EvNotes. All DPOs, investment projects, and advisory
services coded for tax and approved and closed over FY2005–15 have been manually
reviewed following IEG standard criteria. In addition to ICRR ratings, the efficacy of
tax components has been rated based on information available in the ICRR.

10.    Also, to compensate for some ICRR limitations, the database has been
supplemented with the information from OPCS on prior actions for each reviewed
DPO and information on IMF programs for each country that received World Bank
Group’s support on tax reforms. To get a sense of whether the country context had
an impact on results, some country characteristics relevant for tax policies were
added including the country income status, whether the country was a fragile and
conflict-affected situation (FCS) or a resource-rich developing country, and the tax-
to-GDP ratio at the beginning and at the end of the review period.

11.    A statistical review of the overall tax portfolio has been conducted to identify
major characteristics and trends of World Bank Group support to taxation over the
last decade and ascertain the extent to which the reviewed tax portfolio was
comparable to the overall one.

12.    Focus on DPOs with tax component aimed at raising tax revenue. As the
bulk of the tax portfolio consists of DPOs, the note covers mainly the DPOs while
the review of the support provided through investment projects and advisory
services is provided in two dedicated appendixes (appendixes D and E). Also, given
the diversity of tax objectives and the focus of the learning note, all tax objectives


58
                                                                               APPENDIX B
                                                                            METHODOLOGY
supported by DPOs have been reviewed and those focusing on an increase in tax
revenue collection have been coded in the database (list in table B.1.).

13.    Illustrative country examples for DPOs have been identified among the 60
operations targeting explicitly an increase in tax revenue to reflect the diversity of
country contexts, regions and time periods (preglobal crisis, FY2005–08; crisis
response, FY2009–10; postcrisis, FY2011–15). To avoid duplication with other IEG
evaluation work, no country example has been selected among FCS and resource-
rich developing countries. However, to allow for meaningful comparisons in the
Latin America and the Caribbean Region, countries with significant natural
resources have been included. For example, Colombia and Peru.

14.   For a number of country examples, instead of focusing on operations, the
review covered the overall World Bank’s support to tax reforms over the period.




                                                                                         59
                                                                                                                                                                      APPENDIX B
                                                                                                                                                                  METHODOLOGY


Table B.1. List of DPOs with Tax Component Aimed at Raising Tax Revenue
                                                       Operation characteristics                                                            Country characteristics
                                                                                                                               Tax-to-GDP ratio (%) Tax-to-GDP ratio (%)
                                                                    Approval year Amount Tax share Tax comm. Income                 Initial Year         Latest Year     IMF program
Country                         Project name                PID      (fiscal year) (US$, millions) (%) (US$, millions) category (usually 2005)            (2012–15)       (FY05–15)
 SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Central African
                Econ. Mgmt. and Gov. Reform DPO II        P106458       2008            8          22          2          LIC           8.3                 9.5              Y
Rep.
Central African
                Econ. Mgmt. and Gov. Reform II - DPO III P113176        2009            5          20          1          LIC           8.3                 9.5              Y
Rep.
Central African
                Econ. Mgmt. and Gov. Reform III DPO IV P120534          2011            9          13          1          LIC           8.3                 9.5              Y
Rep.
Liberia         Re-eng. and Reform Support DPO            P102915       2008           42          17          7          LIC          10.8                18.8              Y
                Reengagement & Reform Support Prog. 2-
Liberia                                                   P113450       2009            4          10          0          LIC          10.8                18.8              Y
                Budget Support
Madagascar      Third Poverty Reduction Support Credit P096102          2007           40          17          7          LIC          10.1                10.Y              Y
Mauritius       Development Policy DPL                    P101570       2007           30          14          4         UMIC          17.8                18.7              N
Mozambique      PRSC-1                                    P075805       2005           60          25          15         LIC          16.1                20.4              Y
Mozambique      PRSC-3                                    P083459       2007           70          17          12         LIC          16.1                20.4              Y
São Tomé and    Public & Natural Resource Mgmt. Dev Pol
                                                          P106468       2008            8          29          2         LMIC          10.9                13.9              Y
Principe        Grant
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Armenia         PRSC-1                                    P078673       2005           20          20          4         LMIC          14.3                17.5              Y
Armenia         PRSC-3                                    P093460       2007           28          17          5         LMIC          14.3                17.5              Y
Armenia         PRSC-4                                    P101486       2008           19          29          5         LMIC          14.3                17.5              Y
 EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Indonesia       DPL-1                                     P092663       2005          300          14                    LMIC          10.5                11.4              N
Indonesia       DPL-3                                     P100327       2007          600          13          78        LMIC          10.5                11.4              N
Indonesia       DPL-4                                     P105637       2008          600          14          84        LMIC          10.5                11.4              N
                Institutional, Tax Administration, Social
Indonesia                                                 P126162       2013          300          13                    LMIC          10.5                11.4              N
                and Investment 1
                Institutional, Tax Administration, Social
Indonesia                                                 P144775       2014          400          10                    LMIC          10.5                11.4              N
                and Investment 2
Philippines     DPL-1                                     P100706       2007          250          33         83         LMIC          12.4                12.9              N
Solomon Islands DPG-2                                     P143242       2014           2           15         0.3        LMIC          17.2                29.5              Y
LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Dominican
                Prog.PubFinance & Social Sector DPL       P115145       2010          150          6           9         UMIC          14.6                13.8              Y
Republic
Haiti           3rd Econ. Governance Reform Operation P117944           2010           13          21          3          Lo           9.7                 12.9              Y
Jamaica         Fiscal & Debt Sust. DPL                   P101321       2009          100          22          22        UMIC          25.3                26.6              N



                                                                                                                                                                                 61
APPENDIX B
METHODOLOGY


                                                        Operation characteristics                                                           Country characteristics
                                                                                                                               Tax-to-GDP ratio (%) Tax-to-GDP ratio (%)
                                                                    Approval year Amount Tax share Tax comm. Income                 Initial Year         Latest Year     IMF program
Country                           Project name                PID    (fiscal year) (US$, millions) (%) (US$, millions) category (usually 2005)            (2012–15)       (FY05–15)
Jamaica            1st Progr. Debt & Fiscal Sustain. DPL    P113893      2010           200         20       40         UMIC            25.3                 26.6             Y
Jamaica            2nd Prog Debt & Fiscal DPL               P123241      2012           100         25       20         UMIC            25.3                 26.6             Y
Costa Rica         CR Pub Fin & Compet. DPL/ DDO            P115173      2009           500         17       85         UMIC            13.7                 13.2             Y
El Salvador        SV Public Finance and Social Sector DPL P114910       2009           450         14       63          LMIC           12.5                 15.4             Y
El Salvador        Public finance and Social Progress DPL-1 P122699      2011           100         40       40          LMIC           12.5                 15.4             Y
Guatemala          Growth DPL I                             P094365      2006           100         14       14          LMIC           11.2                 10.8             N
Guatemala          Broad-Based Growth DPL-2                 P094897      2007           100         14       14          LMIC           11.2                 10.8             N
Guatemala          DPL-3                                    P101311      2008           100         14       14          LMIC           11.2                 10.8             N
Guatemala          Fiscal and Institutional DPL I           P112312      2009           200         29       58          LMIC           11.2                 10.8             Y
Guatemala          Fiscal and Institutional DPL-2           P114373      2010           350         29       70          LMIC           11.2                 10.8             Y
Guatemala          Fiscal Space for Greater Opportunity     P131763      2013           200         50                   LMIC           11.2                 10.8             N
                   Enhanced Fiscal & Financial Mgmt for
Guatemala                                                   P133738      2014           340         43                   LMIC           11.2                 10.8             N
                   Greater Opportunity
Honduras           Emergency Recovery Dev Policy Credit P121220          2011            75         40       30          LMIC           14.5                 15.Y             Y
Honduras           1st Progr. Reduc. Vulner. Growth DPC     P127331      2012            86         14       12          LMIC           14.5                 15.Y             Y
Panama             1st Competitive & PubFinancMgmt DPL P105710           2008            75         14       11         UMIC            14.3                 18.4             N
Brazil-Minas
                   Partnership for Development           P088543       2006          170          13          22        UMIC           16.5                14.Y             n.a.
Gerais
Brazil-Alagoas Fiscal & Public Mgmt Reform               P103770       2010          195          13          25        UMIC           16.5                14.Y             n.a.
               Fiscal sustainability DPL-1
Brazil-Rio State                                         P117244       2010          485          25         121        UMIC           16.5                14.Y             n.a.
               Fiscal sustainability DPL-3
Brazil-Rio State                                         P126465       2013          300          20                    UMIC           16.5                14.Y             n.a.
               Third Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment
Colombia                                                 P084762       2005          100          14          14        UMIC           12.9                13.4
               Loan
Colombia       First Programmatic Fiscal DPL             P123267       2012          200          14          40        UMIC           12.9                13.4              Y
Colombia       Second Programmatic Fiscal DPL            P129465       2013          300          20          42        UMIC           12.9                13.4              Y
Colombia       Fiscal Capacity for Shared Prosperity     P145605       2014          600          43         258        UMIC           12.9                13.4              Y
Paraguay       Public Sector DPL                         P113457       2009          100          32          32        UMIC           10.2                12.8              Y
Paraguay       Public Sector DPL                         P117043       2012          100          33          10        UMIC           10.2                12.8              N
Peru           Progr. Decentral. & Compet. DPL-3         P089826       2005          150          13          20        UMIC           14.3                16.5              Y
               Prog Fiscal Mgmt & Competitiveness DPL-
Peru                                                     P101335       2007          200          14          28        UMIC           14.3                16.5              Y
               1
Peru           Prg Fiscal Mgmt & Competitiveness DPL-2 P101590         2009          370          14          52        UMIC           14.3                16.5              Y
Peru           Prg Fiscal Mgmt & Competitiveness DPL-3 P106720         2010          150          12          18        UMIC           14.3                16.5              Y
Peru           Prg Fiscal Mgmt & Competitiveness DPL-4 P116214         2011          100          16          16        UMIC           14.3                16.5              N
MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA
Jordan         Recovery Under Global Uncertainty DPL P117023           2010          300          13          39        UMIC           24.4                15.3              N




62
                                                                                                                                                                     APPENDIX B
                                                                                                                                                                 METHODOLOGY


                                                      Operation characteristics                                                            Country characteristics
                                                                                                                              Tax-to-GDP ratio (%) Tax-to-GDP ratio (%)
                                                                   Approval year Amount Tax share Tax comm. Income                 Initial Year         Latest Year     IMF program
Country                          Project name              PID      (fiscal year) (US$, millions) (%) (US$, millions) category (usually 2005)            (2012–15)       (FY05–15)
West Bank and    Palestinian Reform and Development Plan
                                                         P123437       2012           40          30          12        LMIC           4.9                 4.8             n.a.
Gaza             Support IV
West Bank and    Palestinian Reform and Development Plan
                                                         P129742       2013           40          34          14        LMIC           4.9                 4.8             n.a.
Gaza             Support V
Yemen, Rep.      Institutional Reform DPG                P101453       2008           51          11          6         LMIC           6.7                                  N
SOUTH ASIA
Afghanistan      Programmatic Support for Inst. Bldg     P078618       2005           80          14          11         LIC           4.7                8.N               Y
India-Orissa     SAL I                                   P081882       2005          125          11          14        LMIC           9.9                10.8             n.a.
Pakistan         Poverty Reduction & Econ. Support Oper. P113372                     500          30         150        LMIC           9.6                11.2              Y
Sources: World Bank Business Warehouse: World Bank FCS website; downloaded April 2016; resource-rich developing countries (IMF, 2012); World Development Indicators,
AIV, Government Finance Statistics, cepalstat (tax-to-GDP ratios).
Note: This list does not include three DPOs that were cancelled and thus not rated: Ecuador Second Fiscal consolidation and Competitive Growth (P083856), El Salvador- Broad-
Based Growth DPL 1 (P 093133), and DPL1 (P094146). Illustrative country examples are highlighted in green. c omm = commitment.




                                                                                                                                                                                  63
Appendix C. Designing Tax Reforms:
Overarching Results Chain and Trade-Offs
Figure C.1. World Bank Group Support to Taxation, FY2005–15-Results Chain

                           Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity
                            Sustainable Growth and Development
  Fiscal Sustainability/        Raise Private                Facilitate Trade            Governance
   Macrostabilisation         Sector Investment                Integration

 Raise government                                       Strengthen export            Increase transparency,
                                 Improve                 competitiveness              accountability, equity,
      revenue               investment climate                                              fairness


        Reform packages/measures supported by World Bank Group operation


                                                                                   Tax Administration
           Tax Base                             Tax Policy
                                                                                Improving the way the tax
    Broadening the tax base           Improving the tax system
                                                                                   system is managed




Figure C.2. Designing Tax Reforms: Trade-Offs


                                Trade-offs in designing Tax reforms
                                    Amount of revenue collected

          Efficiency                                                                       Equity




                                                                                                64
Appendix D. Review of Tax Components in
Investment Projects, FY2005–15
Theory of Change
1.     The objectives of the investment projects mostly focused on improvement of
public financial management. Tax administration objectives are to be reviewed
within this wider context. This is reflected in the tax commitments and the tax share
of the projects. The share of tax commitments in reviewed projects ranged between
13 and 50 percent of the project’s cost. The projects carried out in Sub-Saharan Africa
and Europe and Central Asia had the lowest tax share (table D.1 World Bank
Investment Projects by Regions). Five projects had a share of tax commitments
above 30 percent. Three reviewed projects (Nigeria P088150, Pakistan, and the
Russian Federation P078420) had budgets for tax components above $10 million (list
of reviewed investment projects with tax component in table D.4). One project
(Cambodia) had an objective “to strengthen the mobilization of the public resources
(as measured in tax and nontax revenues as a percentage of GDP).”

Table D.1. World Bank Investment Projects with Tax Component by Region
                                         Projects   Total Commitments    Tax Commitments
 Region                                    (no.)       (US$, millions)     (US$, millions)
 Sub-Saharan Africa                          6              213                  29
 East Asia and Pacific                       2               25                  11
 Europe and Central Asia                     2              114                  17
 Latin America and the                       6              104                  21
 Caribbean
 Middle East and North Africa               0               0                    0
 South Asia                                 1              103                  41
 Total                                     17              559                 119
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.

2.     Investment projects aimed at improving effectiveness and efficiency of public
finance administration. They indirectly served to reach the general goals of tax
systems, such as collecting financial resources, promoting private investment and
employment, and increasing transparency, accountability, and fairness. Improving
the effectiveness and efficiency of tax administration was expected to reduce
taxpayers’ compliance and public revenue administration costs, while reducing tax
evasion and tax avoidance and providing level playing field for business. Therefore,
these projects were expected to contribute to sustainable growth and development.




                                                                                             65
APPENDIX D
REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
3.     Most of the investment projects (13 out of 17) had as objectives: increase
transparency, equity, accountability and fairness of the public sector; only two
projects1 had explicit targets to increase tax revenue. The final results of the
Cambodia and Philippines were to be high revenues. It means that for most projects,
targets of reforming tax administration and improving tax system were to bring
revenue results as by-product of these projects.

Description of Support: Objectives and Design
4.     The specific objectives of investment projects vary. In some cases, a tax
administration component was part of a particular project, which aims to improve
performance of the whole public finance and/or resource management. There were
also projects aimed exclusively at increasing the capabilities of customs and/or
Inland Revenue administration. Some projects’ objectives were to develop the
capabilities of subnational or local administrative structures, while other projects
dealt with national or central administration.

5.      The measures and activities of the projects were tailored to these objectives.
For instance, in Cambodia, a tax administration component had the objective
“mobilization of public resources” and included: advising functional reorganization,
strategic planning, and capacity development, strengthening of core tax
administration functions, and improvement in accountability arrangements. It also
promoted the use of banking systems for tax payments, an amendment of code of
ethics for tax officers, and developed circulars on measures to collect revenue
information. Additionally, it helped initiate a self-assessed regime on property tax,
tax auditing, and collection of tax arrears.

6.     The project Tanzania aimed at “assisting the government in supporting the
Tanzania Revenue Authority to fulfill its mission as an effective and efficient tax
administration that provides high-quality services with fairness and integrity.” The
project had high tax policy and administration component (50 percent). It is worth
noting that it was built on experience gained under the Tax Administration Project
closed prior to the reviewed project.

7.    Under the wider objective “improving the efficiency and effectiveness of
governmental processes in the management of its public finances,” the project
envisaged such activities as: (i) deploying an integrated tax administration
information system in two pilot sites; (ii) improving and expanding disclosure of
key data from the General Department of National Taxation; (iii) introducing a tax
appeals mechanism in law; and (iv) enabling 17 different electronic forms including
taxpayer registration, tax return, and payment obligation online.



66
                                                                                 APPENDIX D
                                REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
8.      While measures and activities of investment projects reflected countries’
challenges and local needs, all projects had information technology components and
most of projects had human resource management or training components.
Improving effectiveness and efficiency of tax administration was carried out
through activities such as enhancing and/or introducing tax identification number,
e-filling of tax forms, support for data systems, improving the registration process,
strengthening enforcement and control, setting up a tax monitoring and planning
unite, training of tax administration. The interventions were to bring about
moderation of taxpayers’ compliance costs and tax administration costs.

Results: Effectiveness in Raising Tax Revenue
9.      Most of these projects experienced significant implementation problems and
many were extended by up to five years; only four were not restructured. The
revisions during implementation usually led to changes of projects objectives and
associated outcome indicators. For instance, a project with the tax-related objective “to
strengthen provincial governments in such areas as those related to land tax and tax
administration” initially aimed to support 50 percent of the provinces. After a major
restructuring the number of provinces was reduced to one or two to focus on priority
activities and the closing date was postponed by two and half years. Eventually, the
revised outcomes’ indicators were met, and two regions displayed an increase in tax
collection. The implementation was challenging and a flexible approach was needed as
well as revision of designed projects’ activities and objectives.

10.    There is no clear correlation between the achievement of project development
objectives and that of tax components. Reviewed projects in Africa and Latin
America and the Caribbean countries met more problems in reaching their
objectives than projects in other Regions. Projects in Europe and Central Asia
performed better.

11.     About half the reviewed projects had targets for indicators related to tax
revenue including tax-to-GDP ratio, collected taxes or number of taxpayers. These
targets were mostly met. In Cambodia, tax revenue as percent of GDP has increased
from 7.6 percent in 2005 to 11.7 percent in 2013 exceeding its modest target of 9.2
percent set for 2012. The project helped to improve revenue administration and
broadening the tax base, but it is not clear to what extent this achievement is linked to
project’s activities. In Nigeria P074447, the introduction of the unique tax
identification number was instrumental to increase of taxpayer registration, but fiscal
data showed that tax-to-GDP ratio did not improve and remained at a very low level.




                                                                                        67
APPENDIX D
REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
12.     Tax component of subnational projects were successful among the reviewed
projects. Three projects addressed regional or local challenges in the federal
countries: Argentina, Nigeria, and Russia. All of them achieved good results for tax
components. In the Russian Federation: Cadastre Development Project, P078420
provided for developing linkages between the municipalities and land right
registration offices. Together with implementing method of mass appraisal of real
estates, it allowed to increase tax revenues at the local level, since land taxes are
collected by municipalities. In Argentina: Subnational Government Public Sector
Modernization Program, P070448, the target related to tax collection was exceeded
as regions Formosa and Chubut displayed an increase of 40 percent and 25 percent
in tax collection during the project life-span. The second target related to exchanging
information between property registries and cadastre systems on a regular basis was
partially met (Mendoza: 50 percent, Chubut: 65 percent and Formosa: 70 percent).

13.    Information technology. There were projects with significant information
technology components. In Grenada, the investment project was to upgrade customs
data system with associated measures, to improve the tax registry, and to strengthen
tax enforcement. The envisaged outputs were mostly achieved. The new custom
data system replaced the outdated one. This enabled an efficient exchange of data
between the customs administration and the trading community, along with
electronic processing of collections and refunds. The tax administration part of the
project was implemented, but the outcome indicators were mostly not met as the
expected benefits such as reduced time to pay taxes or increase of tax compliance,
have yet to materialize.

14.     Deployment of information and communication technology may cause a
challenge for tax administration. The Tanzania project (P100314) was successful in
integrating its operation and introducing the VAT register through the information
and communication technology systems. The ICRR clearly indicated the problems
with sustainability of such projects. First, the new investment and current maintenance
of information technology systems are needed to secure the tax revenue administration
requirements. Second, the administration has to able to attract information technology
staff.

15.    A general finding is that although successful implementation of the tax
administration reforms may not lead to an immediate increase in tax collected, the
reform achievements pave the way for meeting such a goal in future, in particular, if
other fundamentals such as limited corruption and an independent judicial system are
in place.




68
                                                                                 APPENDIX D
                                REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
16.     Results are not easy to interpret. The achieved results and indicators may not be
easily interpreted. The ICRRs do not provide enough information and details. The
links between outputs and outcomes are not always clear. For instance, increase or
decrease of the tax-to-GDP ratio during project implementation may be affected by
many factors not at all linked to project activities. Second, the positive or negative
results of project’s actions may come only after a few years. One should not expect that
tax administration may accommodate changes overnight. Stable and predictable tax
administration (and tax system) brings changes of taxpayers’ behavior after months if
not years. Eventually these changes may lead to an increase in collected taxes.

17.     The same rule applies to internal structure of tax administration.
Implementation of clear internal rules and stable regulations for tax officers and
inspectors, including remunerations, promotions, internal controls, and evaluation
of staff may bring positive effects, only if such activities are carried out for a long
period of time.

Explaining Results
18.     Projects’ objectives were highly relevant, but their design was sometimes over-
ambitious. The relevance of design was sometimes assessed as too ambitious given
the government’s low institutional and absorptive capacity. High relevance of design
did not guarantee that the outcome of the project would be satisfactory, nor that a tax
component would be highly relevant. Three projects (Tanzania, Philippines, and
Pakistan) had high relevance of design and moderate relevance of the tax component.
On the other hand, the Argentina (P070448), Cambodia, and Mauritania projects were
modestly relevant and their tax components were also similarly relevant. The design
and implementation of tax administration reforms should address universal
challenges of the fiscal administration in terms of effectiveness and efficiency, and
take into account the country context and for projects at subnational level, the local
context, including equity considerations. The tax systems are usually deeply rooted in
the national politics, institutions, and history. This context, capabilities of
administration, and potential response to tax reform changes from tax payers and tax
officers may significantly differ among countries, and should be considered as they
may have an impact on behaviors and actual results including revenues, tax
avoidance and evasion opportunities, costs of compliance, and enforcement.

19.    The reviewed projects suggest that timing of administration tax reform could
be crucial for its success or even for launching reform. Paraguay had strong
commitment to capacity building in the areas of fiscal and economic planning for
policy formulation, implementation, and monitoring. The project was considered
high-risk due to the probability of a change the minister that was championing the


                                                                                          69
APPENDIX D
REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
reform. The change of the Minister of Finance, soon after the project was approved by
the Board, caused a considerable delay of 17 months in the signing the loan
agreement. That led eventually to cancellation of the project. The new minister was
interested in promoting a less ambitious reforms. Guatemala support for the project’s
activities ebbed and waned due to political situation, but the objectives eventually
were met (Guatemala Tax Administration Technical Assistance Loan, P0486541).

20.     Political leadership of reforms. The cancelled project in Mexico illustrates the
situation of vanishing government interest caused by the political cycle (box D.1).
Most tax administration reforms bring immediate and concentrated political risks,
and disparate long-term benefits. Therefore, it is not surprise that major reforms are
usually launched after elections and not before them. Tax reforms are in most cases
at the center of political campaigns and therefore are more sensitive to political cycle
than other reforms.


 Box D.1. Political Cycle as a Factor for Launching Tax Administration Reforms: Mexico
 The government of Mexico was committed to perform major reform of customs
 administration because slow and inefficient customs service and high transactions costs
 impede the country’s competitiveness, so the project did not directly target a rise in revenues.
 The country reached out to the World Bank for its international experience in the area of
 restructuring customs services. The project was prepared according to a plan put forward by
 the Mexican tax authorities under whose aegis customs operates. The project initially
 proposed an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan of $10 million
 together with $45 million of government financing.
 The project was approved in April 2009, but the government delayed signing for 11 months
 until March 2010, then six months later formally requested a restructuring to reduce its
 contribution to $24 million, while leaving the World Bank financing unchanged. Soon after the
 government decided to cancel the project. The project was formally closed in March 2012,
 three years after approval.
 During preparation and appraisal, the government interest in completing the project
 gradually waned, in part due to delays and budget constraints. But the critical factor for
 withdrawing from this project was that it became clear it could not be completed before the
 end of the presidential term. Thus the political risk associated with the reform could
 materialize during the political campaign and its potential and dispersed benefits would only
 come after the election.

 Source: ICRR, Mexico: Custom Institutional Strengthening, P114271.


21.    Institutional gridlock may also have caused delays or a limited success of a
project (box D.2). The tax administration reforms sometimes address major
institutional malfunctions, and may call for dissolving old structures, establishing
new ones, or merging some of them. Such actions inevitably confront strong vested
interests opposed to reform. The same resistance may occur if a major organizational


70
                                                                                           APPENDIX D
                                          REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
change is planned. With weak or diminishing leadership and ownership of the
reform, a chance for success is not high. Such a risk turned out to be a reality during
the implementation of the Pakistan. It planned to restructure the tax-based structure
of the tax administration into a unified function-based, decentralized, and
automated tax organization. Strong opposition to the reform from the Federal Board
of Revenue slowed down the process and limited government capacity to pursue the
project’s objectives was clear by the inability to secure parliamentary approval for
the broad-based General Sales Tax legislation, an important assumption for project
success after restructuring. Similar resistance of planned tax administration reforms
was encountered in Philippines: National Program Support for Tax Administration
Reform (P101964). Government ownership of the tax administration reform was
weak there as well. Neither project was effective in its pursuit of reform.


 Box. D.2. Institutional Gridlock and Change of Political Leadership: Paraguay
 The Ministry of Finance of Paraguay objectives were to improve the sustainability and the
 quality of public expenditures. The project design was based on sound analytical work
 prepared by the World Bank and the relevance of its objectives and design were rated high.
 The project assumed that no legal change was required to implement the project.
 After the World Bank’s approval, the Minister of Finance was changed, and it caused a delay
 of 17 months in signing the loan agreement by the government. In addition, as in most
 countries in the Region, a loan agreement has to be approved also by the parliament. The
 World Bank agreed to extend the effectiveness date by three months, but it was not sufficient.
 The second request to extent the closing date of the project was refused, and the project was
 eventually cancelled.
 This is a good illustration of diminishing political leadership of the project due to personal
 change and inability of the government to build broad political coalition for such reforms.
 Source: ICRR, Paraguay: Modernization of the Ministry of Finance (P087036).



22.      A flexible and proactive approach by the World Bank can be a decisive factor
of success. However, changes of political leadership do not necessary imply that a
project’s objectives may not be achieved. In Mauritania, the project was conducted in
a highly unstable political situation. During the project lifetime, the country
experienced two presidential elections, a military coup, and several governments. The
project was extended by five years and restructured, but eventually reached most of
its initial objectives, including tax collection targets. After 2012, when political
situation calmed the project’s activities intensified. The World Bank’s engagement
increased. All three objectives (to improve performance, efficiency, and transparency
of public resources management) were largely achieved. Efficiency was modest due to
the lack of an economic efficiency analysis and significant delays in project
implementation.


                                                                                                  71
APPENDIX D
REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
23.     Significant responsiveness to changing demand and requirements is in many
instances a key for success. Nigeria (P0088150) was restructured five times and the
closing date was extended for two and half years. Progress in implementing this
complex project was slow during the first five years, and resources were shifted from
slow to fast-moving governmental agencies. Project linkages between inputs, outputs,
and intermediate and final outcomes were vague. During implementation, the
political aspects of the project became overwhelming. The project costs were to be
funded in part by the government counterpart ($16.69 million), but that funding was
eliminated in third year of the project. This funding had been found to be a bottleneck
due to “bureaucratic procedures” of the budget office for the processing, approval,
and release of the counterpart funds. The outcome of the project was not satisfactory.

24.   The ability to sustain the World Bank’s support to reforms may be challenged
by changing governments. In Guatemala, after a supportive government, a new one
was hostile to reforms. This was a main reason for a five-year delay. Here, the World
Bank’s patience brought about good results.

25.     Complexity and restructuring of projects. Many projects are overly complex
and ambitious at the onset and the usual three-year project time frame is not
realistic. The reviewed projects addressed wide and deep problems of public sector
management, including high turnover of civil servants, and limited communication
among the government organizations. In Mauritania, all civil servants and nine
ministries were involved in the project and 12 pieces of legislation were passed. The
Argentina (P070448) could not be completed in the three years as initially planned
and after five years the scope had to be significantly reduced (box D.3).


 Box D.3. Adjustment of Project’s Activities to Actual Capabilities: Argentina
 The project’s objective was to improve the capabilities of the participating provinces and
 eligible municipalities to manage their resources more effectively and improve the quality of
 government administrative services. The project was to include half of the Argentina’s
 provinces. After five years, its scope was reduced to two provinces and the project was to
 focus priority activities as reflected in revised performance indicators and targets.
 The project design proved to be overly ambitious and underestimated the time needed to pass
 legal acts. Eventually, two provinces, Formosa and Chubut, performed well, and their 15
 percent increase in tax collection target was surpassed. But this restructuring came late,
 probably due to high rotation of task team leaders.

 Source: ICRR, Argentina: Subnational Government Public Sector Modernization Program (P070448).


26.   High rotation of task team leaders is a risk factor. During project
implementation, World Bank supervision focuses on monitoring progress and



72
                                                                                          APPENDIX D
                                         REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
providing technical support. For more than half of the projects, the closing date was
significantly extended, and actual project life was on average over six years. It is thus
expected that more than one task team leader was responsible for a particular project.
Among the investment projects there were some, which had up to five task team
leaders (Mauritania and Argentina). In practice, high rotation of task team leaders
reduced project oversight and might have been a cause for delays in project
restructuring affecting negatively the project outcome.

27.    A well-established leading borrower partner facilitates coordination and
implementation. Insufficient coordination among the governmental agencies may
hamper project implementation, for instance if the leading ministry is not well
equipped or staffed for planned activities. The evidence of the investment projects
suggest that the Ministry of Finance is best suited for tax administration reform
projects. While some of the projects focused on public financial management, and a
tax administration component was merely a part of it, it happened that a leading
governmental entity of a project was ministry of interior or ministry of
administration. This weakness usually led to unrealistic expectations and
implementation problems. The effective approach to this problem is to anchor the
project at the Finance Ministry and delegate some responsibilities to other
governmental or regional entity (box D.4).


 Box D.4. Competition Between States for Inclusion in the Project: Nigeria
 The general objective of the project was to strengthen capacity in the relevant participating
 states. The project was established at the Federal Ministry of Finance. The tax administration
 objectives were to enhance tax registration and assessment measures in Bauchi and Kaduna
 States. The beneficiary states were selected on a competitive basis, whereby the record of, and
 commitment to, reforms before project approval were a key selection criterion. The target for
 internally generated revenue was exceeded in both states and tax payer’s registration
 increased significantly.
 The high-level ownership by governors and their advisors seem to have been supported by
 the competition between states for inclusion in the project. It also helped project
 implementation and achieved the satisfactory rate of outcomes

 Source: ICRR, Nigeria: State Governance and Capacity Building (P074447).


28.   As mentioned above, an average time-span of a project is over six years.
During such a period, the external and internal conditions may change significantly.
Administrations are living organizations, and may be influenced by many factors.
And projects’ activities should adjust to these changes. In some cases, the learning
process within administration may also bring positive developments (box D.5).




                                                                                                 73
APPENDIX D
REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15

     Box D.5. Learning Process of Cadastre Agency and Flexible World Bank’s Approach: The
     Russian Federation
     During preparation of the project the State Cadastre Agency was not eager to consider a
     merge with the Right Registration Service. The World Bank provided evidence that such
     solution would be the best model, but did not force it on the Russian institutions during
     that stage. During the implementation, Russia itself came to the conclusion that the single
     agency model suited its needs best, and implemented it by creating the RosReestr (Federal
     Service for Registration, Cadastre, and Cartography Services). This merger disrupted the
     project’s activities. The World Bank was flexible, and extended the closing date to adjust to
     this new situation. The project brought about an important institutional change.
     This is an example where the World Bank’s patience, persistence, and flexibility brought a
     good outcome.

     Source: ICRR, Russian Federation: Cadastre Development Project (P078420).


29.     Some projects had objectives to increase the number of taxpayers and
taxpayer registration (Nigeria P74447 and P088150, Pakistan, and Philippines). These
targets were achieved with high margin. However, the ultimate question is how
these additional taxpayers may be served. The ICRRs were not clear whether the
increase in the number of taxpayers and the resulted increase in service demand was
addressed by an increase of the number of tax officers, or the previous staff was
supposed to serve an increased number of taxpayers, and thus increasing its
productivity, or the level and quality of taxpayers’ service suffered. This is not a
trivial issue, because compliance taxpayers’ costs could rise, and in the end collected
taxes may remain unchanged.

Lessons
30.    In a country with weak tax administrative capacity and highly unstable
political situation, the project design, planned activities, and measures should be
kept simple, and objectives should not to be too ambitious. Relatively simple
measures such as e-filling, banking transfer for tax payments, well-developed
circulars may bring major improvement in tax compliance.

31.    Tax administration reforms are not only technical and institutional in nature
but also political. The latter dimension predominates in many instances. Borrower
support for these reforms may wax and wane during project life. The World Bank and
the project management unit should take that into consideration (Guatemala).

32.    When implementing tax administration reform, the World Bank needs to be
proactive and responsive to changing circumstances and priorities and ready to




74
                                                                                             APPENDIX D
                                            REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
learn from implementation weaknesses and failures to adjust project activities and
targets.

33.     High complexity and ambition usually lead to frequent restructurings and
extensions. For such complex projects, close monitoring and supervision and the
ability to adjust project design, if needed, are especially important. A mid-term
review with adequate benchmarks should be a natural framework to consider such
revisions.

34.    Tax administration reforms alone are not sufficient. Tax administration
operates in a wider context of other governmental agencies and judicial entities and
institutional framework, including the tax system itself.

35.    Tax system reforms should consider tax administration capabilities and
limitations. Experience suggest a gradual approach to enhancing these capabilities.

36.     Tax administration reforms are context-specific, and should take into
considerations country (or state) political, institutional, and historical characteristics.
Therefore, such projects need detailed prior assessments of governmental ownership
for reforms, and call for considerable preparatory work and careful design.

Table D.2. Investment Projects with Tax Component, by Share of Tax Code, 2005–2015
                                        Overall Portfolio                                     Reviewed Portfolio
                           Comm.         Tax                                                Comm.         Tax
                           Amount      comm.                    Closed                      Amount      comm.
 Percentage     Projects    (US$,       (US$,      Countries*   projects   ICRs    ICRRs     (US$,       (US$,      Countries*
 Group            (no.)    millions)   millions)     (no.)        (no.)    (no.)    (no.)   millions)   millions)     (no.)
 0–9               10        619         30`           9           1        0        0         0           0            0
 10–14             23       1,062        134           21         13        11       8        352          48           7
 15–19             7         107          18           7           3        2        1         18          3            1
 20–25             11        195          43           8           4        4        4         58          12           4
 26–50             19        489         191           17          7        6        5        153          59           3
 >50               5         237         189           5           2        2        0         0           0            0
 Total             75       2,709        605           67         30        25      18        581         122          15
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG database
Note: *Country total includes overlaps. Comm. = commitment.




                                                                                                                       75
APPENDIX D
REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
Table D.3. Investment Projects with Tax Component, by Region, 2005–2015

                                         Overall Portfolio                                      Reviewed Portfolio
                            Comm.          Tax                                               Comm           Tax
                           amount        comm.                   Closed                        amt.       comm.
             Projects        (US$,        (US$,    Countries* projects ICRs ICRRs             (US$,        (US$,    Countries
 Region         (no.)      millions)    millions)      (no.)      (no.)   (no.)    (no.)     millions)   millions)    *(no.)
 Africa          29          1,253         134           17         9       8        7          235          36          5
 EAP             14           379          192            8         9       6        3           39          10          3
 ECA             11           422          136            9         3       2        1          100          14          1
 LAC             17           441           67           12         8       8        6          104          21          5
 MNA              1            1             0            1         0       0        0            0           0          0
 SAR              3           213           76            1         1       1        1          103          41          1
 Total           75          2,709         606           48        30      25       18          581         122         15
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and IEG database.
Note: *Country total includes overlaps; AFR=Sub-Saharan Africa; comm = commitment; EAP=East Asia and Pacific; ECA =
Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR=South Asia.

Table D.3. Investment Projects with Tax Component, by Global Practice, 2005–2015
                                            Overall Portfolio                                      Reviewed Portfolio
                                Comm          Tax                                                Comm.         Tax
                                amount      comm                     Closed                        amt       comm.
                     Projects    (US$,       (US$,      Countries*   projects   ICRs    ICRRs     (US$,       (US$,      Countries*
 Global Practice       (no.)    millions)   millions)     (no.)        (no.)    (no.)    (no.)   millions)   millions)     (no.)
 Governance             54      1,946         508          38          21        19      14        442         98           12
 Energy &                5        52           5            5           2         0       0         0           0            0
 Extractives
 Transport & ICT         3       211          29            2           2        2        0         0           0            0
 Finance &               3        37          10            3           2        2        2        34           9            2
 Markets
 Social, Urban,          2       144          19            2           1        1        1        100         14            1
 Rural, and
 Resilience
 Macroeconomics          2         6           1            2           1        1        1         5           1            1
 & Fiscal
 Management
 Education               1       130           7            1           0        0        0         0           0            0
 Trade &                 1        12           1            1           1        0        0         0           0            0
 Competitiveness
 Agriculture             1        10           1            1           0        0        0         0           0            0
 Health, Nutrition       1         2           0            1           0        0        0         0           0            0
 & Population
 Total                  73      2,549         581          56          30        25      18        581         122          16
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.




76
                                                                                                  APPENDIX D
                                                 REVIEW OF TAX COMPONENTS IN INVESTMENT PROJECTS, FY2005–15
     Table D.4. Investment Projects with Tax Component: List of Reviewed Projects, 2005–2015
                                                                                                                         Funding              Tax
                                                                                                                         Amount Tax           Funding
Country       Income   Tax/GDP   Tax/GDP                                                  Global     Approval Completion (US$,     Share      (US$,
Name          Category 2005      2015      PID       Project Name                         Practice   FY       FY         millions) (%)        millions)
                                                                Sub-Saharan Africa
Kenya         LMIC     18.7      15.9      P085007   MSME Competitiveness                 FAM        2005     2012        22.0    13.0        2.9
Kenya         LMIC     18.7      15.9      P090567   Inst Reform and Capacity Bldg.       GOV        2006     2012        25.0    14.0        3.5
Mauritania    LMIC     13.1      13.4      P082888   Publ. Sect. Capacity Bldg.           GOV        2007     2014        13.0    14.0        1.8
Nigeria       LMIC     2.9       1.6       P074447   State Governance and Capacity        GOV        2005     2012        18.1    17.0        3.1
                                                     Bldg.
Nigeria       LMIC     2.9       1.6       P088150   Econ Reform and Govern SIL           GOV        2005     2013        140.0   13.0        18.2
                                                     (FY05)
São Tomé      LMIC     10.9      13.9      P083400   Gov. Capacity Bldg.                  MFM        2005     2011        5.0     14.0        0.7
and
Principe
Tanzania      LIC      11.7      11.7      P100314   Tax Modernization Project            FAM        2006     2012        12.0    50.0        6.0
                                                               East Asia and Pacific
Cambodia      LIC      7.9       13.4      P087945   PFM and Accountability               GOV        2006     2014        14.0    20.0        2.8
Mongolia      UMIC     28.7      15.3      P098426   Governance Assistance                GOV        2006     2015        14.0    23.0        3.2
Philippines   UMIC     12.4      12.9      P101964   Support for Tax Administration       GOV        2007     2013        11.0    33.0        3.6
                                                     Reform
                                                             Europe and Central Asia
Russian       HIC      16.6      14.3      P078420   Cadastre Development                 SURR       2006     2011        100.0   14.0        14.0
Federation
                                                         Latin America and the Caribbean
Argentina     HIC      22.1      29.2      P070448   Subnational Gov. Publ. Sect.         GOV        2006     2013        40.0    14.0        5.6
                                                     Modernization
Argentina     HIC      22.1      29.2      P101171   SOC&FISC NTL ID SYS II               GOV        2009     2013        20.0    20.0        4.0
Colombia      UMIC     12.9      13.4      P106628   Consolidation of Natl. Publ. Mgmt.   GOV        2010     2015        25.0    30.0        7.5
                                                     Inf.
Grenada       UMIC     18.3      18.7      P101322   TAC                                 GOV         2008     2012        1.9     33.0        0.6
Mexico        UMIC     16.1      17.4      P114271   Customs Institutional Strengthening GOV         2009     2012        10.0    20.0        2.0
Paraguay      UMIC     10.2      12.8      P087036   Modernization Ministry of Finance    GOV        2005     2007        7.5     14.0        1.1
                                                                    South Asia
Pakistan      LMIC     9.6       11.2      P077306   Tax Administration Reform Project    GOV        2005     2012        102.9   40.0        41.2

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.
Note: FY = fiscal year; FAM = Finance and Markets; GDP = gross domestic product; GOV = Governance; HIC = high-income
country; LMIC = low- and middle-income country; LIC = low-income country; MFM = Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management;
MSME = micro, small, and medium enterprise; PFM = public financial management; PID = project identification number; SIL =
special investment lending; SURR = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; UMIC = upper-middle-income country.



1Given its overlap with a DPL series supporting tax reforms), Guatemala (P048654): Tax
Administration Technical Assistance Loan although approved outside the review period
(approved in FY1998 and closed in FY2007) was also reviewed.




                                                                                                                                         77
Appendix E. Review of IFC Advisory Services
for Business Taxation, FY2005–15
IFC Approach
1.     IFC Advisory Services (AS) projects covering business taxation were part of
IFC AS projects supporting investment climate reforms. As indicated in IEG
evaluation of World Bank Group support to investment climate reforms (see
appendix F, World Bank 2015b), IFC support was implemented through stand-alone
AS structured under a set of defined products and tend to form focused, short-term,
and rapid interventions. IFC intervention tend to be standardized and narrowly
focused. In some regions, Latin America and the Caribbean among them, investment
climate work is jointly managed by the World Bank and IFC and Investment Climate
AS are part of a broader investment climate agenda. As noted in the same
evaluation, World Bank Group support to investment climate tends to be heavier in
the regulatory areas such as business registration, taxation, and trade, which are
covered by the most common diagnostic tools, Doing Business and Enterprise
Surveys.

2.     AS on business taxation focus on tax administration reforms rather than on
tax policy. Business tax administration reforms are usually carried out with other
reforms along the Doing Business indicators covering issues, such as starting a
business, dealing with construction permits, and resolving insolvency.

3.      The tax payment aspect of the Doing Business indicators (payments, time and
total tax rate for a firm to comply with all tax regulations) generally guides the
business tax work that often includes drafting/enactment of tax laws.
Harmonization of legal environment is sometimes addressed through regional
projects (for example, in East Africa). Doing Business measures have also been used
for AS projects at the subnational level (for example, in India).

4.      More so than the World Bank, IFC relies on government requests or
stakeholder consultations when designing investment climate projects. Historically,
IFC’s investment climate projects have relied on the Facility for Investment Climate
AS diagnostic reports on administrative barriers. Over time, Doing Business started
to become a de facto diagnostic tool for IFC. Among projects that used a diagnostic
tool, 62 percent used the Doing Business report in their design.




                                                                                     78
                                                                                 APPENDIX E
                          REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
5.      At the country strategic level, in the recent past IFC has increased its
collaboration with the World Bank in the context of Country Partnership
Frameworks. When there is no World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework,
IFC relies on its Regional Strategies to guide its AS activities in country level, but
there is no framework for assessing their development impact at that level. The 2013
IEG biennial report on operations evaluation that assessed IFC M&E systems
indicated that the framework for understanding the development impact of AS
operations is based on the logic model that links outcomes with project activities
(see appendix F, World Bank 2013 a). IFC’s evaluation program comprises donor-
funded facility reviews, and thematic, product, and program assessments of its
operations.

Scope and Composition of IFC Support to Tax Administration Reform
6.      IFC AS on business taxation are much smaller than World Bank interventions
and are managed by the revenue authorities. Over the review period, IFC initiated
117 AS that include a component on business taxation. Among those, 82 were closed
during the same period. Based on IFC selective evaluation policy, which has been in
effect since 2008, only 17 of those projects were evaluated (table E.1.).

7.     Among the 17 IFC AS projects reviewed for this note only the Vietnam) was a
stand-alone business taxation reform project. These 17 IFC AS projects ranged in
their expenditures between $99 thousand and about $5 million, with a median of
$1.3 million, and were much smaller than World Bank interventions. Expenditures
on tax administration reform were about a third of the total expenditures or just
above $400 thousand on average. (See the list of evaluated project in table E.2.)

8.     The IFC AS projects reviewed differ from the overall portfolio for a number of
reasons. First, AS projects have been selectively evaluated only since 2008, thus
projects completed earlier cannot be part of the review. In effect the oldest projects
part of this review were completed in 2008. Also because of this cutoff date, the
variations over time may not be reflected in the set of reviewed projects. For
instance, the average size of AS projects with a business taxation component
increased significantly from FY2005 to FY2012 and has since been declining.

9.     Second, the selection for evaluation is applied on the universe of Investment
Climate AS not sorted by subcategories. Thus the 17 AS on business taxation that
have been evaluated (and reviewed) may not be representative of the overall
portfolio.




                                                                                        79
APPENDIX E
REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
10.    Third, recent trends may not be reflected as FY11 is the most recent approval
year for the projects evaluated (and reviewed). This includes the recent increase in
demand from Latin America and the Caribbean countries. While so far the majority
of Investment Climate AS projects including those with a component on business
taxation have been conducted in the Sub-Saharan Africa and Europe and Central
Asia Regions, demand for those AS has been recently increasing in the Latin
America and the Caribbean Region (for example, Colombia and Guatemala). Given
the specific business taxation challenges in the Region, the design of AS on business
taxation may have evolved recently in ways not reflected in the set of reviewed
projects, which does not include any Latin America and the Caribbean country-
specific project. According to Doing Business indicators: South America has the
highest corporate income tax rate and time to comply and Central America and the
Caribbean (the other part of the Region) are two sub-Regions where profit taxes
account for the greatest share of the tax rate.

11.    For instance, the Colombia Tax Reform project (ID 599785) approved more
recently (FY14; $2.1 million) was designed to improve the business tax-related
investment climate and fostering private sector competitiveness, both at the national
and subnational level in Bogota (as a pilot). (See box E.1.)

12.     Also, changes in IFC’s approach moving away from a narrow focus on Doing
Business indicators to include, for example, increase in formal tax compliance of
micro, small, and medium enterprises, may have affected the design of more recent
AS projects still active and thus not yet subjected to evaluation. Finally, the recent
merger of the IFC Business Environment and Investment Climate unit with the
World Bank team under the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice might have
led to further changes in the design of more recent projects compared with those
that have been evaluated and reviewed for this note. Only one project managed by
the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice is covered by the review (Rwanda).
This project, completed in FY2014, has a relatively small tax share (15 percent) but is
much bigger than the average size of the reviewed projects (total funding amount:
$4.6 million).

Theory of Change
13.    IFC AS on business taxation aim to reduce costs and time to comply with tax
regulations (covering mainly corporate income and other profit taxes, and social
contributions and labor taxes paid by the employer but sometimes property taxes,
property transfer taxes, dividend tax, capital gains tax, financial transactions tax,
waste collection taxes, vehicle and road taxes, and any other small taxes or fees)
through the creation of tax brackets, reducing frequency of reporting from monthly


80
                                                                                          APPENDIX E
                                   REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
to quarterly, combining various taxes, rationalizing administrative processes that
include elimination of duplicate inspections by tax authorities, simplification of
code, and making available “commentary” to improve comprehension or reduce
uncertainty, introduction of information communication and technology and mobile
methods of payment and introduction of taxpayer appeals system.


 Box E.1. One Recent Active IFC Tax Administration Project—Colombia, FY2014
 In Colombia, an IFC Tax Reform project approved in FY2014 and still under implementation
 aims to improve the business tax-related investment climate and foster private sector
 competitiveness, both at the national and subnational level in Bogota (as a pilot) by enhancing
 tax simplification and reducing compliance tax burdens for all enterprises.
 The Colombia Tax Reform project, among other objectives, specifically addresses increase in
 formal tax compliance of micro, small, and medium enterprises, by reviewing and
 rationalizing the micro, small, and medium enterprise tax regime, and lowering barriers to
 formalization and improvements in the tax compliance culture. According to project
 documents, over half of the Colombian firms identify tax avoidance practices of competitors
 in the informal sector as a major constraint. To increase tax compliance, the project is also
 expected to harmonize changes at national and subnational levels. For M&E indicators, in
 addition to the usual ones for IFC AS business taxation projects such as average number of
 days to comply with business regulation, and direct compliance cost savings, the project
 includes new indicators, such as number of business taxpayers that are registered with the tax
 authority and number of firms that file tax returns, both with baselines and targets.
 The project is supposed to draw on the World Bank-Fund Integrated Assessment Model of
 Tax Administration. This methodology, project documents elaborate, is expected to allow the
 government to conduct self-assessments and implement reforms according to international
 good practices. The IFC Colombia Tax Reform AS Project is expected to complement the
 World Bank support to the modernization of the Colombian tax administration (including
 taxpayers’ segmentation, auditing, withholding system, refunds, and electronic invoices).

 Source: Colombia: Tax Reform Project, (ID599785) Implementation Plan, 2014



14.    The link of IFC AS projects to macro and broader development objectives,
such as with improved firm-level productivity (Albania) and increased investment
from domestic and foreign sources (Albania and the Republic of Yemen), were
rarely made. Even then, they are usually not tracked under the M&E system and
there is no explicit results chain or counterfactuals. Rarely (Rwanda and the
Republic of Yemen) did the IFC AS projects explicitly link project activities to the
objective of increasing government revenue, maybe because the AS projects are in
parallel with activities by other institutions, such as the IMF or that the revenue
authorities are expected to look out for that objective on their own without IFC
support.




                                                                                                 81
APPENDIX E
REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15

Data Limitations
15.     When tax administration reforms constitute a large component of the reform
package, standard and well-established IFC Business Taxation indicators may be
measured, such as: average number of days to comply with business regulation; and
average official cost to comply with business regulation; along with measures for
draft tax bill, training modules for taxpayers and tax administration staff, and
promotion and outreach programs. The value of aggregate private sector savings
from recommended changes is then the main impact indicator for the tax
component. However, a model is often used to estimate the impact of tax reform
instead of actual savings.

16.   However, when tax reforms account for 25 percent or less of the overall IFC
AS project, the M&E system may not collect beneficiary data specific to tax
administration reform. Usual outcome results may indicate “number of procedures
eliminated or streamlined” (nothing specific to taxation). Sometimes, these are
supplemented by various details emerging from recommendations that were
adopted by the authorities.

17.    Another data limitation comes from the Doing Business indicators
themselves. A recent article by Hallward-Drimeier and Pritchett has the following
critique of the Doing Business framework (Hallward-Driemeier and Pritchett 2015).
Doing Business indicators are problematic, because among other things, there is
huge variance reported by firms within the same country. This observation fits well
with the finding by the recent investment climate evaluation (see appendix F, World
Bank 2015b) which indicated that barriers to dynamic and well-functioning markets
may benefit privileged economic participants at the expense of competitors,
potential entrants, and consumers. Though details along these lines are generally
unavailable, one EvNote (Uzbekistan: Small and Medium Enterprise Policy Project
[542564]) did signal that the situation away from the capital was much worse than in
the capital indicating that Doing Business reforms of tax administration are likely to
have the same issues of high variance within the same country with the benefits
coming to privileged economic participants, at least initially.

Results
18.    The tax components were successful in 67 percent of the cases for projects at
country level (15 projects), a success rate similar to Investment Climate AS projects,
and in 65 percent of the 17 reviewed projects (including 2 Regional projects in Africa
and Latin America and the Caribbean). However, this review found that
development effectiveness was often inferred with a model rather than through an



82
                                                                                          APPENDIX E
                                   REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
actual measure because there was not enough time immediately following the
passage of laws/changes in regulatory environment for the private sector to reap
actual benefits from the changes.


 Box E.2. Government Commitment Can Be Enhanced with Clearly Quantified Cost and
 Benefits that Demonstrate that the Project Is Good for the State: India-Bihar
 For the Bihar Investment Climate Reform Phase II, IFC aimed to improve the investment
 climate in the State of Bihar, India.
 Even though the overall project was unsuccessful, the project introduced improvements in
 business taxation. These include a simplified tax regime for small businesses; introduction of
 an audit-based inspection regime applied to a random sample of taxpayers; introduction of
 anti-tax-avoidance provisions; and setting up “one-stop” service centers for small businesses.
 For the taxation component, IFC was able to enhance client commitment with clearly
 quantified cost and benefits that demonstrated the benefit of the project to the state of Bihar.

 Source: EvNote Bihar: Investment Climate Reform Phase II (ID568031).



19.   In some cases, to find out actual benefits to the beneficiaries, IFC was able to
undertake postcompletion surveys. These surveys revealed that, although the
enactment of the laws was necessary for cutting compliance time and costs, they
were far from being sufficient and additional corrective actions were necessary to
improve the situation.

20.    The modest size of AS projects, particularly with the tax authorities as
counterparts, allowed them to avoid many of the challenges faced by World Bank
interventions. In addition, IFC combined private sector consultations to improve
relevance and focused on legal and administrative changes, usually with some
international expertise, as part of its project design. These positive features were
enhanced when there were a series of projects because such sequencing permitted
IFC to build a better relationship both with the private sector as well as the tax
authorities (Tajikistan: Business Enabling Environment III & IV ID [542544]).

21.   The limits of the Doing Business approach lay with the relative rigidity which
does not take into account the actual strength of the public tax authorities. (Sudan:
Administrative Barriers Reform Program (ID 549806) and the Democratic Republic
of Congo: Investment Promotion, Taxes and Doing Business [ID 559845]).

22.   However, the participation of the tax authorities in project implementation,
even when they were weak, is critical and usually led to some increase in tax-to-
GDP ratio. Pakistan is a counterexample (box E.3). In addition, when they were
stronger as was the case in India-Bihar, for example, the formalization of the sector


                                                                                                    83
APPENDIX E
REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
that came with the Doing Business reforms led to considerable increase in tax
revenue and tax-to-GDP ratio. However, when the formalization had already taken
place, as was the case in many countries in Europe and Central Asia, the increase in
tax appears not to be that dramatic.


 Box E.3. Tax Administration Projects Require the Participation of Revenue Authorities:
 Pakistan
 In Pakistan, IFC followed up a successful project with the Pakistan Business Council (PBC)
 with a Phase II that was to “initiate but not implement,” among other things, business
 taxation reform. Both the government and the private sector had recognized the urgency of
 tax reform, because, at approval, Pakistan had one of the lowest ratios of direct tax-to-GDP.
 The PBC had been formed by some of the largest and most renowned private companies of
 Pakistan and wanted to establish itself as a strong, nonpolitical voice of the private sector.
 According to IFC, PBC was a truly independent—politically and financially—advocacy body
 that had been successful in positively influencing the government.
 However, the IFC AS project activities targeted at the PBC did not result in any reforms. In
 contrast, the project completion report indicated that the World Bank had launched a long-
 term tax reform program with tax authorities and in collaboration with the IMF. PBC was to
 collaborate to this program for private sector inputs “when necessary.”

 Source: EvNote, Pakistan: Assistance to Business Council Phase II (ID564227).



23.    Lastly, AS projects reviewed did not target an increase in government
revenue as part of their objectives and almost never reported on increase in
compliance or increase in tax collection. In general, at approval, the result chain is
not well articulated and counterfactuals are not considered. For example, that an
increase in tax revenues as a percentage of GDP could take place without any
marginal increase in compliance in the formal sector, for example, the Republic of
Yemen: Investment Climate (ID553505).

24.    From the point of the broader development objectives, this study found that
when the tax-to-GDP ratio was either low or high at the inception of the project, the
benefits to this broader development objective were limited. However, if the tax-to-
GDP was in the “middle of the pack,” as was the case in India-Bihar, the benefit to
this broader development objective was considerable. In addition, the longer-term
impact in terms of competitiveness or governance (particularly in addressing
corruption) were not considered when support for institutional development was
provided under AS projects, may be because they were inherently limited in size.




84
                                                                                           APPENDIX E
                                    REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15

Lessons

25.     Going beyond Doing Business reforms, though desirable, has yet to be
tested. The EvNote of an unsuccessful AS project indicated (and the IEG Investment
Climate Reform Evaluation agrees) that Doing Business indicators should not be
used as either a goal or a main source of evidence for measuring project results. In
an FCS country, where availability of reliable data is a constraint, the M&E plan
should be properly budgeted for and include baseline, relevant indicators, data
collection activities, and when possible triangulation of information through focus
groups, interviews or direct observation (Sudan). Nonetheless, the reform program
may be unable to secure government ownership and commitment much beyond
Doing Business reforms, and important developments, such as the tax appeals
tribunal as well as the all-important in-depth reform legislation, may not gain
traction (Rwanda). Vietnam: Business Tax Simplification (ID564330) is an example
where going beyond Doing Business reforms requires strong support and political
will beyond tax authorities (box. E.4.).


 Box E.4. Going Beyond the Tax Authorities for Approval May Create Bottlenecks: Vietnam
 For the Vietnam Business Tax Simplification AS project, IFC had a Memorandum of
 Understanding signed between IFC and the General Department of Taxation (GDT) to
 provide technical assistance for reforming the tax system.
 The project set out to achieve a number of rather ambitious tax policy reform targets within a
 fairly abbreviated three-year time frame. Most importantly, the design failed to appreciate
 that the GDT does not have the authority to make any policy or regulatory changes. All
 legislative changes initiated by the GDT had to go through a chain of approvals including the
 provincial offices, Ministry of Finance, the government, and the National Assembly.
 Although the project was finally able to secure buy-in for the establishment of the VAT
 threshold, the “centerpiece” of a small business tax regime, the National Assembly had not
 enacted at project completion the revised VAT Law and Law on Tax Administration.
 Consequently, the reduction in cost of compliance was only partially achieved.

 Source: EvNote, Vietnam: Business Tax Simplification (ID564330).



26.    The involvement of other partners such as the World Bank and IMF lend
credibility to IFC AS projects (the Republic of Yemen), particularly in an FCS
country. However, while a high-level committee is necessary for validation,
endorsement, and championing of reforms with government, parliament and
industry groups, they would not be available for the duration of the project to act as
day-to-day counterparts. For that task, IFC should promote the participation of
empowered technicians and private sector (Madagascar). In this regard, beyond the



                                                                                                  85
APPENDIX E
REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
most nascent stage of state-building, the revenue authorities are quite well placed to
lead the formalization process leading to increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio.

27.     For countries where a functioning tax-related legal and regulatory framework
exists, major policy reforms require changes in law, which entails a time-consuming
process. IFC requires a thorough scoping exercise to better comprehend the
complexity of undertaking tax-related reforms and set more realistic time frame and
targets. In addition, it is critical to prioritize and sequence activities to ensure quick
wins to create and maintain momentum while working on longer-term reform
initiatives (Vietnam).

28.     To improve equity and ensure better implementation of reforms, the
following drivers should be considered: a clear identification of responsible entities
for implementation; provision of adequate information and training of officials at
the local level; provision of necessary tools and resources to implementing agencies
at the local level; establishment of an incentive structure with feedbacks on the
quality and reward/punishment system. Building local partnerships with
stakeholders such as business associations, nonprofits, training centers, academia to
implement training on the regulatory reforms are more cost-effective and efficient
methods and ensure greater sustainability of the reform agenda (Tajikistan).

Table E.1. IFC Advisory Services—Business Taxation, by Share of Tax code, FY2005–2015
                                     Overall Portfolio                                      Reviewed Portfolio
                    Funding Commitment                                     Funding
                    amount    for tax             Closed Client-           amount Commitment
Percentage Projects (US$,      (US$,    Countries projects facing* EvNotes (US$,        for tax                    Countries
  Group      (no.)  millions) millions)   (no.)     (no.)    (no.)   (no.) millions) (US$, millions)                 (no.)
    0–9          1        2.0         0.1           1         1         0         0         0           0               0
   10–14        11       12.5         1.3           7         8         6         1       0.89        0.09              1
   15–19         4       10.0         1.5           3         2         2         2       6.10        0.91              2
   20–25        47       31.0         6.1          23        37        37         8      14.27        3.22              8
   26–50        18       29.9        10.3          18        15        14         4       3.82        1.29              4
    >50         36       46.1        45.6          30        19        18         2       1.42        1.42              2
    Total      117      131.5        64.9          62        82        77        17      26.50        6.93             14
Source: IFC AS Operational Portal.
Note: *IEG selects a percentage of client-facing AS projects to review. The internal AS are not included in the selection.




86
                                                                                       APPENDIX E
                                REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15

Table E.2. Advisory Services—Business Taxation Projects, by country, 2005–2015 Reviewed by
IEG

                              Tax/GDP                                                            Funding            Tax
                              (most                                                              Amount Tax         Funding
Country      Income   Tax/GDP recent                                         Business Completion (US$,     Share    (US$,
Name         Category 2005    year)     PID       Project Name               Line     FY         millions) (%)      millions)
                                                 Sub-Saharan Africa
Congo,       LIC      5.9     8.8       559845 Investment Promotion, IC               2010       0.26     33        0.09
Dem. Rep.                                        Taxes, and Doing
                                                 Business
Eastern    N/A                          569528 EAC Investment              IC         2013       1.98     25        0.49
Africa                                           Climate Reform
region                                           Program
Madagascar LIC        10.1    10.1      561587 Investment Climate          IC         2010       0.89     10        0.09
                                                 Reforms - Business
                                                 Licensing
Niger        LIC      12.3    15.1      548746 Doing Business              IC         2008       0.66     25        0.17
                                                 Indicator Solution
                                                 Design, Admin Barrier,
                                                 and METR
Rwanda       LIC      12.6    13.4      576907 Investment Climate          T&C        2014       4.56     15        0.68
                                                 Reform Program
Sudan        LMIC     7.3     6.1       549806 Administrative Barriers IC             2011       1.61     30        0.48
                                                 Reform Program
                                                East Asia and Pacific
Vietnam      LMIC     18.2    19.1      564330 Business Tax                IC         2013       1.28     100       1.28
                                                 Simplification
                                              Europe and Central Asia
Albania      UMIC     17.9    16.9      543824 Better           Business IC           2008       0.10     20        0.02
                                                 Regulation - Action
                                                 Plan
Armenia      LMIC     14.3    17.5      564407 Regulatory                  IC         2013       1.54     15        0.23
                                                 Simplification - Doing
                                                 Business Reform
Tajikistan   LMIC     16.6    19.0      542544 Business          Enabling IC          2014       5.04     20        1.00
                                                 Environment Phases
                                                 III, IV
Uzbekistan LMIC       27.0    28.5      542564 SME                  Policy IC         2010       0.71     25        0.18
                                                 Development Project,
                                                 phase IV
Uzbekistan LMIC       27.0    28.5      559085 Building Capacity for IC               2011       0.65     50        0.33
                                                 Better Regulation
                                          Latin America and the Caribbean
Latin        N/A                        552825                             IC         2010       1.51     20        0.31
America
and the
Caribbean                                         Municipal Scorecard
Region                                            Phase II
                                              Middle East and North Africa



                                                                                                                   87
APPENDIX E
REVIEW OF IFC ADVISORY SERVICES FOR BUSINESS TAXATION, FY2005–15
Yemen,       LMIC       6.7       N/A        553505 Investment Climate        IC       2008         0.14      100       0.14
Rep.                                                  Reform Program(Tax)
                                                          South Asia
Bangladesh LMIC          7.1      8.7        571047 BICF-Regulatory           IC       2012         4.05      25        1.01
                                                      Reform Phase II
India, Bihar LMIC        9.9      10.8       568031 BIHAR Investment          IC       2011         1.30      30        0.39
                                                      Climate Reform Phase
                                                      II
Pakistan      LMIC       9.6      11.2       564227 Assistance to Business IC          2009         0.22      20        0.04
                                                      Council Phase II
Source: World Development Indicators, AIV, Government Finance Statistics, cepalstat
Note: IC = Investment Climate; LIC = low-income country; LMIC = low-middle-income country; PID = project ID; T&C: Trade
and competitiveness; tax/GDP = tax-to-GDP ratio UMIC = upper-middle-income country.




88
References
World Bank. 2008 a. Evaluation of World Bank Support for Public Sector Reform. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.
———. 2008b. Project Performance Assessment Report: Colombia—Structural Fiscal Adjustment Project and
     First, Second and Third Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Structural Adjustment Loan Projects.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2009. Project Performance Assessment Report: Mozambique—Economic Management and Private Sector
     Operation Project; and First and Second Poverty Reduction Support Credit Projects. Washington, DC:
     World Bank.
———. 2010. Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis: Phase I.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012. Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis: Phase II.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013 a. Biennial Report on Operations Evaluation: Assessing the Monitoring and Evaluation Systems of
     IFC and MIGA. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013b. Project Performance Assessment Report: Afghanistan—First, Second, and Third Programmatic
     Support for Institution Building Projects and Strengthening Institutions Development Policy Grant
     Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013c. Project Performance Assessment Report: Dominican Republic Public Finance and Social Sector
     Development Policy Loan. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014. Project Performance Assessment Report: Jamaica—Fiscal and Debt Sustainability Development
     Policy Loan. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015 a. IEG Learning Product: How Does Knowledge on Public Expenditures Integrate with the Design
     Development Policy Operations? Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015b. IEG Learning Product: Quality of Macro-Fiscal Frameworks in Development Policy Operations.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015c. IEG Learning Product: Quality of Results Frameworks in Development Policy Operations.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015 d. Investment Climate Reforms: An Independent Evaluation of World Bank Group Support to
     Reforms of Business Regulations. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016 a. IEG Learning Product: The Role of Political Economy Analysis in Development Policy Operations .
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016b. Project Performance Assessment Report: Cambodia—Public Financial Management and
     Accountability Project. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016c. Project Performance Assessment Report: Mozambique—Poverty Reduction Support Credits 3-5.
     Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                          89
