Id ntiﬁc tion for D v lopm nt (ID4D)
      Id ntiﬁc tion S st ms An l sis




             Countr
             Ass ssm nt




                                       LIBERIA
identification for Development (iD4D)
       Id ntific tion S st m An l sis




             Updated June 2015
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover photos: Top left: A boy holds his birth certificate, outside African Development Bank Zanzan II Primary
School, in Bondoukou, Côte d’Ivoire. © UNICEF/NYHQ2011-2489/Asselin; Center: Identification cards for
women in a local finance cooperative. © Simone D. McCourtie / World Bank, SDM-IN-046 World Bank; Bottom
left: A refugee filling an application at the UNHCR registration center in Tripoli, Lebanon. © Mohamed Azakir /
World Bank, _ZAK6881F; Top right: Fingerprint. © Jose Luis Gutierrez; Right center: Man guiding another in
using a fingerprint scanner. © leezsnow; Bottom center: Using smartphone. © mihailomilovanovic.
Table of Contents


 Executive Summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  iv

 Overview  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1

 What Is Digital Identity?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3

 Potential Benefits for Liberia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .5

 Enabling Environment .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
         Governance .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
         National Identification Registry .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
         Biometric Identity Card  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
         Financing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
         Privacy  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8
 Functional Identity Programs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
         Ministry of Health and Social Welfare .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
         Ministry of Foreign Affairs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 10
         Civil Service Agency  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
         National Social Security and Welfare Corporation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12
         Ministry of Transport  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 13
 Additional Considerations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15

 Next Steps  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17

 Annex 1: Stakeholders Met for Consultations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19

 Annex 2: Diagnostic Framework for Liberia  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  21




                                                                                                                                                                                    iii
 Executive Summary


The Government of Liberia (GOL) enacted the National Identification Registry Act in 2011 to establish national
identification in the country. The law called for the setup of a National Identification Registry (NIR) to be respon-
sible for issuing a biometric-based identification card to each citizen and resident in Liberia. Since the enactment
of the law, a Board of Registrars (BOR), headed by the Minister of Internal Affairs, has been set up as a governing
body and has convened multiple times. In 2015, the government put in place a management team for the NIR
and allocated provisional funding for the setup of a national registry.

Today, no official identity card is issued to people in Liberia. Roughly 10.6 percent of the population of Liberia is
registered in a civil registry, managed by the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, and only 26 percent of chil-
dren are registered at or around birth.

The development of digital identity in Liberia can help the country’s economic and social development. The use
of an official identity can improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of conducting census, collecting taxes, issu-
ing passports, delivering pensions, managing elections, controlling the country’s border, and delivering financial
services. In the future, digital identity can help the implementation of effective safety net programs that provide
for the country’s poor.

About five digital identity programs are being run by different government agencies in Liberia. These programs
provide useful services and are specific to the individual needs of each government agency. They help operate
a civil registry for birth and death, a passport system, a human resource management system for civil service,
a pension system, and a driver’s license system. Each functional program uses its own technologies and pro-
cesses, with little or no provision for interoperability across the different identity programs. Scaling up any of
these functional programs to national coverage is likely to be difficult. In contrast, a well-developed national
identity program can help harmonize the functional identity programs.

In developing a digital identity program for Liberia, the GOL may consider possible next steps: (a) strengthen
the enabling environment for identity, including strong provisions for privacy and data protection; (b) develop a
business plan and design for NIR, exploiting partnerships, both public and private, where possible; (c) establish
the NIR, within a strong institution, with sufficient capacity and resources; (d) enroll people; (e) ensure proper
linkages exist amongst the different identity programs in Liberia, in addition with the civil registry; (f) establish
electronic authentication of identity; and (g) communicate the benefits of digital identity to people in Liberia.

This report provides a rapid study of the potential and readiness of digital identity in Liberia. The work has been
funded by the Korean Trust Fund (KTF) and the Ebola Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF). The report is based on
consultations held with the GOL and stakeholders in Liberia during 2014 and 2015. The report provides a pre-
liminary review of the enabling environment and the functional identity programs in Liberia, and discusses next
steps. Further assessment of the enabling environment and a detailed action plan would be needed for the GOL
to pursue developing digital identity in the country. This report is complemented by Digital Identity Toolkit: A Guide
for Stakeholders in Africa, a publication of the World Bank.




iv
Overview


 This report provides a rapid assessment of the potential and readiness of digital identity in Liberia. The study is
 based on discussions held with the Government of Liberia (GOL) and stakeholders during May–June 2014 and
 March 2015. Annex 1 shows the stakeholders who met in Liberia. Annex 2 provides a framework used to assess
 digital identity in Liberia.

 A companion document, Digital Identity Toolkit: A Guide for Stakeholders in Africa, published by the World Bank
 in 2014, provides a broader overview of digital identity and the steps necessary for building a digital identity pro-
 gram in a developing country in Africa.




                                                                                                                    1
What Is Digital Identity?


 A digital identity system involves capturing the unique identity of each individual in a country and storing the
 information in a national identity registry, usually in the form of an electronic database. Once the registry is estab-
 lished, the government may issue an official identity credential, such as a national identity card bearing a unique
 identification number, to each person, and operate identity services that verify people’s identities electronically. A
 national registry thus established can then be used across sectors—from education and health care to transpor-
 tation and urban development—for the delivery of services, both public and private (see Figure 1). For example,
 a government offering safety net transfers to the country’s poor can use the national identity registry to help iden-
 tify the target population and issue cash transfers electronically. A financial institution can use the national reg-
 istry to validate identity, thereby addressing a key aspect of Know Your Customer (KYC), and can offer a host of
 financial services, such as opening an account, securing credit, taking deposits, or paying for services, whether
 at a bank branch, on a computer, or on a mobile phone. Immigration authorities may track who enters and exits
 the country, and link national passports with the unique identity of each person.

 Identification is thus necessary for modern development. Without a reliable way of proving one’s identity, exercis-
 ing basic rights, claiming entitlements, accessing a range of governmental services, and conducting many daily
 activities could be hampered. Governments play an important role in facilitating the development of such identifi-
 cation systems and in inculcating trust, primarily through regulations, for the broad adoption and use of identity.1

 A digital identity program consists of two types: (a) foundational identity—which is built in a top-down manner with
 the objective of bolstering national development by creating a general-purpose identification for use across sec-
 tors; and (b) functional identity—which evolves out of a single use-case, such as voter ID, health records, or bank
 cards, and has potential for use across sectors. A detailed discussion on the pros and cons of the two programs
 can be reviewed in Digital Identity Toolkit: A Guide for Stakeholders in Africa.
 Figure 1	 A National Vision for Economic and Social Development
                                                                                                                Transform the efficiency of
                                                                                        Safety Nets             safety nets with electronic
                                                                                                                cash transfers
                                                                                                                Track immunization of
                                                                                        Health Care             children and delivery of
                Civil                                                                                           health care to citizens
             Registration                                                                                       Accelerate financial
                                           National Identity                              Finance               inclusion using digital
              Identity                         Registry                                                         banking and payments
             Enrollment                                                                                         Issue driver’s licenses
                                                                                         Transport              linked to digital identity
          Register people                                                                                       registry
                                        Record unique identity
            for identity
                                        of people in a national                                                 Track border control and
                                           electronic registry                          Immigration             issue passports linked to
                                                                                                                digital identity registry

 Source: World Bank analysis.

  See Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Report “Digital Identity Management for Natural Persons: Enabling Innovation and Trust in the
 1

 Internet Economy” (2011).

                                                                                                                                                        3
Potential Benefits
for Liberia


 Digital identity can be beneficial for economic and social development of Liberia. A reliable and robust form of
 identification at a national scale can benefit multiple sectors in Liberia. To achieve this, a basic form of digital
 identity would be needed. The identity of every individual in Liberia can be captured in an electronic database and
 accessed by authorized ministries and government agencies to electronically deliver services to people.

 Digital identity in Liberia can help in the following ways:

    •	   Improve human resource management within government: Government payrolls are known to
         have ghost workers at times. In Liberia, a biometrics registry was established within the Civil Service
         Agency (CSA), as discussed in Section 6, to track ghost workers and reduce or remove redundancies
         in the human resource system. The biometric registry has proven to be useful. Since the launch of
         the system, about 3,000 employees have been identified and removed from the payroll, easing the
         burden on the government budget. More can be achieved under the system once the registry is linked
         to a national digital identity program, is run on a real-time basis, and has further coverage of people.
    •	   Lower the cost of election registration: In the absence of a national identity registry, Liberia faces
         the cost of re-registering voters for each election cycle. Based on discussion with the GOL, election
         registration can cost up to US$5 million per election cycle. The Ministry of Justice incurs an additional
         cost of deploying investigators to nearly 2,000 locations across the country to investigate and resolve
         voting issues. Voter registration is done frequently for national elections every six years, for midterm
         elections, and for referendums. Though voter ID cards present a form of identification in Liberia, the
         reliability of the voter ID card requires further review. Digital identity can help reduce the cost of voter
         registration and offer greater efficiency during electoral cycles.
    •	   Improve border control and electoral management: Liberia has 176 official land crossing points
         of which 36 are manned. Border control is thus needed to prevent unauthorized entry at the country’s
         borders, and at major transport hubs, such as airports. Because Liberia shares a common ethnic
         background with neighboring countries, border control can also affect the country’s elections. Accord-
         ing to the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization of Liberia, inspectors are sent to 1,877 voting
         locations during an election period across the country in order to prevent noncitizens from voting.
         Digital identity can be used to verify the identity of people and screen unauthorized access at border
         checkpoints, thus improving national security and electoral management.
    •	   Improve the delivery of financial services: Liberia currently does not have a credit bureau. A credit
         bureau is used to assess the creditworthiness of people in determining whether an applicant for a loan
         is eligible to borrow money. The Central Bank of Liberia (CBL) maintains a credit watch list in form of
         a basic Excel file. To determine the creditworthiness of people, banks request a check against this
         credit watch list or issue frequent inquiries to other financial institutions. The process is time intensive,
         costly, and not efficient. Neither banks nor the government has a comprehensive view of the level of
         indebtedness of creditors in Liberia. Without a robust credit bureau, the level of consumer lending
         remains low. To help clear financial transactions amongst banks, the CBL is in the process of setting
         up a financial switch. Digital identity can improve the delivery of financial services in Liberia, includ-
         ing strengthening credit bureau functions, and facilitating the use of electronic financial transactions.



                                                                                                                         5
    •	   Improve the reliability of travel documents: The use of digital identity can improve the quality of
         travel documents, such as passports. Several European nations require the citizens of Liberia to
         appear for visa interviews in neighboring countries in order to attest the authenticity of the travel docu-
         ments used. Since 2007, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) has been using biometrics to issue
         passports, improve the reliability of documents, and detect and prevent fraud. The system has been
         useful. MOFA reports that roughly five attempts for duplicate passports are detected on average per
         day with the use of biometrics, though no punitive steps are being taken to prevent future attempts.
         More can be achieved when MOFA’s passport system is linked with a digital identity program.
    •	   Harmonize identity programs across government agencies: Five functional digital identity pro-
         grams are being operated under different government agencies in Liberia. A person in Liberia can
         thus hold several identity numbers: (a) a passport number; (b) a civil servant registration number;
         (c) a social security number; (d) a driver’s license number; (e) a birth registration number; and (f) a
         voter registration number. Though each program is useful, the multiplicity of identity programs raises
         questions about the cost and efficiency of identification in Liberia. Most of these functional programs
         are not developed for interoperability and linkage with other systems. A national identity program can
         harmonize the workings of these various identity programs, and provide a unified view of an individual
         to both the government and private firms for the efficient delivery of services.
    •	   Lower the cost of census: Census can be costly. The cost of census can be significantly reduced or
         eliminated with the help of a reliable digital identity system that registers every individual in the coun-
         try. Liberia plans to conduct the next census in 2018.
    •	   Improve tax collection: Building a robust revenue collection program can be difficult in the absence
         of a comprehensive identity system in a country. Without an identity system, the government does
         not have a full view of the tax paying population. Tax evasion can thus be easier and can contribute
         to a loss of revenue to the government. A national digital identity program can point to the roster of
         people who may be eligible to pay taxes, and could link with an electronic system managed by the
         tax authorities.
    •	   Improve the delivery of safety nets and universal health care: Liberia currently has a limited social
         safety net program. In case the GOL launches a broader safety net program to help protect the poor
         and vulnerable of the country, a digital identity program could be used to reduce leakage of funds and
         improve the efficiency of safety nets. The use of digital identity can also improve the delivery of health
         care, including for infants and children.
    •	   Improve harmonization with the ECOWAS region: In March 2013, the Economic Community of
         West Africa States (ECOWAS) proposed the use of biometric national identity cards in place of travel
         certificates. The approach can help improve regional integration, cross-border identification, and the
         use of electronic services, such as digital commerce, across ECOWAS states. Digital identity in Libe-
         ria can thus help the country be aligned in the way services are delivered within ECOWAS and in
         neighboring countries, such as Ghana and Nigeria, where digital identity is being used. Digital identity
         can also be an enabler for a digital economy with potential regional linkages.




6
Enabling Environment


 Liberia has taken important steps towards setting up the enabling environment for digital identity. On August 1,
 2011, the President signed into law the National Identification Registry Act of 2011. The law recognizes that a
 reliable and effective system for identifying people in Liberia is essential for rule of law and for social planning,
 including the efficient delivery of services. The new law repeals PRC Decree #65 and calls for the creation of a
 National Identification Registry (NIR) in Liberia.

 According to the law, PRC Decree #65 was promulgated in 1981 to represent the first national effort to imple-
 ment a national identification system in Liberia. At the time, a Bureau of National Identification Registry (BNIR)
 was established and empowered to issue national identification cards with a focus on revenue collection. The
 BNIR no longer exists. The national identification cards issued by the BNIR were found to be inadequate for the
 country’s national development objectives and did not fully account for the technology and processes required
 for producing identity cards.

 Since the enactment of the law, several progressive steps have been taken. A Board of Registrars (BOR), chaired
 by the Minister of Internal Affairs, has been set up to govern identification in Liberia. The Board has met several
 times to define the strategic and operational priorities of the NIR. The law represents a significant milestone in
 establishing a national identity in Liberia.

 Further work may be needed in the enabling environment for digital identity in Liberia. The enacted law currently
 does not define digital identity as a legally recognized category, though it defines biometric identity as a digital
 construct of identity. The law is silent on how the digital identity is to be used or asserted, i.e., through online
 identity services. The law is explicit about the need to control access to biometric information which is collected
 or used for identification purposes.



 Governance
 The NIR Act of 2011 establishes a BOR to govern identification in Liberia, and defines the management structure
 and functions. The BOR consists of the following members:

    •	   Minister of Internal Affairs (Chair of the Board)
    •	   Director General of Liberia Institute of Statistics & Geo-Information Services (LISGIS)
    •	   Minister of Health and Social Welfare
    •	   Minister of Justice
    •	   Director General of National Social Security & Welfare Corporation (NASSCORP)




                                                                                                                    7
National Identification Registry
According to the NIR Act of 2011, NIR would serve as an autonomous entity within the executive branch of the
GOL, and would be empowered to operate as a legal entity with the full rights to offer services. NIR’s functions
are stipulated to be:

    •	   Establish, maintain, administer, and implement the National Biometric Identification System (NBIR)
         of Liberia
    •	   Design, implement, and make provisions for the technology infrastructure, and related processes,
         needed to set up the NBIR
    •	   Collect, organize, store, secure, and manage access to data, including biometric data, and data
         obtained from people who apply for a national biometric ID card, or for other key documents, such as
         a passport, driver’s license, or social security card
    •	   Establish the adequacy of information provided by applicants for biometric identification cards in
         accordance with the law
    •	   Issue a biometric citizen identification card to citizens, or a biometric resident identification card to
         residents in Liberia
    •	   Issue a social security number (SSN) as part of the biometric citizen identification card, to serve as a
         unique identifier and the primary government-approved identity number

In March 2015, the government set up an interim management team for the NIR, and issued a request for an
expression of interest from suppliers to build the NBIR in Liberia. Subsequently in 2015, the government formal-
ized a management team of NIR within the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and is reviewing partnership arrangements
for the NIR. The government has prioritized setting up the NBIR in light of upcoming national elections during
2016–2017. A NBIR based on biometric profiles of registered voters can support the holding of elections in the
country.



Biometric Identity Card
According to the NIR Act of 2011, a person in Liberia is entitled to obtain a biometric national identification card
provided that she or he submits the following information: (a) a birth certificate; (b) fingerprints; (c) photograph;
(d) proof of citizenship of parents; (e) date of birth; (f) place of birth; (g) gender; (h) color of skin, hair, and eyes;
and (i) any other information deemed necessary to verify citizenship. Based on the information provided, a citizen
would be issued a biometric citizen identification card bearing a SSN, and a resident would be issued a biometric
resident identification card.



Financing
According to the NIR Act of 2011, the NIR is to be financed by legislative appropriations made through the
national budget, without precluding the NIR from seeking and accepting assistance, donations, and/or grants
from other persons or institutions. During 2015, the government allocated a provisional budget for the setting up
of NIR, and continues to seek additional financing from donors and partners for building the NBIR.



Privacy
The NIR Act of 2011 calls to ensure that the collection and issuance of data about people are done in conformity
with the freedom of information laws of Liberia and do not infringe upon the rights to privacy guaranteed by the
country’s constitution.

8
Functional Identity
Programs

 Liberia has no foundational identity program (though the NIR Act of 2011 calls for one), and has five functional
 identity programs at minimum. Different government agencies run these identity programs to serve various seg-
 ments of the country’s population. Each program uses its own standards of identity and operates its own pro-
 cesses. Interoperability across these programs is not known. Harmonization of these functional programs could
 be a potential challenge.



 Ministry of Health and Social Welfare
 The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MOHSW) operates a civil register to record births and deaths in Libe-
 ria. Since 2011, the civil register has been partly decentralized to improve the efficacy of information collected at
 birth. Prior to 2011, birth registration had to be conducted at the office of MOHSW in Monrovia. Since people in
 rural areas had difficulty traveling to Monrovia, birth registration was low. Starting in 2011, the GOL has estab-
 lished 14 birth registration centers (as registrars) in different counties of Liberia and maintains a central registrar
 at the MOHSW office in Monrovia. As shown in Table 1, adults continue to be registered in Monrovia only. The
 registration process for adults involves screening and interviewing people to determine whether the person was
 truly born in Liberia. Though progress is made in recording births, further work is needed in recording deaths or
 marriages in Liberia.

 MOHSW maintains an electronic database of births though not in real time. At the time of birth (irrespective of
 whether the birth takes place in a community or at a county health clinic), a birth notification form is filled out in
 triplicates. Parents keep one copy of the birth notification form, and the other two copies are sent to the district
 registrar officer. The district registrar records the birth, transmits the information to the electronic database at
 MOHSW, and issues a birth certificate to the facility where the child was born. A parent can claim the birth certifi-
 cate by presenting a copy of the birth notification form. MOHSW has spent considerable effort to create aware-
 ness for the need of early birth registration. MOHSW has developed midwife birth facilities at the county health
 clinics, and is offering birth registration for free (see Table 1).

 Today, 10.6 percent of the people of Liberia are registered, and 26 percent of the children are registered at or
 around birth, as shown in Table 2. The GOL has made significant progress in establishing the civil registry of
 Liberia. More work is needed to register the remaining population.


 Table 1	      Cost and Location of Registration in Liberia

       Age                 Cost of Registration                           Location of Registration
  < 12 years         LRD 0                                           County Registrar or Central Registrar
  Adults             LRD 500 (equivalent US$5.60)                    Central Registrar

 Source: Liberia MOHSW (2014).



                                                                                                                      9
Table 2	          Number of Records in Liberia’s Civil Registry

                       Age                                                              Number of Records
     0–5 years                                           244,000 (estimated: 26 percent of child population)
     6–12 years                                          290,000
     All ages                                            287,939 (from county registrars)
                                                         127,657 (from central registrar)
                                                         415,596 (total, estimated: 10.6 percent of population)

Source: Liberia MOHSW (2014).


The civil register of Liberia can serve as an important cross-check for establishing the digital identity program of
Liberia, as envisioned under NIR. A linkage between the civil register and the NBIR would be important. The civil
register would not be sufficient to establish the unique identity of people in Liberia. NIR would require a technol-
ogy, such as biometrics, to determine the unique identity of people at the stage of enrollment.



Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Since 2007, the Bureau of Passports and Visas at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA), has been using biomet-
rics to issue passports to citizens in Liberia. Applications for passports are received at five enrollment stations in
Liberia and in two countries outside. Table 3 shows a snapshot of Liberia’s passport system. Ten fingerprints and
one photograph are collected as biometrics at the time of application. MOFA uses proprietary scanners to collect
fingerprints in five steps per applicant. MOFA sends the fingerprints to an Automated Fingerprint Identification
System (AFIS) within MOFA. At AFIS, the fingerprints are checked against an electronic database of people to
whom MOFA has previously issued passports. If a match is found, the request for passport is seen as a duplicate
and a possible fraudulent attempt. Otherwise, MOFA reviews issuing a passport, based on the validity of addi-
tional information provided.

According to MOFA, about five attempts are made on average per day to obtain a fraudulent passport. The appli-
cant faces no penalty for a fraudulent attempt, and is denied a passport.

The electronic system for passports under MOFA has been set up using a build, operate and transfer (BOT)
model. The GOL has partnered with a local firm to issue passports.2 The local firm has made an up-front invest-
ment in the equipment, systems, and training for the passport system. In return, the firm collects the greater part
of the revenue generated from the passport fees. The firm is expected to transfer ownership of the passport
system to MOFA after 300,000 passports have been issued. The cost of the passport system is thus estimated
to be US$5–6 million.3

The development of the passport system is an accomplishment for the GOL. Thus far, 130,000 passports have
reportedly been issued, and fraudulent attempts are prevented daily, as shown in Table 3. Based on the brief
assessment done, it is not known whether the fingerprints are stored in a standard data format, are readable
without vendor intervention, or the images captured are of reasonable quality. These areas would need to be fur-
ther examined to determine a potential linkage of the passport system under MOFA with a digital identity system
under NIR. With good interoperability, the passport system could be useful in validating the identity of people who
already have a passport and seek an official identification from NIR.




 Innovetrics is the supplier of AFIS. The AFIS is reported to have a response time of less than 1 minute, and a capacity of less than 400,000 records.
2


 Buck Price is the local firm providing the passport system in partnership with MOFA.
3




10
Table 3	           Snapshot of Liberia’s Passport System

                                    Area                                                                      Description
     Passport application centers                                                  1 station in Monrovia (with 3 windows)
                                                                                   3 stations in the U.S.
                                                                                   1 station in London
                                                                                   5 stations in total


                                                                                   Note:
                                                                                   1 station in Brussels is planned
                                                                                   1 station in Asia is desired
     Passport fee                                                                  US$23 in Liberia
                                                                                   US$205 outside Liberia
     Validity of passport (years)                                                  5
     Length of time for obtaining passport (days)                                  7
     Type of biometric collected                                                   10 fingerprints and 1 photograph
     De-duplication (to check for uniqueness)                                      Using AFIS4
     Number of passport applications (per day)                                     150–200
     Fraudulent attempts (average, per day)                                        5
     Number of records (biometric, and passports)                                  130,000

Source: Liberia MOFA (2014).


Civil Service Agency4
Since 2009, the Civil Service Agency (CSA) has been operating a biometric-based electronic register to improve
human resource management within the government. The purpose of the register has been to clean up civil
servant payroll, ensuring that there are no ghost workers. The exercise was a high priority for the post-war
administration, and has been intended to reduce the burden on the government budget due to human resource
inefficiencies. The exercise has involved enumerating the employees, verifying their active enrollment, and regis-
tering their biometrics into an electronic database. CSA uses multiple types of scanners to collect ten fingerprints
in ten steps per person.5 AFIS is also used for de-duplication.6 Biometric facial recognition is also used. Table 4
depicts the enrollment system used by the CSA.

The CSA registry has shown notable success, though it highlights areas of further development. Since its launch,
about 3,000 employees have been removed from the government payroll, demonstrating significant cost sav-
ings. Of these employees, 2,000 did not show up for biometric enrollment, and another 1,000 were found to be
individuals who were using the identities of employees on payroll that are no longer active. The registry offers a
useful offline database to provide an employee roster for human resource management. Greater enumeration of


 Note that a conservative estimate of the cost of the passport system is used. A passport fee of US$23 for 300,000 passports generates US$6.9 million of rev-
4

enue. A passport fee of US$205 for 300,000 passports generates US$61.5 million of revenue. The fraudulent attempts of five applications per day on average
generate additional revenue without increasing the count of passports issued.
 The 10 fingerprints are captured one at a time in a sequence. Different types of scanners are used. For the bulk of registrations, a standard single-finger optical
5

scanner (from Digital Persona) is used. For difficult to capture fingerprints, a multi-spectral scanner (Lumidign sensor) is used.
 AFIS configuration has a response time of 200,000 records per second for a single finger, and 400,000 records per second for facial recognition.
6




                                                                                                                                                                11
Table 4	           Snapshot of Civil Service Agency Enrollment

                                    Area                                                                      Description
     Type of biometric                                                              10 fingers and 1 facial data
     Number of employees
     Government employees                                                           32,000
     Transitional employees7                                                        8,000
     Pensioners (regular and armed forces of Liberia                                15,000
     pensioners)
     Proxy and beneficiaries8                                                       95,000
     Total                                                                          150,000
     Enrollment
     Number of enrollments (per week)                                               150
     Cost of enrollment                                                             LRD 0

Source: CSA (2014).


civil servants, namely teachers, could help improve the coverage of the registry. Further work may be needed to
improve the interoperability of fingerprint scanners within CSA, or with external programs (such as the passport
system). Higher quality images could further improve the performance of the biometric system.7 8

The CSA registry could be used as an important cross-check with the NBIR under NIR. Interoperability of the
CSA registry with the NIR would be useful, though could present challenges in case the fingerprint data is deter-
mined not to be based on a standard format or does not demonstrate high image quality.



National Social Security and Welfare Corporation
The National Social Security and Welfare Corporation (NASSCORP) serves two sets of people: (a) active con-
tributors (i.e. employees of the formal public and private sectors) who participate in the country’s social security
scheme and offer monthly withholdings from their respective payrolls; and (b) beneficiaries (i.e. mostly retired
individuals) who receive monthly benefits from the social security scheme. Table 5 provides a summary of the
active contributors and beneficiaries under NASSCORP. For each active contributor, NASSCORP provides a
social security number that accompanies the individual throughout their life, from stages of active contribution to
beneficiary. At the active contribution stage, NASSCORP collects biographic information only and no biometrics.
Once the individual becomes a beneficiary, NASSCORP requires biometric enrollment and issues benefits to
the bank account of eligible beneficiaries. NASSCORP requires each beneficiary to re-register every two years.

In the absence of a national digital identity system, NASSCORP faces several challenges:

       •	    There may be duplicate entries of beneficiaries
       •	    The biographic information collected of active contributors may be inconsistent and may undermine
             identity resolution


 The enumeration of teachers is reported to be not complete. Teachers are employees of the Ministry of Education, even at the local level.
7


 It should be noted that the database includes a significant number of proxies and beneficiaries that are designated by the primary registered civil servant. In
8

case biometric information is not collected for proxies and beneficiaries, administering benefits, such as health insurance coverage for family members of the civil
servants and payment of survival benefits for deceased employees, could be a challenge.


12
Table 5	              Snapshot of NASSCORP Electronic Database

                                Population                                                               Number of Records
      Active contributors                                                              81,309 from the private sector
                                                                                       37,175 from the public sector
                                                                                       118,484 in total
      Beneficiaries                                                                    7,000 (approximately)

Source: NASSCORP (2014).


        •	     Dependents, such as children, may be difficult to identify and may require varying benefits depending
               on age
        •	     Spouses may be difficult to identify since marriages are not properly registered and benefits to a
               spouse can change based on the person’s civil status (such as remarriage)
        •	     NASSCORP may continue to issue benefits to people who may have passed away since deaths are
               not properly registered in Liberia

Since 2009, NASSCORP has been using four information technology (IT) systems to conduct its daily operations.
These systems were developed by a local firm.9 NASSCORP owns and operates the IT systems. NASSCORP is
working to integrate these modules, and to link with an external banking system. Currently, significant amounts
of manual data entry takes place, posing risks of incorrect information. The four IT systems include the following:

        •	     Registration system—to issue the social security number to each active contributor
        •	     Contribution record system—to record payroll withholdings at 7.75% of gross pay uncapped
        •	     Claims system—to cover occupational and disability insurance
        •	     Beneficiary system (with biometric enrollment)—to offer social security benefits

For biometrics, 6 fingerprints are captured in six steps per individual.10 NASSCORP issues a social security
card bearing a photograph and a social security number to each person.11 The use of biometrics has reportedly
reduced the number of beneficiaries who may be incorrectly claiming social security benefits. Though efforts
are being spent to link the CSA registry with the NASSCORP system, the process is thus far manual. The list of
people from CSA registry is printed and visually compared on a periodic basis.

As with other functional identity programs, the NASSCORP IT systems could be used as an important cross-
check with a NBIR under NIR. Interoperability of the NASSCORP and NIR systems would be useful, though
would depend on standardized data formats and higher quality images.



Ministry of Transport
The Ministry of Transport (MOT) manages the driver’s license system of Liberia. MOT relies on a network of
license schools that give a certificate to each applicant to attest to their driving abilities. The applicant uses this
certificate to request a driver’s license. Currently, no rigorous steps are known to be used to vet the identity of
the applicant. As a result, the driver’s license is primarily used as a permit to operate a vehicle, and not as a form
of identity in Liberia. Table 6 provides a summary of the information represented by the driver’s license system.



 Mwetna is the local firm that has developed the IT systems of NASSCORP.
9

10
     A supervisor can override biometric enrollment if the individual is unable to provide a readable finger for reasons of image quality.
11
     The social security cards given are PVC cards with no security provision.


                                                                                                                                             13
Table 6	     Snapshot of Driver’s License System

                         Area                                                 Description
 Information given on driver’s license                     Biographic information (such as name)
                                                           Driver’s license number
 Validity (years)                                          3
 Number of records                                         14,270

Source: MOT (2014).


The driver’s license system provides a useful repository of information about registered drivers in Liberia. Given
the lack of reliability of information captured of individuals, a cross-check with the driver’s license system could
be less significant for the digital identity program under NIR. On the other hand, the availability of a national
digital identity system can help vet the identity of people requesting a driver’s license, and improve the quality of
transport documents issued.




14
Additional
Considerations

 The following are additional considerations in developing a digital identity system in Liberia:

    •	   Improved infrastructure for high-speed internet can help: Digital identity requires a central office
         to interconnect with regional offices in all counties of Liberia using a high-speed internet link for enroll-
         ing people, issuing identity credentials, providing identity services, and running operations. The use of
         biometrics requires collecting high-quality fingerprint images and cross-checking with a back-end sys-
         tem for uniqueness using a high-speed internet link. The availability of affordable high-speed internet
         can thus help the development of a digital identity program, though offline solutions are also possible.
         The connectivity infrastructure of Liberia offers good mobile coverage but lacks reliable high-speed
         internet. Currently, 65.3 percent of people in Liberia have a mobile phone subscription, and less than
         1 percent of people have a high-speed internet subscription. Stakeholders in the information and
         communication technology (ICT) sector of Liberia, namely Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
         (MOPT) and Liberia Telecommunications Authority (LTA), are working to improve the availability of
         high-speed internet in Liberia.
    •	   Outreach throughout Liberia is important: Several government agencies involved in functional
         identity programs face challenges in decentralizing their operations. A national digital identity program
         would require a strong center, potentially in Monrovia, with a wide network of enrollment centers, or
         registrars, throughout the country. ICT applications, in the forms of e-government and e-commerce,
         aiming to use digital identity for delivery of services, would similarly operate throughout the country
         and require coverage in urban and rural areas.
    •	   Public private partnerships are desirable though should be pursued with care: A public private
         partnership (PPP) is a desirable approach for developing a digital identity program in order to relieve
         the fiscal burden on government and to fill in for inadequate technical capacity. Several government
         agencies in Liberia have shown an interest in using a BOT model of PPP. The GOL should continue
         pursuing PPP as a potential approach for developing a digital identity system, though should prevent
         locking in with any one vendor or any specific technology. Before engaging specific vendors, the GOL
         should consider preparing a design and technical specifications for the digital identity program, with
         adequate provisions for scalability, reliability, availability, and affordability.
    •	   A technology system should be based on international standards, common off-the-shelf com-
         ponents, and standardized data formats: Interoperability of the national identity program would be
         a key feature. The GOL should ensure the use of international standards for all technology systems
         used in developing a national identity program. Similarly, all data should be captured and stored in
         standardized data formats.

 Additional considerations for developing a digital identity program can be found in Digital Identity Toolkit: A Guide
 for Stakeholders in Africa.




                                                                                                                         15
Next Steps


 The GOL may consider the following next steps for developing a digital identity program in Liberia:

       •	    Strengthen the enabling environment: The enactment of the NIR Act of 2011 is a significant step
             forward for Liberia. Additional work may be needed to ensure that digital or electronic identity is a
             legally recognized category,12 and strong provisions are in place for privacy, data protection, and elec-
             tronic transactions, amongst other considerations.
       •	    Establish the NIR as an operating entity: The NIR, as empowered under the NIR Act of 2011,
             should assume its full range of functions, including building the national registry and executing plans
             for enrolling the entire population of Liberia. Setting up the NIR requires a viable business plan, insti-
             tutional development, technology development, and partnerships, amongst other steps.
       •	    Determine the desirable type of biometrics: The NIR Act of 2011 has indicated issuing a biometric-
             based identification card to citizens of Liberia. The GOL should determine the type of biometrics to be
             used to establish uniqueness of individuals at the time of enrollment, and for authentication, if desired.
       •	    Conduct enrollment: The government will need to undertake the sizeable task of enrolling people
             and capturing biographical and biometric profiles of people into the NBIR of the country. Enrollment is
             time and cost intensive, and should be effectively planned, preventing the need of reenrollments in the
             future. The government should consider conducting enrollments in partnership with public or private
             entities, and in minimizing the cost of enrollment.
       •	    Determine a credential, if any: The current legal environment requires further clarity on the type of
             credential, if any, to be issued to people in Liberia. Possible credentials may be: a simple identity card,
             a smartcard, a mobile credential, or no physical credential (a unique identity number may be issued
             in such a case). The GOL acknowledges that the choice of credential would depend on cost and may
             change with time due to technology.
       •	    Review potential linkage with the civil registry and authentication mechanism for downstream
             identity services: A digital identity program under NIR would benefit from linkages with MOHSW’s
             civil registry system, where information on birth, death, and marriages could be collected and retained
             in an electronic form. Current birth registration is being retained in an electronic database. Historic
             birth records may need to be digitized, in case such records are being kept in paper form. Marriage,
             death, and other changes in the civil status will also need to be captured electronically. In addition,
             an authentication mechanism would be needed for downstream applications to verify the identity of
             people, including for pensions, passports, civil service, driver’s licenses, census, taxes, electoral vot-
             ing, and financial services. These applications would require interfaces to link with NBIR under NIR.




   Electronic identity should equal paper identity based on law.
 12




                                                                                                                           17
     •	   Fund the development of NIR and build institutional capacity: The digital identity program should
          be anchored in a strong institution, with provisions for good governance, managerial and technical
          capacity, a strong business plan, operational controls, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and long-
          term operations and maintenance (O&M). Funding the setup of NIR and building the institutional
          capacity would be important considerations for the GOL.
     •	   Communicate effectively: As part of the program to develop digital identity, the GOL should make
          provision for good communications with people, including raising public awareness, addressing any
          misconceptions and concerns, and offering appropriate grievance and redress mechanisms for poten-
          tial issues.




18
1
Annex



                  Stakeholders Met
                  for Consultations


During May–June 2014 and March 2015, consultations were held with the GOL and stakeholders in the identity
community of Liberia. These discussions provided inputs for the preparation of this report.

Officials from the following organizations who met:

   •	   Ministry of Internal Affairs
   •	   National Identity Registry (Board)
   •	   Members of the Senate of Liberia
   •	   Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications
   •	   Liberia Telecommunications Authority
   •	   Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Bureau of Passports and Visas
   •	   Civil Service Agency
   •	   Ministry of Health & Social Welfare (civil registration and health information management system)
   •	   Ministry of Justice, Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
   •	   National Social Security & Welfare Corporation
   •	   Department of Transportation
   •	   Business Registry
   •	   Bankers Association
   •	   Technical Advisors




                                                                                                            19
2
Annex



                 Diagnostic Framework
                 for Liberia


                     Area of Assessment                                         Findings
Economic and social context
Population (in millions)                                         4
Urban population (% of total)                                    49
GNI per capita (World Bank Atlas method, US$)                    370
GDP growth (avg. annual %; 2000–05 and 2005–12)                  11.6
Adult literacy rate (% ages 15 and older)                        55
ICT infrastructure
Mobile phone subscriptions (per 100 people)                      65.3
Broadband subscriptions (per 100 people)                         0
Households with a computer (%)                                   2.0
Households with access to internet (%)                           1.5
Status of identification
Official identity holders (% of population)                      0
Is identity mandatory for every person?
Minimum age for identity?
Cost of identity to each person?
Number of functional identity programs in country?               >5
Electronic identity
Does a law govern electronic ID?                                 Yes (partly)
Coverage of electronic ID (% of population)                      0
Name of institution authorized for identity management           National ID Registry (not established)
Type of authorizing institution (government, autonomous, etc.)   Executive Branch
Number of branches of authorizing institution                    None
Type of biometrics collected (if any)                            Photo and fingerprint (in future)
Is electronic ID online or offline?
Does a ministerial steering committee govern electronic ID?      A Governing Board is set up
Operations managed by the public sector (% of total)
                                                                                               (continued)
                                                                                                        21
Continued

                       Area of Assessment                                       Findings
 National civil register
 Does a law govern mandatory civil registry (for birth & death)?   No
 Coverage of national register (% of population)                   10.6%
 Birth certificate holders (% of population)
 Is birth registration stored electronically?                      Yes
 Name of institution authorized for civil registry                 Ministry of Health & Social Welfare
 Is national register linked to electronic ID?
 Identity credential
 Type of credential issued (none, paper, mobile, smartcard)?       Not determined
 Is there a unique identity number?                                Yes (planned)
 Authentication
 What information is used for authentication                       Not determined
 (password, mobile ID, etc.)?
 Is there an authentication standard across programs?              No
 Privacy and security
 Does a law govern privacy and data protection?                    References to privacy are made
 Is there a supervisory body for privacy and data protection?      No
 Is there a process for grievance redress?                         No




22
Strategic Framework
January 25, 2016
