IFC and HBL Supporting Job
Creation in Pakistan
CASE STUDY
    IFC MENA (CME) and Development Impact Department (CDI) greatly appreciate
    the close collaboration with Habib Bank Ltd. (HBL) in the preparation of this
    study. IFC would like to thank the HBL team, especially the members of the
    Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) and Management Information System (MIS)
    departments, Business and Regional teams including Ahsen A Khawaja, Faisal
    Javed, Imran Moti, Salman Razzaq, Tauqeer Mazhar, Muhammad Shoaib, Abid Ali,
    Syed Zohair Islam, and Mohammed Ali for their tremendous support.

    This report was prepared by a core team comprised of Serena Cavicchi, Shabana
    Khawar, Andrea Onate, Nisachol Mekharat, James Hodgdon Bisbee, Akbar Zaman
    Khan, Azhar Nadeem Malik, Nadeem Sarfraz Bakht, Usama Ali Syed, and Anushe
    A. Khan, with guidance and direction from Rapti Goonesekere, Roland Michelitsch,
    and Ana Maria Torres, and reviewed by Mouayed Makhlouf, Nigel Twose, and Peer
    Stein.




2
Executive Summary                                         ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................    5


Country Context                                  ......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................   6


IFC’s Strategy in Pakistan                                                    .........................................................................................................................................................................................................................   7


HBL and IFC                          .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................    8


HBL’s SME Strategy ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 9


Study Methodology                                          .........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................   10


Results               .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................    11


Conclusions and Implications for IFC and HBL                                                                                                ........................................................................................................................................................   14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
    The objective of this study is to develop an understanding of the relationship between access
    to finance for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and job creation. IFC has analyzed a
    sample of more than 100 SMEs that obtained loans from its client, Habib Bank Ltd (HBL),
    in 2009 in Pakistan, at a challenging time for the country. The findings are encouraging
    and include:

    •• Positive results in terms of employment growth in small and medium enterprises:
      Overall, 1,170 permanent full-time jobs were created between 2009 and 2012, with a
      compound annual growth rate of 9.7 percent.

    •• Insights on SMEs segments: Job growth was mainly driven by medium size companies
      (50-249 employees), but small firms also revealed potential for employment generation.
      Very small firms (up to 10 employees) only grew jobs at 2 percent, but had the fastest
      labor productivity growth (sales grew at 17 percent).

    •• Insights on SMEs by sectors: The service sector, including wholesale, retail, and trade
      firms, created the majority of full-time jobs (56 percent). The textile and manufacturing
      sectors created 25 percent and 15 percent of the total new positions respectively. The
      textile sector created the largest opportunities for women and youth employment.

    •• Insights in terms of banking products targeting SMEs: The majority of firms
      preferred flexible repayment terms and mostly used credit lines for working capital pur-
      poses. These credit lines were designed to match the cyclical cash flows of the SMEs and
      address their funding needs, particularly at a time of declining SME financing across
      the country.




4
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, contributes to the World Bank mission of global poverty reduction by creating
opportunities for people to improve their lives through private sector solutions. In Pakistan, IFC’s strategy has focused on
addressing the key challenges that affect private sector development, from investing in the infrastructure sector, including
energy, to enhancing access to finance, with a view to improving the conditions for growth and employment generation.

As part of its country program, IFC has focused on increasing access to finance for small and medium enterprises (SMEs),
which are the backbone of Pakistan’s economy as they constitute more than 90 percent of total private enterprises in the
formal industrial sectors and employ over 70 percent of the labor force. Often these SMEs struggle to obtain the financing
needed to grow and create jobs. For this reason, IFC has partnered with financial institutions to improve service provision
to SMEs and stimulate economic development across the country. Since 2007, IFC has been engaged with HBL, Pakistan’s
largest private sector commercial bank, and provided financing to strengthen the bank’s capital following its privatization,
as well as advised on how to scale up the bank’s SMEs portfolio in a sustainable manner.

Measuring the impact of IFC’s investment and technical assistance activities is complex, particularly as the results are
achieved over the medium term and some of the development outcomes are indirect. IFC’s Middle East and North Africa
Region (CME Strategy Department and the Pakistan Country Team) together with the Development Impact Department
(CDI) and the Access to Finance teams collaborated with HBL to undertake this study. This study aims to: (1) gain
insights about the relationship between SMEs with increased access to finance and job creation; and (2) highlight different
dimensions of job creation through SME finance.

By looking at IFC and HBL’s contribution to job creation in Pakistan between 2009 and 2012, the study also attempts to
identify sectors that show potential for strong SME growth as well as to gain insights on how SMEs use loans to grow. The
findings of this study may prove useful to inform the design and programming of future IFC operations, particularly at a
time when a country faces slow growth, high unemployment, and declining SME financing as in the case of Pakistan in
recent years. The results are based on a survey sample of 113 companies carried out in April 2013 that received loans from
HBL in 2009. The enterprises ranged from very small, small, and medium enterprises1. It was encouraging to see that these
firms created 1,170 permanent full-time jobs between 2009 and 2012, with a compound annual growth rate of 9.7 percent.
These results are commendable given the challenging macroeconomic and security environment in Pakistan during the
last five years, which negatively impacted the overall economic growth rate and private sector activity. For instance, SME
financing declined significantly, possibly making SMEs the worst hit firms of the overall challenging economic scenario.




                   113 SMEs                                           1,170 full-time jobs                                    9.7 percent CAGR




1
  The SME definition for this study is as follow: very small enterprises (1 - 9 full-time employees), small enterprises (10 – 49 full-time employees), and medium enter-
prises (50 to 249 full-time employees). This categorization differs from HBL’s internal rubric which only differentiates between SMEs and non-SMEs.
                                                                                                                                                                           5
    The past five years represent a significant political achievement in Pakistan, a democratically elected government completed
    its full term and a new government is currently in place following general elections in May 2013. However, on the
    economic front, gains have been limited. Pakistan’s economy has not been able to perform up to its potential due to
    challenges including the persistent energy crisis which has crippled growth, a decline in investment, and poor law and order
    and security concerns.

    Pakistan’s economic growth has been modest at best (averaging an annual rate of 3 percent) since the macroeconomic
    crisis of 2008. Inflation has been in double digits most of the time (over 10 percent), and the fiscal deficit in the range of
    7-8 percent of GDP since 2008-2009. Formal unemployment has risen from 5.6 percent in 2009-2010 to 6.7 percent in
    2012-2013 (with youth unemployment almost twice as much). There is no doubt that Pakistan has had to manage through
    several shocks, such as natural disasters and the ongoing conflict in neighboring Afghanistan. Nevertheless, there has also
    been deterioration in many structural areas under government control, such as revenue mobilization, the energy sector,
    social sectors, and the overall environment for private investment. The current level of foreign exchange reserves and the
    fiscal deficit have also become unsustainable, inevitably constraining the fiscal space for financing development needs and
    placing the economy on the brink of a balance of payment crisis - for the second time in less than five years. On a positive
    note, on September 4, 2013 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a $6.7 billion three year extended fund
    facility which will support the country’s economic reform program going forward.

    Private Sector and Investment Flows
    Against this challenging macroeconomic scenario, the                                     Foreign Direct Investment, 2000 - 2012
                                                                                             (In percent of GDP)
    private sector has suffered. Private investment has fallen by                        4
    nearly half over the past five years, reflecting sharp drops                                     Pakistan
    in both foreign and domestic investment. For instance,                               3           South Asia 1/
    domestic private investment dropped from 14 percent of
    GDP in 2007-2008 to an estimated 10.9 percent of GDP                                 2
    in 2012-2013. Weak private sector credit growth has
    contributed to this decline. Private credit has also fallen                          1
    in real terms in recent years, crowded out by rapidly rising
    public borrowing. Foreign direct investment (FDI) which                              0
                                                                                             2000       2002        2004       2006        2008       2010        2012
    peaked above 3 percent of GDP (well above other South                                Sources: Pakistani authorities and IMF staff calculations.
    Asia countries) in 2007-2008, has since fallen below 0.5                             1/ South Asia countries include: Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal,
                                                                                         Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam
    percent of GDP, putting further pressures on depleting
    international reserves.

    SME Financing
    There are close to 3 million SMEs in Pakistan that combined account for about 90 percent of all private enterprises in
    the industrial sector and 30 percent of the country’s GDP. These firms have faced numerous constraints. In line with the
    reduction in private sector credit, from 2008 to 2012, banks and development finance institutions reduced SME financing.
    A primary reason for the reticence of banks to increase their level of market penetration in SME financing was due to the
    more risk-averse strategy adopted in the wake of increasingly higher delinquency rates in SME financing portfolios.
    The perception of high risk and high operating costs to service SMEs, as well as information opacity from such clients,
    contributed to the declining trend in providing financing to SMEs. This trend persisted especially during 2012, while
    the proportion of non-performing SME loans increased. The declining trend in SME financing has reduced the share
    of SMEs in total financing of banks from 8.3 percent in December 2011 to 6.7 percent in December 2012, and the
    number of SME borrowers also saw a decline of more than 20 percent, shrinking from 167,936 in December 2011 to
    132,167 in December 2012. The faster decline in the number of SMEs financing facilities compared with the declining
    rate of SME using financing could be evidence that the lower-end SMEs have been losing their banking relationships,
    and have possibly been the worst hit firms in terms of their integration and absorption in the formal financial system.1
6   2
        “Development Finance Annual Review”,p.4-State Bank of Pakistan, December 2012.
                            On the demand side, a disinclination of SMEs to use the financial services offered by the
                            banks and financial institutions was due to several issues including low financial literacy,
                            strong collateral requirements, and high transaction costs associated with accessing finance,
                            inappropriate product proposition, and limited capacity to undertake strategic planning and
                            transparency which would make them more bankable and creditworthy. The implications
                            of these constraining factors were further intensified by external factors mentioned above,
                            i.e. rising inflation, weak macroeconomic context, law and order and security concerns, and
                            natural disasters like floods in the past few years.




“[SMEs] often struggle      IFC’s strategy in Pakistan has provided a direct response to the challenges which adversely
to get loans from banks     affect private sector growth and limit access to finance for large segments of SMEs. IFC has
which see them as risky     been focusing on: (i) mobilizing investments in energy (including renewable power) and
investments. Red tape       infrastructure, (ii) expanding access to finance to SMEs, and (iii) supporting employment
makes it hard for them      creating sectors.
to get crucial permits
                            Through its integrated investment and advisory services strategy, IFC has focused on
and licenses. Commercial
                            increasing access to finance to SMEs for several years and this approach has been validated
disputes with other firms
                            by several recent publications including the 2013 IFC Jobs Study and the 2013 World
can drain their finances.
                            Development Report on Jobs. On the investment side, interventions have been conducted
And many entrepreneurs      primarily through (i) credit facilities to financial intermediaries to help expand their SME
lack even basic business    operations; (ii) risk sharing facilities to promote SME lending; and (iii) trade finance
training. As a result,      guarantees to support small businesses. On the advisory front, IFC has helped financial
roughly 95 percent of       intermediaries with SME banking and risk management capacity building, provided
SMEs will never employ      training to financial institutions on SME finance, and trained SMEs on international best
more than five people       practices and corporate governance.
and only 4 percent
survive to their 25th       To help address some of the challenges faced by SMEs, IFC is ramping up its investment and
birthday.”                  advisory work in the country. IFC has helped train more than 4,400 entrepreneurs in the
                            fundamentals of commerce through Business Edge, a specially-designed program pioneered
“Hitting it Big”p.14, IFC   by IFC. About 20 percent of those were women. At the same time, IFC has also trained
Publication: Voices, How    over 200 trainers, who have shared their expertise with scores of budding entrepreneurs.
IFC is changing lives in
                            The organization has helped develop mediation and alternative dispute resolution centers in
Pakistan”
                            Karachi and Lahore. These dispute and resolution centers allow smaller businesses to settle
                            commercial disputes quickly and inexpensively outside of the country’s overburdened court
                            system. IFC has trained close to 100 bank staff (including managers) on ways to reach out
                            to SMEs whose needs are often different from those of other clients. IFC is also expanding
                            its work with banks to help them develop a range of financial services tailor-made for
                            smaller firms. This includes support for strengthening SME banking products and services,
                            expanding agribusiness lending and banking services for women-led firms.
                                                                                                                            7
    “We had been trying to      IFC has a long-standing relationship with HBL which is the largest private sector commercial
    increase our outreach       bank in Pakistan and operates over 1400 branches across the country. HBL is part of the
    for several years, but we   Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development (AKFED), which owns 51 percent of the
    were struggling to find     bank. AKFED is an international development agency operating through approximately
    a model that worked”        90 separate companies in 16 developing countries, employing 30,000 people. In 2007,
                                IFC provided to HBL a subordinated loan of $50 million to strengthen the bank’s capital
    says HBL’s head of small
                                base and support its post-privatization expansion. Subsequently, IFC provided a $100
    and medium enterprise
                                million guarantee facility under its Global Trade Finance Program (GTFP). HBL has had
    banking. “IFC helped
                                a strong focus on retail and SME operations, particularly medium-sized businesses. IFC
    shift the way we were       identified a major opportunity to tap into and scale up the largely un-served small business
    thinking about SMEs and     segment, mainly by leveraging HBL’s vast branch network to acquire and serve small firms,
    prompted us to offer        and by analyzing the bank’s SME deposit clients and HBL’s knowledge on those customers
    them a complete suite       to cross-sell lending products.
    of services in terms they
    could understand.”          Since 2011 IFC has been providing advisory services to help HBL adopt best practices in
                                SME banking. IFC’s support has included the development of a value proposition for SMEs,
                                re-engineering of credit and risk processes, strengthening staff skill levels, and piloting the
                                new SME business model. During this engagement, HBL was able to set up a dedicated
                                business unit for SME banking and re-work the key performance indicators for its branches
                                in favor of SME loans. The new SME unit has raised the profile of the SME business within
                                the bank’s network. HBL took a wholesale approach to address the funding needs of small
                                business clients and created dedicated loan products with specific eligibility criteria for
                                small firms, which include a Running Finance Facility (i.e. renewable working capital line
                                for up to one year) and a Demand Finance Facility (i.e. a fixed term loan for up to three
                                years). These products, coupled with a re-engineering of its credit processes, strengthened
                                delivery channels and improved MIS systems, have allowed HBL to strengthen and scale
                                up their SME operations. Since 2011, the bank has opened 89,000 SME deposit accounts,
                                and has disbursed over 19,000 new SME loans, which is almost double the amount of the
                                original loans’ target.

                                In May 2013, HBL and IFC signed an agreement for a 30-month advisory program to
                                help the bank develop and launch new products and services for the large farming and
                                agribusiness community in the country. This is in line with the World Bank’s increased
                                focus on promoting financial inclusion. HBL and IFC are also looking at opportunities
                                for collaboration in banking for women, mobile banking, and risk score card development.
                                During this extensive engagement with HBL, IFC also conducted a survey of the bank’s
                                SME portfolio, as part of IFC’s Gender Baseline Survey of Women Owned SMEs. The
                                bank is very keen to service the women in business segment in the country and is looking
                                to benefit from IFC’s global experience of working in this area.




8
HBL is primarily a retail bank with one of the largest distribution networks in Pakistan, and a strong retail and SME
customer base. It is estimated to have at least 250,000 SME customers among its over 5 million customer base. The
management is cognizant of the competitive advantage HBL holds in the market and wants to maximize its outreach to the
SME sector in the country. In partnership with IFC, HBL has developed a new business model for effectively serving SMEs.
The new business model revolves around the retail lending organization set up to consolidate and grow the business. As
part of this initiative, HBL has improved its understanding of SME customers by conducting various segment studies and
customer focus groups. This has resulted in developing several new products and offerings for the different SME segments
as per their needs. This includes revitalizing its trade business by developing and offering a seamless product program for
SMEs. The bank is looking at growing its SME portfolio in the next couple of years by cross-selling different products
and services to its existing customers and also soliciting new customers to contribute to its overarching goal of financial
inclusion in the country.




Expertise, Collaboration, Dynamism and Youth

Aerolube Limited is the sole distributor of Shell Aviation lubricants and fuel products in Pakistan. The company
was established with the collaboration of Pakistan Aircraft Engineering Services and KZK Lubricants, and so
benefits from over 50 years of experience in the aviation and lubricant distribution businesses. The group
employs over 150 people, including about 90 fully qualified engineers in aviation engineering and industrial
lubricants.

In the past three years, the company branch in Karachi has grown significantly. In terms of revenue they have
grown over 300 percent while the number of employees has increased three fold. About half of employees are
now less than 24 years old.

“We appreciate the youth, they are full of energy” said Maraj Kirmani, Finance Manager.

The employment of dynamic young people, an extensive knowledge of distribution structures, optimal cash
flow management, and managing order quantities to minimize the cost of inventory for the customer, have all
contributed to the success of Aerolube.

HBL provided a 100 percent secured loan to Aerolube in 2009 which was used as a performance payment
guarantee and allowed for the company’s business expansion. Recently Aerolube has been recognized as
distributor of the year by Shell Aviation in the region. On the back of this success, Aerolube has ambitious plans
to expand throughout the Middle East and North Africa.




                                                                                                                              9
     This case study was based on data collected from 113 firms from HBLs’ SME portfolio. In April 2013, a joint IFC
     team comprised of CME Strategy and Access to Finance departments, with the support of the Pakistan Country Team,
     visited Pakistan and travelled to Karachi, Lahore, Faisalabad, and Islamabad. The team interviewed the SMEs following
     a randomly selected sample of HBL’s performing loan clients. Eighty percent of the sample belonged to the HBL’s Small
     Business Finance (SBF) program which has a smaller NPL ratio than other facilities.

     For the purposes of this analysis, these firms were broken into three categories based on the number of employees:


     •• Very small enterprises (up to nine full-time employees)

     •• Small enterprises (10 to 49 full-time employees)

     •• Medium enterprises (50 to 249 full-time employees)


     The field interviews conducted by the IFC team aimed to obtain firm-level information on job creation and financial
     performance between 2009 and 2012. These interviews also gathered information on the operations and performance of
     firms as well as qualitative data on the largest constraints faced by the SMEs.

     The period of three years was chosen to measure the employment effects for firms having capital to start and expand
     operations, while limiting other external factors on job growth that could occur over a longer period.




     Caveats

     (i) Selection bias: The sample size did not include firms who were driven out of business by the increased
     competition implied by the expansion of the firms supported by the IFC. Furthermore, the sample did not
     include firms with nonperforming loans, which may have experienced job losses during the period. Although
     this was controlled for in the extrapolation, the average jobs created per $100,000 is likely biased upward. On
     the other hand, only job effects in the enterprises that received financing were assessed, not due to increased
     expenditures of workers.

     (ii) Omitted Variable Bias (OVB): The lack of a control group comprised of micro, small and medium
     enterprises that did not receive financing support over the same period makes the analysis vulnerable to
     country-wide shocks that could bias the results. In addition, other observable factors that may have influenced
     job growth during this period are likely missing from the data. For example, though partially captured by sector
     categorization, labor intensity in production is a missing variable that might impact both loan size and job
     growth. Similarly, the age and experience of the business owners are likely causal determinants of both loan
     size and job growth. The omission of variables such as these from the data set invites OVB and limits statistical
     inference.

     (iii) Measurement error: Given the nature of the survey, measurement error is a likely issue in the data.
     Subjective quantitative metrics such as the percentage share in business ownership by women is an inherently
     noisy measurement.

10
The findings of the study are encouraging, especially given Pakistan’s challenging country context between 2009 and 2012.
Throughout the interviews, it was observed that following the 2008 crisis, SMEs that were able to “stay in business” and
ensure “job preservation” were considered success stories. Almost all of the SMEs interviewed entered the HBL’s SBF
program in 2009, obtaining in most cases a loan enhancement based on their previous running finance facility. These firms
created 1,170 permanent full-time jobs over the period analyzed, with a commendable CAGR of 9.7 percent. It is however
important to note that job creation cannot be attributed exclusively to the financing obtained through HBL due to other
contributing factors, including regional differences, sector of operation, firm size, and the caveats listed previously.

About 77 percent of SMEs interviewed indicated “sole proprietorship” as ownership structure and were family businesses.
Almost all SMEs (except one) interviewed seemed to follow the same “development path”, i.e. they started their business
with own/family funding, initially grew their businesses, and then sought financing from HBL– primarily to further
expand their business and/or for working capital purposes. Having collateral (in the form of land or property) proved
to be instrumental in qualifying for further credit from HBL. However, several firms surveyed expressed dissatisfaction
HBL’s valuation of the collateral– the firms were of the opinion that the value of their properties was higher than estimated
and recommended better and alternate collaterals. For more than half of the firms surveyed (55 percent), infrastructure,
specifically access to electricity and power, represented the main constraint to business performance and growth. This is
also in line with Pakistan’s ongoing macroeconomic situation including issues with energy outages (both power and gas).
Following lack of power, other key constraints to business growth for the interviewed firms were, in order of importance,
law and order, and macroeconomic instability, including the depreciation of the currency in recent years. Lastly, when
asked about the main reason for “taking a loan with HBL” as opposed to other financial institutions, the firms interviewed
spoke in favor of HBL’s wide network, long-lasting client (personal) relationship, and the SME product proposition.




Some key takeaways include:

(1)	 As mentioned above, SMEs created 1,170 full time
     jobs, with medium sized firms contributing to                Figure 1: Full-Time Job Creation
     the bulk of the full-time jobs created. As Figure 1           100%
     indicates, medium sized firms were the drivers of this
                                                                    80%
     job growth, adding a total of 982 full time jobs (31.7
     jobs per firm on average) with a CAGR of 11 percent            60%

     (Figure 3). Small firms had a CAGR of 7 percent and            40%

     an average of 4.2 jobs per firm.
                                                                    20%


(2)	 Medium sized firms, which represented 27 percent               0%
                                                                               Number of Firms           Number of Jobs
     of the sample, created 93 percent of the total full                                                    Created
     time positions for women and 61 percent of the full                         Very Small      Small   Medium
     time positions for the youth (Figure 2). However, small
     firms demonstrated the highest rate of jobs growth for
     youth (Figure 3).




                                                                                                                                11
     (3)	 When segmenting by sector across firm size,
                                                                          Figure 2: Women & Youth Jobs by Medium
          aggregated services (including wholesale, retail,               Sized Firms
          and trade) and the textile sector created the largest
          number of jobs for both women and youth. Textile                100%

          companies created 53 percent of the total jobs for                                                   31

          women and 40 percent of the total jobs for the                   80%           59
                                                                                                                                    140
          youth. This could be explained with the traditional              60%
                                                                                                               42
          participation of women in the textile sector compared
          to industries such as construction and manufacturing.            40%


          The aggregated services created more than 54 percent             20%                                 40
                                                                                                                                     84

          of full time positions for women and 23 percent of full                         2
                                                                                          2                                          5
          time jobs for the youth.                                          0%
                                                                                 Number of Jobs Created   Number of Firms     Number of Jobs
                                                                                      for Women                             Created for the Youth

     (4)	 SMEs prefer financing instruments with flexible                               Very Small       Small       Medium

          repayment terms. The majority of firms interviewed
          used HBL’s credit lines for working capital purposes.       Figure 3: CAGR by Firm Size
          HBL and the banking industry have long recognized
                                                                        25%
          that these facilities provide SMEs with an appropriate                              22%


          form of working capital loan product, which is suited         20%
                                                                                                                              16%
                                                                                                               15%
          for the cyclical funding needs of small and medium            15%
          size companies, allowing them to continue to run and                                                        11%
                                                                                                                                   10%
                                                                         5%
          expand their businesses. These revolving lines of credit,              5%
                                                                                                      7%
                                                                                                                   5%            5%
          which allowed the businesses to draw funding when              5%           2%           3%

          needed and whose interests could be repaid quarterly,          0%
          were particularly useful at a time of declining SME                  Very Small        Small          Medium      Grand Total
          financing across the country. This is also in line with the     Youth Jobs CAGR       Female Jobs CAGR           FT Jobs CAGR
          outcomes of the State Bank of Pakistan’s Development
          Finance Review (December 2012) which highlights a
          similar behavior of SMEs nationwide. According to their facility-wise breakup, working capital financing constituted
          more than 80 percent of total SME financing, followed by trade finance and fixed investment, with their respective
          shares of 9.4 percent and 10.5 percent, HBL’s running finance facilities were mainly used to buy stocks, inputs and
          materials for production and also pay salaries.

     (5)	 Regional business environment and sector of operation pose specific challenges for SMEs. The location and
          the sector in which the firm operated were important determinants to assess key obstacles to business performance.
          For instance, the majority of firms located in Punjab (Lahore and Faisalabad) listed persistent energy shortages as
          their primary constraint, while firms in Sindh (Karachi) mentioned law and order as one of the most pressing issues.
          Furthermore, it should be noted that in both regions, the consecutive 2010-2011 floods, severely impacted small sized
          firms that had little financial resources to rebuild and revitalize their businesses. The analysis did not differentiate job
          creation rates across regions. This is due to the fact that the sample of firms surveyed belonged mainly to the Punjab
          and Sindh regions, with 80 and 30 firms respectively. The region of Islamabad was only represented by three firms.
          The Punjab and Sindh regions are the main contributors to GDP growth in Pakistan (close to 60 percent for Punjab
          and over 25 percent for Sindh). When looking at sectors, some commonalities among sector of operation and key
          constraints can be identified in the sample. For instance, issues arising from law and order were predominantly cited
          among firms in the service sector, particularly in wholesale, retail, and trade. These trends reflect the importance of a
          stable operating environment for the service industry to grow. On a different note, for companies in the manufacturing
          sector, lack of infrastructure, and particularly energy shortages, was by and large the main impediment to business
          growth.
12
Jawed Brothers Ltd Embroidered Fabrics


Zulfiqar Ali started his fabric embroidery firm in 2003 with one embroidery machine and his family’s savings.
With the support of HBL and pledging personal property as collateral, he obtained a working capital loan in
2004 and began expanding his business. By 2009, he had 3 embroidery machines and 60 employees, including
2 women employees. From 2009 to 2012 he requested an increase in his credit line to buy more embroidery
machines. By the end of that period, Mr. Ali had 14 machines in operation, doubled his sales and was
employing 150 workers, 15 of which were women. Despite challenging economic conditions in the country, he
is confident about continuing to grow his business. He has plans to buy new machinery and continue increasing
its production capacity with the support of HBL.




                                                                                                                13
     During the past five years, Pakistan faced enormous challenges which have exacerbated the country’s binding constraints to
     growth. Among these, macroeconomic instability, poor access to electricity, and a protracted fragile security situation, have
     taken a toll on the private sector, worsening the investment climate and reducing access to sources of finance. Inevitably,
     economic growth, private sector development, and job creation have suffered. IFC has responded to the urgent needs of
     the private sector in Pakistan, with an important focus on increasing access to finance for SMEs. The results of this study
     validate IFC’s strategy of using access to finance for SMEs as a tool to address job creation needs. For instance, this study
     shows that, despite the difficult context, the SMEs in the sample that received financing from IFC’s client HBL were able
     to sustain growth and create jobs at a higher rate than the average for the country. Even though the analysis of this study is
     limited to a portion of HBL’s SME portfolio, the results are insightful and could provide lessons for impacting job creation
     in other economies experiencing similarly external and internal constraints as Pakistan.

     This study highlights the following ideas and strategic choices:

         1)	 Smaller firms could be helped to grow and expand into medium sized businesses – to achieve higher impact
             on the economy and job creation. Smaller firms constitute the bulk of the SMEs operating in Pakistan; these
             firms showed significant employment creation (with a rate higher than the country average) and therefore need
             more support from financial institutions in the form of finance and other services to enable them to expand to
             medium sized companies and contribute to greater job creation.

         2)	 Provide support to SMEs in key sectors of high potential for job growth and inclusion. The services (wholesale,
             retail and trade) and manufacturing sectors, particularly textiles, were among the greater contributors of job
             growth. The textile sector was also leading in offering the largest opportunities for women and youth employment.
             The sectors in which SMEs operate and their potential for long term growth could offer critical insights to banks
             when they engage in developing new products and financing instruments to expand their SME client portfolio.

          3)	 SME credit instruments, particularly revolving credit lines could be encouraged. The majority of firms
              interviewed used HBL’s credit lines for working capital purposes with flexible installments. In Pakistan, SMEs
              face a number of barriers to obtain credit; from low financial literacy to high collateral requirements, from
              high transaction costs to inappropriate product offering. The firms interviewed expressed their preference for
              financing instruments with flexible repayment terms as these suited their funding needs and cyclical operations.
              Considering that in Pakistan, SMEs constitute more than 90 percent of total private enterprises in the formal
              industrial sectors and employ over 70 percent of the labor force, the argument for finding ways to support
              their development with specific financing products that suit their needs and cash flows is compelling. With the
              continued support of organizations like IFC, private banks and DFIs should consider further exploring this area,
              which caters better to the SME sector.

     Areas for further engagement. While this study did not investigate SMEs in the agribusiness sector, there seems to be
     ground for further research in this sector. For instance, the World Bank’s Pakistan Economic Memorandum, released in
     July 2013, points out the potential for growth generation at the regional level, including an evaluation of regional domestic
     and international trade opportunities. In the Punjab region alone, agriculture contributes 27 percent of the GDP and
     employs 40 percent of its labor force. Almost 90 percent of Punjab’s labor force works for private firms, the majority of
     which employ fewer than 10 employees. Furthermore, Punjab has both domestic and international cost-effective trade
     opportunities. The case of agribusiness provides a strong argument for financial institutions to further look into supporting
     local SMEs and find ways to respond to their financing needs and sustain their growth while creating new jobs and
     opportunities. Similar analysis of sectors and regions could help in highlighting new sectors for expanding access to finance
     for SMEs with a view to increasing job impact.
14
15
     Contact Information
     Washington, DC
     Rapti Goonesekere
     Principal Economist
     Tel: +202 458 1299

     Islamabad, Pakistan
     Nadeem Siddiqui
     Chief Regional Representative
     Tel: +925 122 79631
     ifc.org




                                     February 2014

16
