IFC Advisory Services in the Middle East and North Africa




      Overcoming Constraints to SME
     Development in MENA Countries
     and Enhancing Access to Finance
                                                  Qamar Saleem
                         Senior SME Banking Specialist MENA, IFC
    Overcoming Constraints to SME Development in
    MENA Countries and Enhancing Access to Finance
    The role of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector cannot be over emphasized in terms of its
    contribution to GDP and employment generation, particularly in emerging economies. Studies indicate that
    formal SMEs contribute up to 45 percent of employment and up to 33 percent of GDP in developing economies
    (IFC: Scaling-Up SME Access to Financial Services in the Developing World 2010). These numbers are significantly
    higher when taking into account the estimated contributions of SMEs operating in the informal sector. In high
    income countries, SMEs contribute nearly 64 percent to the GDP and 62 percent to employment (Figure 1).

    Figure 1: SME Sector’s Contributions to GDP and Employment, a Comparison



               GDP contribution of SME and informal sector                     GDP contribution to formal country employment
                                                                                              (median values)
        100%                                                            100%

                                31%             36%          Residual
         80%     37%                                                    80%

         60%                                    13%          Informal   60%
                                30%

         40%     47%                                                    40%
                                                             SME
                                                51%          sector
         20%                    39%                                     20%
                 16%
          0%                                                             0%
               Low-income   Middle-income   High-income                          Low-income     Middle-income   High-income



    Source: IFC SME Banking Knowledge guide 2010; Ayyagari, Beck, and Demirgüç-Kunt (2003)


    Youth unemployment of 25.1 percent for the Middle East and 23.7 percent for North Africa—versus a global
    average of 12.6 percent—and female-entrepreneurship levels of 12 to 15 percent—versus a global average of 31
    to 38 percent—severely affect economic growth (Figure 2). Creating jobs for young entrepreneurs and fostering
    female-entrepreneurship remains a key challenge.

    Figure 2: Youth Unemployment and Women Entrepreneurship in MENA versus Regions




    Source: IFC, Education for Employment Report; IFC, Strengthening Access to Finance for Women-Owned SMEs



1
SME Landscape in MENA Region
MSMEs account for a very high share of private sector employment in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA),
particularly in countries with large informal sectors. According to official statistics, MSMEs typically account for
10 to 40 percent of all employment in MENA. However, employment in MSMEs is likely to be significantly under-
estimated in official records. The typical non-GCC MENA country is estimated to employ as much as 67 percent of
labor informally, although only 6 percent of GCC labor is informal (Loayza & Wada, 2010).

The majority of enterprises in MENA are MSMEs, estimated at 19-23 million (formal and informal) in number and
comprising 80-90 percent of total businesses in most countries. Access to finance is one of the greatest challenges
facing MSMEs across the globe, and particularly for MENA where nearly 63 percent of the MSMEs do not have
access to finance. The total financing gap for MSMEs in MENA is estimated at $210 to $240 billion (of which
formal MSME finance gap is estimated at $160-180 billion).

A recent World Bank/Union of Arab Banks survey of over 130 MENA banks shows that only 8 percent of lending
goes to SMEs across MENA, and even less in GCC countries at 2 percent. This is substantially lower when compared
to the middle income countries lending average of 18 percent and high-income countries average of 22 percent
(Figure 3).

Figure 3: MSME Lending Benchmarking in MENA Region




  25%    24%

                                                                                                                              High Income countries
                    20%
  20%
                                                                                                                            Middle Income countries
                            16%
                                      15%
  15%
                                                13%

                                                          10%
  10%
                                                                   8%
                                                                          6%
                                                                                      5%
                                                                                              4%      4%
   5%
                                                                                                            2%     2%        2%    2%             1%
                                                                                                                                                            0.5%
   0%
          Morocco


                    Yemen

                            Lebanon

                                      Tunisia

                                                Non-GCC


                                                          Jordan

                                                                   MENA


                                                                          Palestine

                                                                                      Egypt


                                                                                              Syria


                                                                                                      UAE


                                                                                                            Oman

                                                                                                                   Kuwait


                                                                                                                             GCC


                                                                                                                                   Saudi Arabia


                                                                                                                                                  Bahrain

                                                                                                                                                            Qatar




Source: Union of Arab Banks/World Bank Financial Flagship Report 2011


SME finance in MENA is restricted by the lack of an enabling environment. Regulations are insufficient, financial
infrastructure is inadequate, lending capacity and tools are lacking, SME management skills need to be improved,
financial transparency needs to be encouraged, and the availability of collateral is scarce. Banks and Financial
institutions in MENA are also not equipped to offer sustainable and profitable SME banking products.


                                                                                                                                                                    2
    Creating Enabling Environment and Leading Practices
    IFC has recently completed a review of leading SME finance practices and models as part of work with the G20. Key
    recommendations and a collection of best practices from the G20 Sub-Group in creating an enabling environment are
    as follows:

    	 Developing country specific strategies: The development of an effective SME finance strategy for an individual
       country should ideally be based on a comprehensive diagnostic of its SME finance gap and the quality of its SME
       finance architecture.

    	 Developing a supporting legal and regulatory framework: An effective legal and regulatory framework
       promotes competition by avoiding overly restrictive licensing requirements and allows international and regional
       banks with better SME lending tools to enter the market. Competition among financial sector players can be promoted
       further by introducing technological platforms in key areas, facilitating a variety of financial products and services,
       driving down the costs of financial access, and reaching previously untapped markets. Mexico’s platform for reverse
       factoring and Brazil’s information platform for venture capital are good examples of government interventions that
       can mobilize private resources for SME finance.

    	 Strengthening the financial infrastructure: Establishing a solid financial infrastructure (auditing and accounting
       standards, credit registries/bureaus, collateral, and insolvency regimes) should be a priority in financial development.
       The aim should be to develop a comprehensive credit reporting system that covers both personal and commercial
       credit information, and can cover MSMEs and help lenders better manage credit risk and extend access to credit.
       Some countries, such as India, have introduced SME rating agencies as an additional institution designed to provide
       more information to prospective lenders. Moreover, a well-functioning collateral regime characterized by a wide
       range of allowable collaterals (immovables and movables), the establishment of clear priority rankings of claims
       over collateral, efficient collateral registries making priority interests publicly known, and effective enforcement of
       collateral in the case of default can further enhance risk acceptability of SME customers for financial institutions.
    	
    	 Effective government support mechanisms: In all cases, government interventions should be carefully designed
       and better evaluated with a view to accurately measure their achievements in terms of outreach and leverage.
       Partial credit guarantee schemes should remain an important form of intervention. Key guiding principles on such
       schemes should contain guidelines on eligibility criteria, coverage ratios, scalable credit approval mechanism, fees,
       payment rules, use of collateral/down-payment, and equity ratios, among other parameters. The Chilean FOGAPE
       guarantee fund and Small Business Finance Program in Canada are two good examples. There are multiple partial
       credit guarantee schemes in the region but market penetration remains concentrated on ‘Medium’ enterprise. The
       maximum outreach has been achieved by Kafalat program in Lebanon for the MENA region. Another important
       stimulus can be government procurement linked to the SME supply chain.

    	 Building reliable data sources for SME finance: An effective data collection framework at the national level
       should include efforts to standardize the definition of SMEs, centralize the collection of supply-side data by the
       central bank/banking supervisors and other financial supervisors, and survey SMEs in order to identify and quantify
       underserved SME segments. Demographic data on SMEs by number of employees, turnover, and asset size should
       be available and help normalize access to data. Computerized business registries would further facilitate the data
       gathering process and would serve as an important first step for firms joining the formal sector. Annual business and
       financial reports can provide important measures over time on the size and trends of the SME sector.

    	 Address specific market niches: Promoting female entrepreneurship and enhancing sustainable energy finance
       is crucial. Experience across different developed markets has shown that women have a better repayment record
       and yield a higher cross sell ratio for financial institutions. Women Entrepreneur Package by Garanti Bank in Turkey
       and M-Power Package by Access Bank in Nigeria are good examples of how outreach was increased to women in
       business. In addition, sustainable energy finance provides opportunities for SMEs to reduce costs as well as increase
       environmentally friendly operations. Erste in Czech Republic and eight banks in Russia (in particular Bank-Center
       Invest) have successfully built profitable portfolios in this sector.


3
         GDP contribution of SME and informal sector                         GDP contribution to formal country employment
                                                                                            (median values)
 100%                                                             100%

                          31%                36%       Residual
  80%      37%                                                     80%

  60%                                        13%       Informal    60%
                          30%

  40%      47%                                                     40%
                                                       SME
                                             51%       sector
  20%                     39%                                      20%
           16%
Institutional Capacity Building
   0%
        Low-income    Middle-income    High-income
                                                                       0%
                                                                               Low-income     Middle-income     High-income


SME Banking can be a very profitable business. Returns are often some of the best on a risk-return basis with
attractive yields (Figure 4). And according to McKinsey SME banking revenue in MENA should grow by 18 percent
per year to reach $15 billion by 2015.

Figure 4: Profitability Benchmarking of SME Business versus Overall Bank Performance



           Income growth rates for panel banks                                        ROAs for panel banks


                                                                                                     ROA-Bank        ROA-SME
           Income growth-Bank         Income growth-SME
                                                                  6%
 240%
                                         233%
                                                                  5%
  50%
                                                                  4%
  40%
                                                                  3%
  30%

  20%                                                             2%

  10%                                                             1%
   0%
         Bank      Bank      Bank      Bank        Bank           0%
          M1        S1        S2        S3          S4                  Bank       Bank     Bank    Bank      Bank    Bank
                                                                         M1         M2       S1      S2        S3      S4
          ME
        segment                 SE segment                                  ME segment                SE segment


Source: IFC, Benchmarking SME Banking Practices in OECD and Emerging Markets, 2007


Specific strategies and business model design can help build a strong and sustainable SME business. The below
strategies and recommendations are based on IFC’s 15 years of experience advising banks in building and scaling
up SME businesses across emerging markets.

SME banking is much more than SME lending. A focus on loans does not allow financial institutions to really look
at the client’s needs and design a suitable proposition. SME customer needs are primarily deposit, transactional,
and credit based. While credit needs (loans, overdrafts, trade finance, receivable finance etc.) are usually focused
on, deposit (operating accounts, term deposits, investment options) and transactional banking (internet banking,
phone banking, mobile banking, transfers, debit cards, foreign exchange etc.) contributions can represent
between 50-60 percent of best practice SME business profitability and demand greater attention.

Proposition, People and Process are three key building blocks of the SME business within a financial institution.
The proposition requires building a servicing model, transactional and deposit products, credit and financing
programs and simple treasury products. The people are seen as key enablers in terms of SME senior management
and staff. The importance of well defined processes cannot be emphasized enough, the front-end and support
infrastructure, business and credit processes, and customer relationship management tools are paramount.

SME business set-up and growth within a financial institution also faces significant internal and external
challenges. The key internal factors are strategic intent, finding the best organizational fit, investment capacity
in early years of launch, change readiness levels within key stakeholders and the significance of the SME
initiative within the overall strategic direction. The external factors influencing the initiative are mainly the size
of the revenue pool, the financial institution’s positioning strategy, the suitability of the economic environment,
maturity of the regulatory framework and the focus of the government. New and growing SME businesses
within a financial institution require deep engagement, commitment and discipline.


                                                                                                                               4
    In order to be successful in SME Banking, proficiency across six core areas and 10 enabling business models is
    required (Figure 5):

    Figure 5: Proficiency Requirements for a Successful SME Business

     10 KEY MODELS:                                                                                  Customer
                                                                                                    Acquisition
      Customer Acquisition: Prospecting, sales,
       activation, cross sell                                                                                            Relationship
                                                                            Communication
                                                                                                                         Management
      Relationship Management: Tiered structure
       & KPIs, retention
     	 Capacity building: Information dissemination,
                                                                                                     Business
        training & networking
                                                                                                      Model
     	 Customer Servicing: Telephone hotlines,                                                                                         Capacity
        service team, alternate channels, SME centers      IT & Analytics             Risk                                              Building
                                                                                   Management                     Segmentation
     	 Product Development: Lending, trade,
        transactional, treasury
     	 Credit Risk: Credit evaluation engine, process
        reengineering, Portfolio monitoring, Collections
     	 Operational Risk: AML management, error                                                                    Products &
                                                              People
                                                                                   Organization &
        rates, dormancy, quality & control standards,                                                               Services            Customer
                                                            Alignment                 Systems                                           Servicing
        audit readiness
                                                                                                     Sales &
     	 People Alignment: Certification program,                                                     Delivery
        scorecards, sales toolkits
     	 IT & Analytics: CRM tools, KPIs, sales & risk
        analytics, automation                                                Operational                                   Product
                                                                                Risk                                     Development
     	 Communication: Branding, collateral,
        welcome packs, campaigns, market events,                                                    Credit Risk
        strategic alliances



    	 Business Model: A dedicated business model and appropriate organization fit is required. Various business
       model options, which are not mutually exclusive, include retail-based for mass market, advisory differentiated,
       segment-based, supply chain linked, mobile money-based, niche markets positioned (e.g. women in business),
       and alternate financing models.

    	 Segmentation: Specific value propositions are essential to target specific sub-segments. Typical approaches
       to segmentation are industry led, sales turnover, profitability, geography or customer need based, and
       gender; these not being mutually exclusive. A powerful segmentation can help define a bank’s participation
       model and help optimize costs.

    	 Products and Services: Financial and non financial products and a differentiated servicing model are
       required. These include heavy customization of products, Islamic and non-Islamic banking provision, non-
       financial advisory provision (e.g. training), and information dissemination. Moreover a strong cross-sell focus
       and bundling of products. Also customer value proposition aligned branding, campaign and communication
       strategy is needed.

    	 Sales and Delivery: Tiered sales and service focusing on higher valued customers, branch-based models
       for small SME volumes, and investment in alternative channels not only enhance customer experience but
       also help reduce operating costs. Specific customer acquisition, activation, retention and churn policies are
       required.

    	 Organization and Systems: Dedicated organization structure for SME focus, separation of acquiring/
       retention/remedial activities, strong relationships across bank, dedicated training and certification programs
       are necessary. In addition upgrading of IT platform for achieving scale, investment in loan origination platform,
       credit scoring, credit approval factory, data warehousing, loan management systems, CRM, analytics etc.

    	 Risk Management: Pricing needs to incorporate data driven risk scoring, development of statistical
       application and behavioral scoring, strong portfolio management, operational risk management, strong
       collections framework, and participation in risk sharing facilities driven by government entities etc.


5
IFC Services
IFC provides a combination of Investment and Advisory Services for optimal results. The services can be summarized
as follows:

Investment Services:
	 Equity investments in financial institutions/equity funds for SMEs
	 Funded lines to expand investment and working capital lines especially in illiquid markets
	 Blended finance options for selected projects, to support the expansion of IFC’s risk appetite (e.g. grace periods,
   performance based pricing, subordination, higher risk/lower security or in limited cases, local currency positions)
	 Focus on underserved segments, such as women, conflict zones, agriculture, and climate
	 Risk sharing facilities/partial credit guarantees to enhance risk taking capacity and provide capital relief via
   low risk weightings; avoid foreign exchange mismatches and encourage domestic resources for SME financing

Advisory Services:
	 Build capacity of financial institutions in strategy, market segmentation, credit risk management, and product
   development through new approaches and systems to scale up their financing for SMEs on a sustainable basis
	 Promote sub-sector focus such as female owned SMEs, sustainable energy SME projects, agriculture SMEs, 	
   and leasing
	 Raise awareness on best practices in the SME finance space
	 Develop credit reporting infrastructure based on country needs
	 Support development of secured transactions, collateral registries, legal and regulatory framework
	 Build capacity of public/private stakeholders through advice and training

Advisory services are supported by the following innovative tools:
	 SME Banking Knowledge Guide: Outlines leading practices and success factors for profitable SME banking
   operations. The guide has been translated into Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish.

	 SME Banking Training Program: IFC offers two courses, an introduction or scaling up course. The three day
   course consists of modules, case studies and exercises covering the following areas: business models for SME
   banking, identifying market opportunities, customer management, products and services, sales, credit risk
   management, IT and MIS.

	 Customer Management Best Practice Guide: The guide outlines key success factors in better serving SME
   clients and allowing banks to maximize revenue opportunity. It is primarily a technical publication, intended
   for bank directors and managers interested in acquiring the key capabilities to enhance growth and revenue.

	 Customer Management Tools: Provision of du pont model and revenue projection models for the SME
   segment.

	 SME Banking CHECK Diagnostic Tool: A guide to assess SME banking operations and design relevant
   advisory services projects.

	 SME Banking Benchmarking: An online SME Benchmarking Survey that automatically benchmarks SME
   banking practices.

	 Market Segmentation Tool: Generates information that can be used by a bank to decide whether to invest
   in developing SME operations, identify target SME segments, and decide how to target them, design and sell
   products.

	 Assessing and Mapping the Global Gap in SME Finance: A joint IFC and McKinsey report that assesses
   and maps the global gap in SME finance, including the number of enterprises by region, size and formality,
   as well as SME’s access to credit and value of the credit gap.


                                                                                                                         6
    IFC0513



7
