                    Responsible Financial Access
               Finance & Markets Global Practice




                          RWANDA

   Diagnostic Review of
Consumer Protection and
      Financial Literacy
                (Private Pensions and Securities)




Volume II: Comparison with Good Practices




                                    November 2015
DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review Report is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent




                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS
                                               Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ......................................................................................................................... I
I. GOOD PRACTICES: PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR ............................................................................... 1
II. GOOD PRACTICES: SECURITIES SECTOR ........................................................................................ 34
ANNEX: LAWS AND REGULATIONS ...................................................................................................... 59




                                                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS
                     Abbreviations and Acronyms
2013 CPFL Review   WBG CPFL review of the banking and non-banking sectors in Rwanda
2015 CPFL Review   WBG CPFL review of the pension and securities sectors in Rwanda
ADECOR             Rwanda Consumer’s Rights Protection Organization
ASSAR              Association of Rwandan Insurers
BID                Basic information document
BNR                National Bank of Rwanda
CEO                Chief executive officer
CIS                Collective investment scheme
CIU                Collective investment undertaking
CMA                Capital Market Authority
CSD                Central Securities Depository
DC                 Defined contribution
EAC                East African Community
EIOPA              European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
FISF               Financial Inclusion Support Framework
FSDP               Financial Sector Development Plan
GDP                Gross domestic product
HR                 Human resources
IOPS               International Organisation of Pension Supervisors
ILO                International Labor Organization
KFS                Key Facts Statement
KYC                Know your customer
MINECOFIN          Ministry of Finance
MINICOM            Ministry of Trade and Industry
MOU                Memorandum of understanding
NBFI               Non-bank financial institutions
NFES               National Financial Education Strategy
NICA               National Inspectorate and Competition Authority
OPSG               EIOPA Occupational Pensions Stakeholder Group
RSE                Rwandan Stock Exchange
RSSB               Rwanda Social Security Board
SMS                Short messaging service
SRO                Self-regulatory organization
WB                 World Bank
WBG                World Bank Group




                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS| I
                                    Acknowledgements
This report was produced under the World Bank Group’s Financial Inclusion Support Framework (FISF)
country support program in Rwanda (P151374) led by Gunhild Berg and Leyla Castillo. It contains the
findings and recommendations from a World Bank (WB) mission to Rwanda from March 20 to 27, 2015,
which took place for the purposes of a diagnostic review of the Consumer Protection and Financial
Literacy/Capability (CPFL) laws, institutions and practices applicable to certain regulated financial services
in Rwanda (2015 CPFL Review). The pensions and securities sectors were considered, along with relevant
financial literacy/capability programs in Rwanda. The 2015 CPFL Review complements the CPFL review of
the banking and non-bank credit institutions sectors that was conducted in 2013 (2013 CPFL Review).
The FISF Program is a World Bank Group (WBG) initiative supported by the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which provides technical assistance and capacity-building support
to countries to help them accelerate the achievement of their financial inclusion commitments and targets.
The WBG’s Good Practices for Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy/Capability were used as a
benchmark for the review.1 CPFL reviews against Good Practices have been conducted by the WBG in
more than 30 countries worldwide, including in many African countries.2
The 2015 CPFL Review was undertaken by a team led by Rosamund Grady (Senior Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR, and Technical Lead). Other members of the team included Fiona Stewart (Senior
Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR, and Pensions Expert) and Richard Symonds (Consultant, Securities
Expert). Research support was provided by Stephanie Chu (Consultant, GFMDR) and Marco Traversa
(Consultant, Research Analyst, GFMDR). Administrative support was provided by Suran Kc Shrestha
(Program Assistant, GFMDR) and Sylvie Ingabire (Team Assistant, AFMRW).

Peer review comments on this report were received from Sau Ngan Wong (Senior Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR), Denise Dias (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), and Anthony Randle
(Consultant, GFMDR). Overall guidance was provided by Douglas Pearce (Global Lead, Responsible
Financial Access, GFMDR). The mission team is grateful for their valuable contributions.
Extensive consultations were held with relevant stakeholders for the purposes of the review. They included
the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR), the Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN), the Rwanda Capital Market
Authority (CMA), other government entities and public agencies, financial institutions, industry associations,
consumer associations and professional bodies.
The mission team is grateful for the support and collaboration extended by all stakeholders. The team
wishes to express its appreciation particularly to the Rwandan authorities for their strong support for the
2015 CPFL Review and their assistance during, and after, the abovementioned mission.
              I. Good Practices: Private Pensions Sector
SECTIO
                        CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1   Consumer Protection Regime
                    The law should recognize and provide for clear rules on consumer
                    protection in the area of private pensions and there should be
                    adequate supporting institutional arrangements:
                    a. There should be specific provisions in the law, which create an
                       effective regime for the protection of consumers who deal directly
                       with pension management companies and members/affiliates of
                       occupational plans.
                    b. There should be a general consumer protection agency or a
                       specialized agency, responsible for the implementation, oversight
                       and enforcement of pension consumer protection, as well as data
                       collection and analysis (including inquiries, complaints and
                       disputes).
                    c. The law should provide, or at least not prohibit, a role for the
                       private sector, including voluntary consumer organizations and
                       self-regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer protection
                       regarding private pensions.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, Law No. 01/2011 of 10/02/2011
                    Regulating the Capital Market (Capital Market Law) contains consumer
                    protection provisions that apply to all types of ‘services’ which would include
                    financial services such as pensions. Relevant provisions in the Capital
                    Market Law include those relating to information to be given to consumers,
                    advertising and prejudicial provisions that do not have any ‘tangible
                    fairness’ (Articles 33, 34 and 39).
                    The newly passed Law No. 05/2015 of 30/03/2015 Governing the
                    Organization of Pension Schemes (Pensions Law) provides sound,
                    general protection of consumers of pension products, including provisions
                    regarding disclosure, conflicts of interest and protection of assets. These
                    provisions are discussed through this report. The Draft Regulation on
                    Minimum Operating Standards and Supervision of (Voluntary and
                    Mandatory) Pension Schemes (Draft Pensions Regulation) includes more
                    detailed provisions that impose additional requirements or that address
                    additional issues (e.g. vesting). Further requirements (around the selling of
                    pension products and the confidentiality of information, amongst other
                    things) have been suggested for inclusion in this report.
                    The new Pensions Law includes general provisions and principles that
                    provide protection for pension fund members. These include: the obligation
                    of the sponsoring employer and service providers to act with due care,
                    skills, diligence, good faith and prudence; the prohibition against misleading
                    and deceptive acts, representations and omissions; and the obligation to
                    promote the interests of pension scheme members (Article 63(1), (2)).

                    The preamble to the Draft Pensions Regulation also appropriately states




                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 1
                                                   PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                              that their purpose is ‘to promote the stability security and good governance
                              of pension schemes and service providers, and to protect the interests of
                              pension scheme members and beneficiaries in the country.’
                              Protection for pension fund members is also provided by the governing
                              body of the fund that is responsible for looking after members’ interests. In
                              Rwanda, the new Pensions Law (Article 52) requires all complementary,
                              occupational pension schemes (except personal retirement savings
                              accounts) to establish trustees, appointed by the sponsoring employer and
                              employee representatives. This means that the general protections of the
                              Law No. 20/2013 of 25/03/2013 Regulating Creation Trusts and Trustees
                              (Trusts Law) (to manage funds in the interests of beneficiaries) apply
                              (Article 2).
                              Article 3(a) of the Draft Pensions Regulation explicitly requires trustees to:
                              (i) exercise, in relation to all matters affecting the pension scheme, the
                              same degree of care, skill and diligence as an ordinary prudent person
                              would exercise in dealing with property of another; and (ii) ensure that the
                              trustee’s duties and powers are performed and exercised in the best
                              interests of the members and beneficiaries.
                              The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 6(a)(iii)) states that a pension
                              scheme shall have no less than three and no more than nine trustees, with
                              at least half nominated by the members (unless a licensed corporate
                              trustee is appointed). In addition (Article 6(a)(iv)) provides that a service
                              provider, the chairman or chief executive officer (CEO) of the sponsoring
                              company may not be the chair of the Trustee Board. The Board is required
                              to meet four times a year (Article 6(a)(v)). Article 4 of Draft Pensions
                              Regulation highlights that trustees are appointed for a maximum of four
                              years, renewable for one term.
                              General skill requirements are also set out in the new Pensions Law (Article
                              53). The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 54) imposes the following fit
                              and proper requirements:
                              •    Personal qualities (probity, competence and soundness of judgement
                                   and diligence);
                              •    Previous business and financial conduct (i.e. must not have been
                                   bankrupt); and
                              •    Must not be convicted of corruption, fraud, tax evasion, crimes against
                                   humanity or genocide.
                              For professional trustees (run by a company, rather than individuals), at
                              least two members from top management must be qualified in pensions or
                              social security, finance, insurance, accounting, actuarial science, human
                              resources (HR) or investment.
                              Training requirements for pension fund supervisory boards are becoming
                              good practice in many countries. For example, an online training
                              programme known as the ‘Trustee Toolkit’ has been developed by the UK
                              Pensions Regulator.3 In Ireland, the regulator authorizes external training
                              providers. There are no proposed trustee training requirements as yet in
                              Rwanda, but these could be developed in future.




3
    See Pensions Regulator, The Trustee Toolkit <https://trusteetoolkit.thepensionsregulator.gov.uk> (accessed on 8 July 2015).




                                                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS| 2
                                               PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                           With the exception of the mandatory Rwandan Social Security Board
                           (RSSB)),4 complementary, occupational pension funds in Rwanda do not
                           currently appoint trustees. As the concept is not widely understood (as
                           confirmed by one of the insurance providers which tried to establish a plan
                           on a trustee basis), awareness-building and training on the role and
                           responsibilities of Trustee Boards under the new Pensions Law will be
                           required.
                           Regulation No 12/2009 of 13/10/2009 on Market Conduct Requirements for
                           Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries (Market Conduct Regulation) cover
                           retirement products sold by insurance companies. As noted in the 2013
                           CPFL Review, these regulations establish various principles of consumer
                           protection, such as: the principle of utmost good faith (Article 2); directors,
                           managers and staff placing service to policyholders above self (Article 2); at
                           all times acting with integrity, honesty etc. (Article 3); acting with due skill,
                           care and diligence (Article 4); and avoiding conflicts of interest (Article 6).
                           Paragraph (b)
                           As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, the overall institutional framework for
                           financial consumer protection in Rwanda is fragmented because of a lack of
                           clearly defined roles and responsibilities among different institutions, and
                           unclear enforcement capacity. The National Bank of Rwanda’s (BNR)
                           consumer protection responsibilities overlap with those of the Ministry of
                           Trade and Industry (MINICOM) under Law No. 36/2012 of 21/09/2012
                           Relating to Competition and Consumer Protection (CCP Law) and the
                           competition and consumer protection regulatory body (the National
                           Inspectorate and Competition Authority (NICA), operating under
                           MINICOM).
                           As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, the main missions of BNR are
                           specified in Article 5 of Law No 55/2007 of 30/11/2007 Governing the
                           Central Bank of Rwanda (Central Bank Law). These include an objective
                           ‘to enhance and maintain a stable and competitive financial system without
                           any exclusion.’ For BNR to achieve its mission as specified in Article 5, it is
                           required to perform the following duties under Article 6: ‘to supervise and
                           regulate the activities of financial institutions notably banks, micro finance
                           institutions, insurance companies, social security institutions, collective
                           placement companies and pension funds institutions.’ (emphasis added)
                           Since 2007, when supervision responsibilities were transferred from the
                           Insurance Commission, BNR has been regulating and supervising the
                           insurance and pensions sector via its Non-Bank Financial Institutions
                           (NBFI) Division. This includes a team of 12 staff overseeing the insurance
                           and pensions sectors. Active steps are being taken to increase regulatory
                           and supervisory capacity, including training for staff on consumer protection
                           issues. There is also ongoing consideration of establishing a division
                           specifically responsible for oversight of the insurance and pensions sectors.
                           In addition to the licensing of pension schemes and service providers
                           (which are covered Articles 36, 44, 45, 47 and 56 of the draft Regulation on
                           the Licensing of Voluntary Pension Schemes, Licensing and Roles of Some
                           Service Providers (Draft Pension Licensing Regulations)), the new

4
 For details on the composition of the RSSB Board, see Rwanda Social Security Board <http://www.csr.gov.rw> (accessed on
8 July 2015).




                                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS| 3
                                  PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                 Pensions Law gives BNR, as regulator, considerable powers regarding the
                 protection of pension scheme members, including: revoking licenses
                 (Articles 64, 65 and 83); appointing a special administrator (Articles 66–9);
                 requesting information (Article 83); and applying sanctions (Article 88).
                 As the private pensions sector has previously been unregulated, the BNR
                 team has yet to commence its regulatory and supervisory duties. Capacity-
                 building will be required to help them do so with the passage of the new
                 Pensions Law and the forthcoming adoption of the Draft Pensions
                 Regulation.
                 Paragraph (c)
                 As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, MINICOM has supported the creation
                 of two consumer associations that advocate for the rights of consumers, the
                 Rwanda Consumer’s Rights Protection Organization (ADECOR) (based in
                 Kigali) and the Consumer Human Rights Organization of Rwanda (based in
                 Rubavu). Consumer associations have standing under the CCP Law to
                 request the regulatory body to commence an investigation into anti-
                 competitive conduct, following which a consultation and consideration of the
                 request must take place. Registered consumer protection organizations
                 may also, under Article 50, commence civil proceedings in respect of a
                 breach of consumer protection law, either at the request of a consumer or if
                 damages are claimed.
                 In practice, financial sector issues are new to ADECOR and the pensions
                 sector has not been covered. Some training and a public awareness
                 campaign on pensions issue could be provided now that the new Pensions
                 Law has been passed.
                 There is no pensions industry association in Rwanda. As noted in the 2013
                 CPFL Review, there is an insurance association, the Association of
                 Rwandan Insurers (ASSAR). Despite its small staff numbers, ASSAR has
                 prioritized a number of crucial areas, including the development of a code
                 of conduct for insurers and consideration of an insurance training institute
                 to attempt to address the gap in specialist knowledge and experience within
                 the industry. These initiatives are also important for the selling of retail
                 retirement products to individuals.
Recommendation   Relatively to the size of the market, BNR’s supervisory capacity needs to be
                 strengthened as soon as possible so that there is effective supervision of
                 the pensions industry now that the Pensions Law has come into effect. In
                 particular there is a need for early capacity building in respect of the detail
                 of the requirements of the new Pensions Law and the new Regulation
                 (once it is finalized), the current state of the pensions market and
                 appropriate methods for conduction on-site and off-site risk based
                 supervision of the consumer protection aspects of the new regulatory
                 framework. This supplements recommendations made in the 2013 CPFL
                 Review to strengthen BNR’s supervisory capacity more generally with
                 respect to financial consumer protection. As an initial step, the passage of
                 the new Pensions Law should offer a good opportunity to hold a workshop
                 on general pension issues and on consumer protection issues for the
                 sector. The workshop should involve BNR staff and other oversight groups
                 (such as the CMA), consumer associations (e.g. ADECOR) and the Office
                 of the Ombudsman. These recommendations could possibly be facilitated
                 within the broader Financial Inclusion Support Framework (FISF) or
                 Financial Sector Development Program II (FSDP II)).
                 With the passage of the new Pensions Law by Parliament, BNR teams
                 should arrange for a consultation meeting with the HR representatives from



                                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS| 4
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    the existing occupational pension funds and pensions scheme providers to
                    make sure they understand their obligations under the new law and the
                    standards that BNR expects.
                    The following consumer protection provisions should be added to the Draft
                    Pension Regulations:
                      •    The regulator may introduce trustee training requirements;
                      •    Sponsoring employers should be required to designate an HR
                           representative to cover pension scheme issues;
                      •    Regulation around the selling of pension products and/or notification
                           that provisions from other financial sectors apply;
                      •    Regulator should be given powers to provide guidance on maximum
                           guarantees, and the distribution of profits and bonuses;
                      •    Members should be required to be notified of changes to scheme
                           rules;
                      •    Scheme rules should be required to include disclosure of fees
                           charged, the existence of any guarantees, and information on
                           withdrawal and transfer arrangements;
                      •    Confidentiality of member information should be made explicit
                           (including for cross-selling purposes within financial groups);
                      •    A minimum cooling-off period (one week is recommended) should
                           be specified when selling retirement products;
                      •    Requirement for pension fund management companies to disclose
                           their financial position; and
                      •    All information provided to members (sales material, contracts,
                           annual statements etc.) should be written in clear and easily
                           understood language, using a legible font.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review recommends that consideration be given to
                    amending the CCP Law so that it does not apply to financial services in
                    order to make it clear that BNR has primary responsibility for supervision of
                    laws and regulations applicable to consumer protection in the financial
                    sector. Ideally, perhaps when the market has further developed, there
                    should be an authoritative financial services consumer protection regulator
                    for all financial sectors, including pensions. This would achieve consistency
                    of interpretation, minimize the risk of gaps in regulatory coverage and avoid
                    any real or perceived conflict of interest for the supervisor. Likewise, the
                    roles of BNR, the Office of the Ombudsman, and the Competition and
                    Consumer Protection Regulatory Body should be clarified with respect to
                    consumer protection rule-making, enforcement and dispute resolution in the
                    financial sector.

Good Practice A.2   Other Institutional Arrangements
                    a. The judicial system should provide credibility to the enforcement
                       of the rules on pension consumer protection.
                    b. The media and consumer associations should play an active role
                       in promoting pension consumer protection.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    The 2013 CPFL Review notes that consumers may commence legal action
                    for breaches of the CCP Law (Article 50), as may registered consumer
                    protection bodies.
                    Article 87 of new Pensions Law gives pension scheme members and
                    beneficiaries the right to take a case to the appropriate court.



                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS| 5
                                                 PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                            There is no small claims court in Rwanda.
                            Given the nascent development of the voluntary pensions sector, no cases
                            have been brought to any court in practice.
                            Paragraph (b)
                            As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, the media does cover financial services
                            consumer protection issues in Rwanda, including pensions.
Recommendation              It is encouraged that BNR launch a media strategy on the new Pensions
                            Law, with the aim of explaining the advantages of occupational pension
                            schemes and encouraging more employers to offer these benefits to their
                            employees. This should be coordinated with the National Financial
                            Education Strategy (NFES).

SECTION B                   DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1           General Practices
                            a. The information available and provided to the consumer should
                               clearly inform the consumer of the choice of accounts, products
                               and services, as well as the risks associated with each of the
                               options or choices.
                            b. Employers should be responsible for ensuring that new plan
                               members are made fully aware of their rights and obligations
                               under any occupational pension arrangements.
                            c. Employers should be required to vest benefits with employees
                               relatively quickly so as to avoid undesirable personnel practices
                               (such as terminating employment just as employer contributions
                               are about to vest).
                            d. Employers should be obliged to ensure that contributions are
                               properly collected, accounted for and passed on to the pension
                               fund’s managers.

Description                 Paragraph (a)
                            The complementary, occupational pension products currently offered in
                            Rwanda do not offer individual members any form of choice. Individual
                            pension savings accounts, which the new Pensions Law allows to be
                            established, have not been offered to date.
                            Paragraph (b)
                            The new Pensions Law (Article 80) requires pension schemes themselves
                            to provide members with information on the status of their scheme, the
                            duties of the scheme, decisions taken in relation to members and their
                            rights under the pension scheme. Article 43 outlines the information that
                            must be provided in the scheme rules, with the Draft Pensions Regulation to
                            provide further details (Article 4).5 Article 43 also states that the information
                            must be written in plain language in Kinyarwanda, French and English.


5
  Information required to be provided in the scheme rules includes: appointment, term of office, removal, powers and
remuneration of the trustees of the fund; power of investment scheme funds; pension benefits; contribution rate; interest
charged on non-remittance and late payment of benefits; how to recover unremitted contributions; vesting formula;
surplus/deficit determination and treatment; withdrawal and transfer rights; procedure for amending scheme rules; procedure to




                                                                                                   FINANCE & MARKETS| 6
                                              PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                          Article 16(a) of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires at least the following
                          to be provided to a scheme member, along with a membership number and a
                          membership booklet that summarizes the provisions of the scheme rules:

                              i.      Member benefits;
                              ii.     Scheme design;
                              iii.    Rights and obligations of members and beneficiaries;
                              iv.     Complaint resolution procedure;
                              v.      Procedure of claiming benefits;
                              vi.     Contribution rates;
                              vii.    Covenants of trustees and sponsoring employers; and
                              viii.   The names and contact information of trustees and service providers.
                          Insurance companies confirmed that an information package is included
                          along with the master policy document signed with corporate clients.
                          Employees are also given individual certification of membership, which they
                          countersign, that includes the summary information on the scheme. Basic
                          information on membership of their company’s scheme will be included in
                          their employment contract.
                          In practice, the quality of information provided to scheme members differs
                          between employers. Some of the scheme sponsors interviewed provide
                          fairly comprehensive information to members. Others (as suggested by
                          anecdotal evidence of former members of occupational schemes whom the
                          World Bank (WB) mission team met) pass on little information to employees
                          and many employees have a low understanding of the benefits and
                          functioning of the scheme. Standards should improve under the new
                          Pensions Law and once the Draft Pensions Regulation setting minimum
                          standards of disclosure is adopted.
                          Paragraph (c)
                          Article 17 of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires payment into defined
                          contribution (DC) schemes to vest immediately. For defined benefit plans,
                          accrual of the promised benefits commences from the date of membership,
                          provided that the member satisfies the minimum period of service. A
                          member’s period of service is determined without regard to temporary
                          interruptions of employment of continuous periods of up to nine months.
                          The mandatory scheme run by the RSSB provides for a lump sum payout to
                          members for less than 15 years of membership.
                          In practice, insurance companies and plan sponsors confirmed that
                          occupational funds have been run as ‘savings schemes’ with immediate
                          vesting.
                          Paragraph (d)
                          The new Pensions Law (Articles 9–13) prescribes obligations on employers
                          regarding the collection of mandatory contributions.
                          In practice, compliance rates at the RSSB run between 70 to 80 per cent on
                          average (lower for the smaller employers), with some problems around non-
                          remittance of employee contributions. This is higher than for many
                          mandatory social security schemes in the region. The RSSB confirmed that
                          it is able to fine companies or even seize assets to cover non-payments.

appoint an auditor and an actuary; custody arrangements; procedures for appointing a liquidator and scheme dissolution
procedures; and the manner in which disputes between parties of the pension scheme shall be resolved.




                                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 7
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    However, the RSSB generally proceeds with negotiation, not wanting to put
                    struggling employers out of business. The RSSB also undertakes extensive
                    awareness and outreach programs (from radio and TV discussions, to
                    brochures and quarterly magazines, to regional events held with employers
                    and employees) aimed at improving knowledge of the benefits and
                    responsibilities around social security, which also assists with compliance.
                    The RSSB is piloting mobile phone, text and short-messaging service
                    (SMS)-based communication with members so that they can track
                    contributions in their accounts and ask questions, which should also help to
                    improve compliance rates.
                    The new Pensions Law (Article 86) requires employers to transfer an
                    employee’s contributions to the scheme of which the employee is a
                    member. Article 58(6o) also obligates sponsoring employers to make timely
                    payments of contributions into voluntary funds. Articles 59 and 60 require
                    trustees and administrators to notify the regulator of any contributions that
                    are more than 30 days overdue.
                    Article 4 of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires the non-remittance of
                    contributions to be covered in the pension scheme rules. A fine can be
                    imposed on the sponsoring employer by the pension fund if non-remittance
                    occurs and the non-transferred contributions should be treated as a civil
                    debt, recoverable summarily by a pension scheme from the sponsoring
                    employer. The Draft Pensions Regulation (Regulation 14(a)(ix)) requires the
                    audited annual statement of the scheme to include the number of occasions
                    on which any sponsoring employer or member contributions have not been
                    paid within 10 days after the end of the calendar month in which they are due
                    or deducted, as the case may be.
                    The insurance company providers confirmed that late or nonpayment of
                    contributions have not been a problem in practice.
Recommendation      Regulations around investment choice may need to be developed in future,
                    should providers start to offer such products.
                    With the passage of the new Pensions Law by Parliament, BNR should
                    review the information which is provided by pension schemes to their
                    members and provide further guidance if necessary.

Good Practice B.2   Advertising and Sales Materials
                    a. Pension management companies should ensure their advertising
                       and sales materials and procedures do not mislead the customers.
                    b. All marketing and sales materials of pension management
                       companies should be easily readable and understandable by the
                       average public.
                    c. The pension management company should be legally responsible
                       for all statements made in marketing and sales materials related to
                       its products, and for all statements made by any person acting as
                       an agent for the company.
Description         Paragraphs (a) and (b)
                    As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, a key provision of the CCP Law is
                    Article 37, which prohibits a seller of goods or services from providing
                    consumers with information that is, in all of the circumstances, deceiving or
                    misleading.
                    The selling of pension products is not covered in the new Pensions Law or



                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 8
                 PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



Draft Pensions Regulation.
Pension management companies in Rwanda currently work directly with
sponsoring employers to provide occupational pension schemes. They do
not advertise directly to the public. The relationships with sponsoring
employers are either built through brokers (a few of which are said to
specialize in relationships with corporate clients) or directly through their
own marketing departments. One regional pension consultant company has
opened an office in the country. Currently they are only providing general
HR advice to clients, though they expect to grow their pension advisory
business in future once the legislative and regulatory framework for the
sector is in place.
Retail retirement products are currently sold mostly by insurance agents
and, less commonly, by brokers. The 2013 CPFL Review made the
following comments regarding the selling of insurance products, which also
apply to the long-term savings/retirement products they provide.
  ‘Article 7 of the Market Conduct Regulations requires that insurers and
  intermediaries pay “due regard” to the information needs of customers.
  The insurer must provide a brochure about each product that clearly
  states the scope of benefits, charges, estimated returns and the extent of
  insurance cover, and that explicitly explains the warranties, exceptions
  and conditions of the cover. The insurer and intermediary must ensure
  that the consumer receives all “material information” in respect of the
  cover to enable the consumer to make a balanced and informed decision
  regarding most suitable product in their best interest. There is, however,
    •   no requirement that the brochure contain specific information on the
        risks of insurance (such as the risk of under-insurance in home
        insurance, or of non-disclosure generally) and
    •   no specific requirement that the brochure and other relevant
        information be provided prior to the purchasing decision being
        made by the consumer.
  The insurer and insurance intermediaries must also take reasonable care
  to ensure that the information provided to customers be accurate in all
  material respects, not misleading and is easily understandable (Article 7
  Market Conduct Regulations).
  Article 9 of the Market Conduct Regulations deals with advertisements by
  insurers and insurance intermediaries. It prohibits the conduct,
  facilitation, acceptance or publication of unfair or misleading
  advertisements and the announcement of false information. The
  provision clarifies that unfair or misleading advertisements include those
  that fail to clearly identify the product as insurance, make claims beyond
  the reasonable expectation of performance, describe benefits that do not
  match the policy provisions, and make unfair or incomplete comparisons
  to products or disparages competitors.
  The Code of Conduct for insurance brokers [set out as Appendix I to the
  Market Conduct Regulation) (Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct)]
  imposes additional requirements, including that brokers ensure that
  statements are not misleading, they must not limit advertisements to
  policies of one insurer without fully explaining the reasons, and the
  advertisements cannot be positioned to take advantage of the lack of
  experience or knowledge of consumers (Article 9). Article 17 further
  obligates intermediaries to provide accurate information regarding the


                                                         FINANCE & MARKETS| 9
                                                PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                                 policy to the consumer before the policy is signed, although there does
                                 not appear to be a specific requirement to provide the brochure prepared
                                 by the insurer.’6
                               The 2013 CPFL Review notes that, following a comparison of Articles 7 and
                               9 of the Market Conduct Regulation, it is not clear that there is an absolute
                               prohibition on misleading and deceptive conduct in respect of an insurer’s
                               published materials or statements generally (such as brochures and advice)
                               other than items that would qualify as ‘advertising’ or ‘announcements’.
                               It is also unclear what rights the consumer has for the breach of these
                               provisions, although BNR may impose sanctions under Article 14.
                               In respect of life investment products (i.e. the retirement products which
                               insurers sell to individuals in Rwanda), the 2013 CPFL Review notes that,
                               although there is a general requirement that claims cannot be made beyond
                               the reasonable expectation of performance, there is the risk that this may
                               be broadly interpreted.
                               In providing advice, insurers or intermediaries must provide all material
                               information about the coverage to enable the consumer to make a balanced
                               and informed decision regarding the most suitable insurance coverage in
                               their best interest (Article 7 of the Market Conduct Regulation). Prospective
                               customers must be fully informed about their duty of disclosure, including
                               the consequences of non-disclosure (Article 8).
                               Insurance brokers must provide advice objectively and independently, and
                               ensure, as far as possible, that the policy proposed is suitable to the needs
                               and resources of the potential customer (Articles 2(d) and 1(f) of the
                               Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct). They must promptly identify and
                               explain the degree of choice in the products on offer, explain the reasons
                               for their recommendations and, where available, offer comparisons of price,
                               cover and service (Articles 2(e) and (f) of the Insurance Brokers’ Code of
                               Conduct). Furthermore, the broker must explain the coverage in order to
                               ensure that the consumer understands it, bring to their attention any
                               warranties or unusual terms, and explain how to cancel the coverage.
                               In practice, many individuals purchasing retirement products from insurers
                               do not understand the nature of the product. These are guaranteed savings
                               products with a life insurance component. They are sold by insurance
                               agents to individuals, often through workplace contracts (e.g. the largest
                               provider of these products confirmed that most of the contracts had been
                               signed with teachers at schools). However, most individuals choose to cash
                               out these products after a few years and are unable to understand why they
                               get less back than they had put in (due to the life insurance element which
                               they had purchased), or less than they could have received in a bank
                               account (due to the long-term guarantee of the return). There are also no
                               provisions on maximum guarantees that can be offered under these
                               contracts or how profits or bonuses should be applied to guarantee
                               products. Improvements in how information on these products is presented,
                               and how they are sold by insurance representatives (including know-your-
                               customer (KYC) and suitability requirements), are clearly needed.
                               Paragraph (c)
                               Pension scheme management companies should deal with sponsoring

6
    2013 CPFL Review, p 115.




                                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS| 10
                                  PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                 employers only and not directly with scheme members or the public.
                 Retirement products are sold on a retail basis by insurance companies. As
                 the 2013 CPFL Review notes, even though broader agency rules may
                 apply, there are no provisions in Rwanda’s law that specifically make an
                 insurer liable for the conduct of its agents in the distribution of insurance.
                 This would cover all aspects of an agent’s role, including the provision of
                 pre- and post-sale information on the insurance, advice regarding
                 appropriate products, the ongoing servicing of policies and assistance in
                 respect of claims.
Recommendation   The Market Conduct Regulation and Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct
                 contain fairly comprehensive provisions on marketing and sales practices in
                 relation to the selling of retirement products to individuals. However, in
                 practice, the provision of information and sales practices need to be
                 improved. BNR should meet with life insurance companies and ASSAR now
                 the new Pensions Law has been passed by Parliament to clarify the new
                 obligations that apply and the industry standards that the regulator expects.
                 Guidance on maximum guarantees and how to determine profit/bonus
                 payouts may also be required.
                 BNR teams could also conduct a survey of the retirement products which
                 are currently being sold on a retail basis to understand the types of product
                 that are being offered and how they are being sold.
                 The selling of retirement products should be covered in the Draft Pensions
                 Regulation. As retail pension products are provided by insurance
                 companies, the Draft Pensions Regulation should clearly state that the
                 legislation and regulations regarding advertising, marketing and selling
                 practices by insurance companies and their agents also apply to pension
                 products sold by insurance companies. The Draft Pensions Regulation
                 should also allow for the regulator to provide guidance on maximum
                 guarantees applied to products, and how profits and bonuses should be
                 applied.
                 In terms of retirement products, the 2013 CPFL Review recommends that
                 more specific regulatory guidance be provided to ensure consumers are not
                 misled about the potential investment returns for life investment products.
                 This would include a requirement that the insurer take into account the type
                 of assets, the terms of the contract and ensure there is a clear statement
                 that past investment performance is no indicator of future performance.

                 The 2013 CPFL Review also made the following general recommendations
                 that apply to retirement products, which should be implemented.
                   ‘Although insurers and intermediaries are required to take all necessary
                   steps to ensure that brochures and other materials provided to the
                   consumer under Article 7 of the Market Conduct Regulations are
                   accurate and not misleading, it is not clear whether brochures and other
                   materials provided to the consumer under Article 7 are included in the
                   definition of “advertising” and “announcements” under Article 9, and thus
                   subject to the absolute rule that they not be misleading. The obligation to
                   present accurate and complete information should be absolute for all
                   materials presented to the consumer by the insurer and intermediary,
                   and it is recommended that an amendment be introduced that would
                   make any misleading and deceptive conduct on the part of insurers and
                   intermediaries [a] breach and thus actionable. Some relief for breaches
                   can be given where, for example, statements of future expectations are



                                                                          FINANCE & MARKETS| 11
                                              PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                               based upon reasonable expectations.
                               In addition, it is recommended that the consumer should have clear
                               recourse in the event that the information does not comply, including for
                               damages.
                               It is also recommended that additional, specific disclosure requirements
                               be considered for brochures, such as risk disclosure, the requirement
                               that unusual exclusions or other terms be given prominence, the amount
                               of any deductibles and information about internal and external dispute
                               resolution schemes. Ideally, information about basic consumer insurance
                               products should be presented in a standardized format to enable
                               comparison across insurers.
                               It is further recommended that the requirements in Article 7 make it clear
                               that the brochure and any information outlined [need] to be provided to
                               the consumer prior to their purchasing decision, that the consumer
                               acknowledges its receipt and that they have read and understood it.
                               Benefit could also be gained by focusing on the level of consumer
                               understanding of the insurance relationship and by facilitating
                               requirements that will maximize the likelihood that consumers understand
                               the basics concerning their insurance purchase, including what the
                               product is that they are acquiring, who the insurer is, how to make a
                               claim or access other benefits under the contract and what their
                               obligations are as policy holders.
                               …
                               It is recommended that BNR consider the benefits of structures that
                               ensure insurance advisers obtain information about their client and
                               ensure that suitable products are sold to them, and over time introducing
                               regulatory or code provisions to enhance the suitability of advice and
                               products. This could potentially be achieved through a written fact find, or
                               through other more appropriate means based on the consumer’s levels
                               of literacy and the maturity of the intermediary market. A fact find would,
                               for instance, record the customer’s situation, needs and objectives and
                               could be retained for a set period, and a copy provided to the consumer
                               with a copy of the advice given.
                               It is also recommended that BNR consider whether insurance agents
                               should meet the higher standard of conduct when understanding their
                               client and giving advice to clients. It is further recommended that
                               consideration be given to implementing requirements for intermediaries
                               to take steps to ensure the consumer understands the advice and the
                               product that they are acquiring.’7
                            As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, although it may be otherwise covered
                            in general law, it is recommended that BNR ensure that it is clear in the law
                            that insurance companies are liable for the conduct of their agents,
                            concerning the sales and marketing process, the ongoing management of
                            customer service and in respect of claims. This recommendation still stands
                            and is important for protecting consumers who purchase retirement
                            products from insurance companies. The 2013 CPFL Review also
                            recommends that consideration be given to whether it is clear to all parties
                            that an insurer is liable for the conduct of its agents and, if not, that clarity is
                            provided on this issue in a manner that is enforceable and well understood.

7
    2013 CPFL Review, pp 116, 117.




                                                                                          FINANCE & MARKETS| 12
                                               PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



Good Practice B.3          Key Facts Statement
                           A Key Facts Statement disclosing the key factors of the pension
                           scheme and its services should be presented by the pension
                           management company before the consumer signs a contract.
Description                No requirements for Key Facts Statements (KFSs) are included in the new
                           Pensions Law or the Draft Pensions Regulation. The 2013 CPFL Review
                           notes that this is also the case for insurance products, including pension
                           products.8
                           Much work on these types of document in relation to the pensions sector
                           has been undertaken by the European Insurance and Occupational
                           Pensions Authority (EIOPA). For example, a statement of the EIOPA
                           Occupational Pensions Stakeholder Group (OPSG) includes a
                           recommendation for a Basic Information Document (BID). This would
                           include: the name of the pension scheme; the nature and main features of
                           the scheme; a brief indication of whether loss of capital is possible; an
                           indication of the consequences of an early exit; a risk and reward profile of
                           the scheme; contributions to be paid by the member and all costs and
                           charges; the scheme’s past performance; and not legally binding
                           projections of possible retirement benefits. Such a BID could then form the
                           first layer in a multi-layer disclosure approach.9
Recommendation             The 2013 CPFL Review recommends that, ideally, a summary form of
                           disclosure about the key terms of the insurance contract be included on the
                           front page of the policy document. This should also apply to retirement
                           products sold by pension companies to individuals.
                           BNR should study international examples of KFSs for pension products,
                           develop a form of statement suitable for use in Rwanda and require pension
                           fund management entities and plan sponsors to provide such information to
                           occupation fund members.

Good Practice B.4          Special Disclosures
                           a. Pension management companies should disclose information
                              relating to the products they offer, including investment options,
                              risk and benefits, fees and charges, any restrictions or penalties
                              on transfer, fraud protection over accounts, and fee on closure of
                              account.
                           b. Customers should be notified of any planned change in fees or
                              charges a reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the
                              change.
                           c. Pension management companies should inform consumers
                              upfront of the nature of any guarantee arrangements covering
                              their pension products.
                           d. Customers should be informed upfront regarding the time, manner
                              and process of disputing information on statements and in
                              respect of transactions.

8
  It should be noted that all retail pension products in Rwanda are effectively insurance products, so many of the
recommendations from the 2013 CPFL Review relating to insurance products may be applicable
9
  For further detail, see: EIOPA, Risks Related to DC Pension Plan Members (2011); EIOPA, Risk Mitigation Mechanisms for
DC Related Risks (2011); EIOPA, Report on Pre-Enrolment Information to Pension Plan Members (2011); EIOPA, Good
Practices on Information Provision for DC Schemes (2013).




                                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 13
                               PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




              e. Customers should be informed in writing, at the time of sale or
                 when joining an occupational plan, of the options available to
                 them if they decide to change employer, move or retire.
Description   Paragraph (a)
              See Private Pensions Good Practice B.1(a) and (b).
              In terms of retirement products sold by insurance companies to individuals,
              the 2013 CPFL Review notes that insurers must issue brochures for each of
              their insurance products which clearly state the scope of benefits, the extent
              of insurance coverage, charges and estimated returns, and which explicitly
              explain the warranties, exceptions and conditions of the coverage (Article 7
              of the Market Conduct Regulation). Customers must also be informed about
              the insurer’s duty of disclosure, although there is no specific requirement
              that this information appear in writing, such as on the proposal form.
              There are no specific requirements regarding the presentation of the
              material, such as type size.
              There is a general obligation for insurers and intermediaries to provide all
              material information about the coverage to the consumer in order to enable
              them to make a balanced and informed decision (Article 7 of the Market
              Conduct Regulation).
              Before an insurance contract is signed, insurance brokers and agents are
              required to provide accurate information about the purpose of the policy,
              what is and is not covered, risk selection requirements, the application,
              terminology used in the contract, how the policy will be issued, the
              estimated price and any other information relating to the contract (Article 17
              of the Regulation No. 06/2009 of 29/07/2009 on Licensing Requirements
              and Other Requirements for Insurance Intermediaries (Insurance
              Intermediaries Licensing Regulation)
              See Private Pensions Good Practice B.2 on the selling of retirement
              products by insurance companies in practice.
              Paragraph (b)
              The new Pensions Law (Article 44) requires that, in case of amendment of
              the voluntary pension scheme rules of procedure, a copy shall be submitted
              to the regulator, the Trustee, the Administrator, the Investment Manager,
              and the Custodian within seven days from the date of approval of the
              amendment.

              There is no explicit requirement to inform members of changes to the
              scheme rules, including changes to fees. Article 26 of the Draft Pensions
              Regulation requires fees to be covered in the initial contract for Personal
              Retirement Savings Account, but does not expressly specify a requirement
              for notification of fee changes.
              Paragraph (c)
              The Draft Pensions Regulation does not contain a specific requirement to
              provide consumers with information on guarantees.
              In practice, the guaranteed return agreed between the insurance company
              providing an occupational pension and the employer sponsoring the
              scheme is included in the master contract signed between these parties.
              Insurance companies also confirmed that the guarantee is included in the
              policy document which individuals sign when purchasing a retail product.


                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS| 14
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                    Paragraph (d)
                    See Private Pensions Good Practice E.1(a)
                    Paragraph (e)
                    Articles 4 and 26 of the Draft Pensions Regulation require withdrawal and
                    transfer rights to be included in the scheme rules of a Complementary
                    Occupational Pension Scheme and the contract establishing a Personal
                    Retirement Savings Account.
                    The insurance companies confirmed that information on transfer rights is
                    included in the policy documents signed with sponsoring employers. Some
                    providers also include this in the summary information sent to individual
                    members. Some, though not all, sponsoring employers are understood also
                    to provide such information to new members when they join the scheme.
Recommendation      The Draft Pensions Regulation should specify that scheme members must
                    be informed of:

                      •   the fees charged, as well as any changes to fees;
                      •   any changes in the scheme rules;
                      •   any guarantees provided; and
                      •   any changes in the scheme regulations.
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation should specify that all information provided
                    to members (e.g. sales material, contracts and annual statements) should
                    be written in clear and easily understood language, using a legible font.
                    As recommended in Private Pensions Good Practice B.1, with the passage
                    of the new Pensions Law, BNR should review the information provided by
                    pension schemes to their members, and provide further guidance and take
                    enforcement actions if necessary.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review recommends that information about the insured’s
                    duty of disclosure, including the consequences of failing to meet the duty,
                    and the times at and until which the duty applies, be required to be provided
                    in writing to the consumer in clear language prior to their signing any
                    application or proposal form.

Good Practice B.5   Professional Competence
                    a. Marketing personnel, officers selling and approving transactions,
                       and agents, should have sufficient qualifications and competence,
                       depending on the complexities of the products they sell.
                    b. The law should require agents to be licensed, or at least be
                       authorized to operate, by the regulator or supervisor.
                    c. Personnel departments with responsibility for occupational
                         arrangements should have at least one suitably qualified
                         individual who can explain the plan to members and deal with
                         third-party providers such as asset management companies.
Description         As previously discussed, retirement products in Rwanda are sold mostly by
                    insurance agents and, less commonly, by brokers. Insurance companies
                    offering complementary, occupational pension schemes contract directly
                    with sponsoring employers. As noted above, since all retail pension
                    products in Rwanda are effectively insurance products, the comments in
                    this section reiterate the findings of the 2013 CPFL Review on insurance.



                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS| 15
                                              PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                            Paragraph (a)
                                ‘Article 4 of the Market Conduct Regulation requires that insurers and
                                insurance intermediaries ensure that:
                                • they act with due skill, care and diligence;
                                • their staff members are competent, suitable and have been given
                                  adequate training; and
                                • a system is in place to monitor the quality of advice.
                                An insurance broker can only provide advice on insurance matters in
                                which he or she is knowledgeable and must refer a consumer to another
                                specialist for advice when needed (Article 2(a) [Insurance Brokers’ Code
                                of Conduct]).
                                Article 10 of the Brokers’ Code [the Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct]
                                contains specific requirements in relation to training. In addition to other
                                requirements in the law [Law No. 02/2008 of 10/09/2008 Governing the
                                Organization of Insurance Business (Insurance Business Law)], the
                                Code also mandates that staff is aware of all applicable legal and
                                regulatory requirements, including the Code, and that they comply with
                                those requirements.’10
                            The insurance companies confirmed to the WBG mission team during the
                            2015 CPFL Review that some training is provided to agents and brokers on
                            all products, including long-term savings products. However, there was
                            agreement that some of the misunderstanding of these products by clients
                            may be due to a lack of understanding on the part of the selling agents as
                            well.
                                ‘The Financial Sector Development Plan contains a proposal to introduce
                                an internationally-recognized standard of education for insurance
                                intermediaries or insurer technical staff (the Certificate of Proficiency or
                                similar) with a substantial lead-time to enable members of the industry to
                                meet the standard.
                                The insurance industry association, ASSAR, is currently developing a
                                proposal for a training institute for the insurance industry and
                                intermediaries.’11

                            Paragraph (b)
                            All insurance intermediaries must be licensed, as outlined in the Insurance
                            Intermediaries Licensing Regulation.
                                ‘The [Insurance Intermediaries Licensing Regulations] and the Market
                                Conduct Regulations require that any broker or agent must make
                                disclosures about their status (that is, whether they are independent or
                                associated with any insurance companies and whether they are
                                authorized to conclude insurance contracts) (Article 16 and Article 7,
                                respectively). There is no requirement for the time at or the form in which
                                this information is to be provided.
                                Under [the Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct], the broker must also

10
     2013 CPFL Review, p 119.
11
     Ibid.




                                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS| 16
                                   PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                     take appropriate steps to see that the consumer understands the broker’s
                     role and on whose behalf the broker is acting (Article 1(b)).
                     …
                     Although there is no explicit provision requiring insurance brokers
                     disclose commissions, insurance brokers must avoid conflicts of interest
                     or if conflicts arise, ensure fair treatment to all policyholders or
                     prospective customers by disclosure or other means (Article 6 Market
                     Conduct Regulation).’12
                   Insurance companies confirmed to the WBG mission team during the 2015
                   CPFL Review that commissions are not disclosed when long-term savings
                   such as retirement products are being sold.
                     ‘BNR has advised that a person cannot operate as a broker and an agent
                     at the same time.
                     …
                     Article 24 of the [Insurance Intermediaries Licensing Regulation] confers
                     on BNR a broad range of enforcement powers to address breaches of
                     the law, including temporary suspensions, the imposition of additional
                     capital requirements, prohibitions against selling new or certain products,
                     and may require training or refresher courses or “any other directives the
                     Central Bank may deem appropriate”.
                     Article 14 of the Market Conduct Regulations also empowers BNR to
                     impose sanctions for breaches of those provisions.’13
                   Paragraph (c)
                   There are no requirements for employers to have specialist HR staff
                   interacting with pension fund management companies in the new Pensions
                   Law and Draft Pensions Regulation.
Recommendation     The 2013 CPFL Review makes the following recommendations regarding
                   insurance agents.
                     ‘It is recommended that the requirements in Article 16 [of the Insurance
                     Intermediaries Licensing Regulation] on the status of intermediaries be
                     clarified by the addition of a requirement that the information be provided
                     at the start of the relationship or at least before any advice or
                     recommendation being acted upon and consideration be given to the
                     information to be provided in writing and/or any other means tailored to
                     the particular needs of the consumer.
                     It is recommended that brokers be required to disclose their commissions
                     (both in dollar terms and also non-financial commissions such as
                     rewards, operational and marketing support or office space) at the same
                     time that any product is recommended to the consumer. It is also
                     recommended that the amount of commission be prominently disclosed
                     in the insurance contract, preferably with an upfront summary of the
                     terms of the policy.
                     …
                     It is recommended that Rwanda continue with the proposals contained in
                     the Financial Sector Development Plan II. Education and experience

12
     Ibid p 114.
13
     Ibid.




                                                                           FINANCE & MARKETS| 17
                                        PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                          requirements should apply both at the time of licensing and at the time of
                          appointment by the insurer (in the case of agents), and there should also
                          be ongoing educational requirements such as a minimum number of
                          hours per year spent in updating or increasing relevant education.
                          There is an ongoing need to provide training to staff and intermediaries in
                          the insurance industry. Such training should be extensive to build
                          appropriate skills within the industry and, from a consumer protection
                          perspective, should cover products (including features and suitability),
                          the underwriting process, claims handling and assessment and training
                          on consumer protection issues.
                          Given the real need to increase experience within the industry, any
                          industry training institute should be encouraged and, if possible, assisted
                          to meet the internationally recognized standards consistent with the
                          proposals in FSDP II.
                          It is further recommended that BNR staff receive specific training to
                          enable them to understand how the process of advice in the insurance
                          context works and potential consumer issues arising from the advice
                          field.’14
                        As part of its ongoing supervisory oversight, BNR should check the
                        qualifications and information provided by pension consultants employed by
                        the external managing entities.
                        The Draft Pensions Regulation should specify that sponsoring employers
                        should designate an HR representative to cover pension scheme issues.
                        BNR should invite HR representatives of sponsoring employers to any
                        workshops or events to ensure they understand their role and
                        responsibilities under the new Pensions Law. In future, if the occupational
                        pension market grows, BNR may wish to introduce training for HR staff
                        responsible for pension issues.

Good Practice B.6       Know Your Customer
                        The sales officer should examine important characteristics of any
                        potential customer, such as age, employment prospects and financial
                        position, and be aware of the customer’s risk appetite and his or her
                        long-term objectives for retirement, and recommend relevant financial
                        products accordingly.
Description             The new Pensions Law and Draft Pensions Regulation do not specifically
                        cover KYC rules. As all funds are currently managed on a
                        group/occupational basis and have not been sold to individuals, the KYC
                        tests are not currently required in Rwanda.
                        International research on how to apply such a test to pensions has been
                        undertaken by the International Organization of Pension Supervisors
                        (IOPS). For example, as part of the test being conduct to compliance with
                        KYC rules, consumers in many countries (Australia, Colombia, Costa Rica,
                        Israel, Mexico and Thailand, among others) are notified if providers lack
                        sufficient information. In some instances, the sale may not go ahead where
                        information is lacking (e.g. Hong Kong, India and Pakistan). Many
                        jurisdictions require that the consumer’s circumstances and the advice
                        given be put in writing and retained (Australia and Hong Kong, among

14
     Ibid p 114, 119.




                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS| 18
                                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                              others). These suitability checks may be supervised, and form the basis of
                              complaints and compliance testing (for instance in Colombia, Israel and
                              Slovakia).15
                              In terms of retirement products sold by insurance companies, the 2013
                              CPFL Review notes that Article 8 of the Market Conduct Regulation
                              requires insurers and intermediaries to seek from their prospective
                              customers the necessary information to make an appropriate assessment of
                              the customer’s insurance needs before giving advice or concluding a
                              contract.
                              According to the 2013 CPFL Review:
                                  ‘The mandatory [Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct] provides more
                                  specifics, and requires that the broker
                                  • understand the type of customer he is dealing with and the extent of
                                    the customer’s awareness of risk and insurance (Article 1(d)) and
                                  • ensure, as far as possible, that the policy proposed is suitable for the
                                    consumer’s needs and resources (Article 1(g)).
                                  Although insurers and brokers must
                                  • have in place risk management policies and internal control systems
                                    (Article 19 of [Regulation No. 05/2009 of 30/10/2012 on Insurers
                                    Licensing Requirements (Insurers Licensing Regulation)]; Article 19
                                    of the [Insurance Intermediaries Licensing Regulation]) and
                                  • have a system to monitor the quality of advice given by their staff
                                    (Article 4 Market Conduct Regulations),
                                 both of which would arguably include an obligation to record and retain a
                                 copy of the customers’ needs, but there is no specific requirement in this
                                 regard.’16
                              In practice, it is not clear that consumers understand the retirement
                              products that are being sold to them directly as a retail product, or that the
                              products meet their needs (given they are often cashed out after only a few
                              years).
Recommendation                BNR should review international experience in KYC rules applicable to
                              pensions, and could introduce regulations and/or provide guidance should a
                              retail market develop in future.17
                              See Private Pensions Good Practice B.2 for recommendations on selling of
                              pension retirement products.
Good Practice B.7             Disclosure of Financial Situation
                              a. The regulator or supervisor should publish annual public reports
                                 on the development, health and strength of the pensions industry
                                 either as a special report or as part of its disclosure and
                                 accountability requirements under the law that governs these.
                              b. All pension management companies should disclose information

15
    See IOPS, ‘Supervision of Pension Intermediaries’ (IOPS Working Paper on Effective Pensions Supervision No. 17,
December 2012).
16
   2013 CPFL Review, p117.
17
   IOPS states in that, in terms of what client information is required to be collected in order to establish suitability of product or
advice, age is standard in virtually all countries that have such suitability requirements. Risk appetite and income are
requested in many cases. Investment experience, family situation, tax position and net worth are less common. IOPS, above n
15, 22.




                                                                                                         FINANCE & MARKETS| 19
                                                PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                                regarding their financial position and profit performance.
                           c. Actuarial reports on funding levels should be required annually for
                              defined benefit plans and members and affiliates should be
                              advised of the condition of the plan in a short and clear written
                              report.
                           d. Investment reports for defined contribution plans should at least
                              match best practice mutual fund reporting.
Description                Paragraph (a)
                           The new Pensions Law (Article 57) requires the regulator to establish, keep,
                           update and publish the list of all pension schemes and their service
                           providers licensed under the Pensions Law on an annual basis (and
                           whenever deemed necessary).
                           Currently, BNR does not have accurate records of the existing
                           complementary occupational pension funds. (It has an ‘informal’ list of 54
                           funds as at September 2014.)
                           BNR could consider becoming a central source of comparative information
                           between service providers (e.g. providing a table of returns and fees).
                           Increasingly, this is becoming common practice in countries such as
                           Australia, Bulgaria, Hong Kong, Chile, Israel, Jamaica, Mexico or Turkey.
                           As IOPS Working Paper No. 15 states: 18
                              ‘The fact that information comes directly from the supervisor may
                              contribute to maintaining public confidence in the functioning of the
                              pension system — a goal which has risen in prominence following the
                              global financial and economic crisis of recent years.’
                           Paragraph (b)
                           Article 21 of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires the trustee of a pension
                           fund to inform members that the audited financial statements of the scheme
                           and the investment reports are available, and to provide them with a
                           summary.
                           There are no requirements in the new Pensions Law for the pension fund
                           management company (as opposed to the pension fund) to disclose its
                           financial position.
                           Pension fund management companies are in practice insurance companies.
                           Likewise, retail retirement products are sold by insurance companies.
                           In terms of insurance companies selling retirement products, the 2013
                           CPFL Review notes the following:
                              ‘BNR is empowered under the Insurer Licensing Regulations to publish
                              reports containing statistical data as well as economic and financial
                              studies and can require insurers or any other person to provide it with
                              statistics and information needed for the analysis (Article 68 Insurer
                              Licensing Regulations).
                              Insurers must maintain accounting records that are sufficient to enable its
                              financial position to be determined at any time with reasonable accuracy
                              (Article 24 of the Insurer Licensing Regulation).


18
   For further details and international examples (including links to individual country websites), see IOPS, ‘Comparative
Information Provided by Pension Supervisory Authorities’ (Working Paper on Effective Pension Supervision No. 15, 2011),
available at <http://www.oecd.org/site/iops/principlesandguidelines/49354396.pdf>.




                                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 20
                                                 PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                                 Insurers must submit various financial reporting to the Central Bank
                                 including Margin of Solvency Reports, Quarterly Financial Statements,
                                 and prudential reports such as valuations of technical provisions, and n
                                 compliance with investment restrictions, loans and exposures (Article 26
                                 Insurer Licensing Regulations).
                                 Insurers must submit audited financial statements to the Central Bank by
                                 April 30 each year. After the Central Bank has reviewed insurers’
                                 financial statements, they are required to publish their audited financial
                                 statements in a newspaper and on their websites (Article 25 Insurer
                                 Licensing Regulations).
                                 The Financial Sector Development Program II recognizes the need for
                                 increased information on the insurance industry to be published, both on
                                 websites and in regular publications. There needs to be more
                                 comprehensive data, which should be separated between the life and
                                 non-life sectors and is expected to include balance sheet information,
                                 income/expense data and key ratios.
                                 Very few companies in Rwanda are rated by credit agencies, and no
                                 insurers operating in Rwanda are currently rated, making publication by
                                 the Central Bank of accessible data on the financial strength of insurers a
                                 priority.’19
                               Paragraph (c)
                               Article 15 of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires an actuarial study for
                               the mandatory RSSB every five years. The last two studies were carried out
                               in 2007 and 2012 by the International Labor Organization (ILO).
                               Article 14(a) of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires all pension schemes
                               to submit an annual report to the regulator. For defined benefit funds, this
                               must include the fund value as at the last actuarial valuation, funding and
                               solvency ratios, the date of valuation, the definition and interpretation of ratios,
                               and the audited financial statements for all schemes. Article 31 requires similar
                               annual reports and statements for personal retirement savings accounts.
                               Numerous provisions in the new Pensions Law (including Articles 58, 59, 77,
                               84 and 85) and the Draft Pensions Regulation (including Articles 8–10 and 12)
                               cover the obligations of trustees regarding audits and actuarial reports, and
                               how audits must be conducted.
                               The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 12(e)) requires the pension scheme
                               to report to members within three months of the actuarial study and the
                               results are available to them upon request.
                               Aside from the RSSB, there are no defined benefit funds operating in Rwanda.
                               Actuarial reviews are not therefore required in practice. However, the
                               insurance companies managing complementary occupational funds
                               confirmed that these are regularly audited.
                               Paragraph (d)
                               See Private Pensions Good Practice C.1(b).
Recommendation                 With the passage of the new Pensions Law, BNR should ensure a thorough
                               stocktake of complementary occupational funds.


19
     2013 CPFL Review p 121.




                                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 21
                                      PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                    BNR should improve the information it has on the pensions sector, including
                    the number and nature of funds, membership and asset data and
                    performance and fee information, and publish such information at least
                    annually, both on its website and in an annual report format.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review recommended that BNR regularly publish an
                    overview of the financial strength of the insurance industry, with key
                    information that would include market share in key segments, solvency
                    margins and regulatory capital.
                    It is also recommended that BNR conduct an education campaign regarding
                    the importance of an insurer’s financial strength.
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation should require a pension fund management
                    company to disclose its financial position.
Good Practice B.8   Contracts
                    There should be consistent contracts or membership forms for
                    pension products and the contents of a contract should be read by the
                    customer or explained to the customer before it is signed.
Description         The new Pensions Law does provide for contract-based, Personal
                    Retirement Savings accounts. Article 39 provides that these accounts
                    should be set up using a standard contract.
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 26) provides detailed minimum
                    requirements for these written contracts including: names of parties; address
                    and contact details of provider and contract holder; date of contract;
                    definitions; contract termination details; benefit entitlement; provider
                    obligations; investment issues; contribution rate; interest charge for late
                    payment of benefits; vesting (if employer contributions); costs; transfer rights;
                    withdrawal rules; procedures for amending contract; details of service
                    providers; information entitlement; and dispute mechanisms
                    In practice, such personal pension products do not yet exist in Rwanda and
                    individuals join pooled, occupational pension schemes set up by their
                    employer.
                    In terms of retirement products sold by insurance companies to individuals,
                    the 2013 CPFL Review notes that current insurance contract rules are
                    governed by the Decree Law No 20/75 of 20/06/1975 on Insurance
                    (Insurance Law) and has been modified and completed by Law No
                    01/2002 of 19/01/2002.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review lists a number of essential consumer elements
                    contained in the draft Law on Insurance Contracts and notes how extra
                    protection could be provided by the passing of such a law. It is understood
                    that the draft Law on Insurance Contracts will be tabled in Parliament in
                    2015.
Recommendation      The draft Law on Insurance Contracts should be enacted, as recommended
                    in the 2013 CPFL Review.

Good Practice B.9   Cooling-off Period
                    There should be a reasonable cooling-off period associated with any
                    individual pension product.
Description         There is no mention of a cooling-off period in the new Pensions Law or
                    Draft Pensions Regulation.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review notes that there is no cooling-off period for



                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 22
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    insurance products.
                    In practice, one of the insurance companies confirmed that they offer a 30-
                    day cooling-off period for long-term savings/retirement products in order to
                    offset some of the risks associated with consumers’ misunderstanding the
                    contracts for these products (as acknowledged by industry and earlier in
                    this report). Another company confirmed that in practice there is a pseudo
                    cooling-off period between the time the proposal is made to a client and
                    when the agent returns with the actual prepared policy for the client to sign.
                    Others sign contracts immediately.
Recommendation      A minimum cooling-off period (one week is recommended) should be
                    included in the Draft Pensions Regulation. This is consistent with the 2013
                    CPFL Review recommendation that consideration be given to reasonable
                    cooling-off periods for non-mandatory classes of insurance and, in
                    particular, to long-term savings contracts.

SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Statements
                    a. Members and affiliates of a defined contribution pension plan
                       should not be locked into a specified investment profile (and
                       shares in their employer in particular) for more than a short period
                       (e.g. one week) after providing notification of a desire to switch
                       investment profiles.
                    b. Customers or occupational plan members should receive a
                       regular streamlined statement of their account that provides the
                       complete details of account activity (including investment
                       performance on a standardized basis) in an easy-to-read format,
                       making reconciliation easy.
                    c. Customers should have a means to dispute the accuracy of any
                       transaction recorded in the statement within a reasonable,
                       stipulated period.
                    d. When customers sign up for paperless statements, such
                       statements should be in an easy-to-read and readily
                       understandable format.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    See Private Pensions Good Practice B.1(a). Pension schemes in Rwanda
                    do not currently offer investment choices to individual fund members.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    The new Pensions Law (Article 80) states that the pension scheme itself
                    has the obligation to provide its members with information on the status of
                    their scheme, the scheme’s duties, decisions taken in regard to members
                    and their rights under the pension scheme. Article 60 also imposes the
                    requirement on the administrator to: (1o) maintain accurately all records
                    necessary for the successful maintenance and operation of the pension
                    scheme, including information related to members; and (2o) ensure that all
                    information to be provided to members pursuant to the Pensions Law is
                    delivered in a timely and accurate manner to all members.
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 26) outlines the content that must be
                    included in an individual pension account contract. This includes the right to
                    information including an annual statement and audited financial reports of
                    the scheme and annual investment reports.


                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 23
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                    An interesting and innovative clause in the Draft Pensions Regulation
                    (Article 27(xiii)) requires the providers of personal retirement savings
                    accounts to develop a communication strategy intended to enable regular
                    communication to accountholders with respect to the affairs of their personal
                    retirement savings and furnishing them with annual benefits statements
                    showing the contributions in the year, earned interest, liabilities incurred and
                    the net savings.
                    In practice, the RSSB, being a defined benefit fund, does not provide annual
                    statements. However, individuals can receive statements on request and
                    individual account information can accessed online. As noted above, the
                    RSSB is also currently piloting mobile phone, text and SMS-based interactions
                    with members (informing of when contributions have been made etc.) to try to
                    improve compliance rates amongst employers.
                    The insurance companies confirmed that they provide information to corporate
                    clients annually, quarterly or monthly, as requested. Some are just starting to
                    roll out services whereby individual employees can get information on their
                    accounts online. As noted, the quality and regularity of information provided to
                    scheme members currently varies between employers and will certainly
                    benefit from standardization and guidance which the Draft Pensions
                    Regulation will provide.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    See Private Pensions Good Practice - Section E on dispute resolution.
                    Paragraph (d)
                    Electronic statements are just starting to become available to members of
                    pension funds. These, and other disclosure practices, will need to be
                    checked by the regulator as they develop.
Recommendation      See Private Pensions Good Practice B.1 on investment choice and
                    supervision of information provision.

SECTION D           PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                    a. The financial activities of any customer of a pension management
                       company should be kept confidential and protected from
                       unwarranted private and governmental scrutiny.
                    b. The law should require pension management companies to ensure
                       that they protect the confidentiality and security of personal
                       information of their customers against any anticipated threats or
                       hazards to the security or integrity of such information, and
                       against unauthorized access to, or use of, customer information
                       that could result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any
                       customer.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    The 2013 CPFL Review notes that Article 22 of Rwanda’s Constitution
                    provides for the right to privacy.
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 7(c)(vi)) states that the service level
                    agreement between a pension scheme and an external pension
                    administrator must require the service provider to provide for the
                    confidentiality, privacy and security of information.



                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 24
                                  PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR




                 In practice, the RSSB confirmed that the confidentiality of personal
                 information is indeed maintained. For example, even the actuaries
                 conducting the official review of a pension fund are required to sign a
                 confidentiality agreement and all information provided to them on members’
                 salaries etc. has personal information redacted.
                 The insurance companies confirmed that the individual information of
                 members of corporate funds is kept confidential and is never sold or handed
                 over to third parties. One provider mentioned that some information was
                 passed within the financial group (from the life to the general insurance
                 company) for the purpose of cross-selling products, but this has been
                 stopped as it was not well-received by clients. This provider may still give
                 presentations to corporate client employees on their other products, but this
                 is done at the invitation or with the approval of the employer, and individual
                 membership data is not used.
                 There do not appear to have been any material problems around breaches
                 of confidentiality relating to personal information of pension fund members
                 (mandatory or voluntary) in Rwanda.
                 In terms of retirement products sold by insurance companies, the 2013
                 CPFL Review notes that the insurance laws provide some general
                 protection for confidentiality, as follows:
                     • ‘Under Article 5 of the Market Conduct Regulation, insurers and
                       insurance intermediaries must maintain the confidentiality of
                       information obtained from policyholders or prospective customers.
                       The use of that information is restricted to the normal course of
                       negotiating, maintaining or renewing an insurance contract, unless
                       either
                        - the policyholder or prospective customer’s consent is obtained or
                        - the information must be disclosed by law or by a Court.

                     • Under the Market Conduct Regulations, the mandatory Codes of
                       Practice for Insurance Brokers, Agents and Loss Adjusters contain
                       requirements that recipients of information received in professional
                       confidence may only be revealed to others who are entitled to that
                       information. It is not clear who is regarded as being “entitled” to the
                       information, such as whether this extends beyond the insurer to
                       government authorities; and
                     • Under [Regulation No. 07/2009 of 29/27/2009 on Corporate
                       Governance Requirements for Insurance Business (Insurance
                       Corporate Governance Regulations)], Article 44 establishes that
                       the confidentiality of relations and dealings between the insurer and
                       policyholders is paramount, and directors, officers and staff
                       members must take precaution to protect it.’20
                 The 2013 CPFL Review does, however, note that there are no specific data
                 protection laws in Rwanda under the oversight of a dedicated agency.
                 Paragraph (b)
                 The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 7(c)(ix)) states that the service level

20
     Ibid 123.




                                                                          FINANCE & MARKETS| 25
                                    PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    agreement between a pension scheme and an external pension
                    administrator must provide for business continuity planning, including
                    transfer protocols relating to the handover of functions from the service
                    provider to either a successor service provider or to the trustees (where
                    applicable) on the cessation of the service level agreement.
                    The RSSB confirmed that it has data protection and disaster recovery
                    systems, including new cloud-based storage.
                    The insurance companies also confirmed that they have such systems in
                    place.
Recommendation      The confidentiality of pension scheme member information should be
                    explicitly specified as a requirement in the Draft Pensions Regulation.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review notes that, in some cases, personal information in
                    relation to insurance may be obtained from a person other than the
                    policyholder or prospective customer. For example, an insured or
                    prospective insured may provide information in the proposal or during the
                    underwriting process. The insurer may also give confidential information to
                    third parties, such as medical professionals. The 2013 CPFL Review
                    therefore recommended that consideration be given to expanding the
                    application of the confidentiality provisions to such third parties.
                    In the longer term, it is recommended that a specific data protection law be
                    introduced in Rwanda to ensure that personal data receive consistent and
                    specific protection across all financial services sectors.

Good Practice D.2   Sharing Customer’s Information
                    a.   Pension management companies should inform the consumer of
                         third-party dealings for which the pension management company
                         intends to share information regarding the consumer’s account.
                    b.   Pension management companies should explain to customers
                         how they use and share customers’ personal information.
                    c.   Pension management companies should be prohibited from
                         selling (or sharing) account or personal information to (or with)
                         any outside company not affiliated with the pension management
                         company for the purpose of telemarketing or direct mail
                         marketing.
                    d.   The law should allow a customer to stop or opt out of the sharing
                         by the pension management company of certain information
                         regarding the customer, and the pension management company
                         should inform its customers of their opt-out right.
                    e. The law should prohibit the disclosure of information of
                       customers by third parties.
Description         Paragraphs (a)–(e)
                    See Private Pensions Good Practice D.1.
Recommendation      See Private Pensions Good Practice D.1 recommendations.
Good Practice D.3   Permitted Disclosures
                    a. The law should state specific procedures and exceptions
                       concerning the release of customer financial records to
                       government authorities.
                    b. The law should provide for penalties for breach of confidentiality
                       laws.


                                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS| 26
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



Description         See Private Pensions Good Practice D.1.
Recommendation      See Private Pensions Good Practice D.1 recommendations.

SECTION E           DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Dispute Settlement
                    a. An internal avenue for claim and dispute resolution practices
                       within the pension management company should be required by
                       the supervisory agency.
                    b. Pension management companies should provide designated
                       employees available to consumers for inquiries and complaints.
                    c. The pension management company should inform its customers
                       of the internal procedures on dispute resolution.
                    d. The regulator or supervisor should investigate whether pension
                       management companies comply with their internal procedures
                       regarding dispute resolution.
Description         Paragraph (a)
                    The new Pensions Law (Article 87) covers the right of appeal of pension
                    fund members, stating that any member or beneficiary of a pension scheme
                    who is aggrieved by the decision of the pension scheme may request, in
                    writing, that such a decision be reviewed by the Board of Directors of the
                    organ which took the decision within a period not exceeding six months.
                    Article 4(a)(xxiii) of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires the scheme rules
                    to include the manner in which disputes between the parties of the pension
                    scheme shall be resolved. This is also required to be included the contract for
                    an individual pension account contract (Article 26(a)(xxviii)).
                    In practice, RSSB confirmed that any problems with mandatory contributions
                    are handled at the local level. They have 30 offices covering each region of
                    the country, and the regional offices are responsible for and have relationships
                    with local employers. Problems, which are mostly administrative, have so far
                    been settled internally with no need to seek external arbitration or to go to
                    court.
                    In terms of insurance companies selling retirement products, the 2013
                    CPFL Review notes that Article 10 of the Market Conduct Regulation
                    requires insurers to have an internal dispute resolution process that
                    addresses policyholders’ complaints in a timely and fair manner. Insurers
                    must communicate the processes and procedures to policyholders. Other
                    potential complainants are not mentioned.
                    Brokers must also comply with certain basic requirements for complaints-
                    handling. Complaints must be accepted by phone or in writing, must be
                    dealt with at a suitably senior level and the broker must have a system for
                    recording and monitoring them (Article 7 of the Insurance Brokers’ Code of
                    Conduct).
                    The BNR Directive on Customer Service Delivery also contains certain
                    benchmarks that are required to be met by insurers and brokers in relation
                    to complaints-handling, including a requirement to address complaints
                    within 15 days.
                    In practice, the insurance companies selling retirement products have had
                    issues with clients receiving less than expected when cashing out their



                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 27
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    retirement savings products early. However, no complaints have been taken to
                    court.

                    Paragraph (b)
                    The new Pensions Law and the Draft Pensions Regulation do not expressly
                    require pension management companies to provide dedicated customer
                    complaints-handling staff. However, in practice, the insurance companies
                    confirmed they have dedicated customer relationship management
                    (including complaints-handling) staff in charge of corporate accounts.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 7(c)(iii)) requires a service level
                    agreement if an external administrator is appointed, which must include
                    dispute resolution mechanisms between the parties.
                    The pension fund management companies consulted confirmed that, as
                    with the customer relationship management staff, these procedures are
                    made known to employer sponsor-clients.
                    Paragraph (d)
                    BNR has yet to commence supervising pension schemes.
Recommendation      See Private Pensions Good Practice E.2.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review recommends that access to the insurer’s dispute
                    resolution mechanism be extended to any person with an interest under a
                    policy, including beneficiaries.
                    Provisions should be implemented that require insurers and brokers to
                    inform consumers about the existence of the internal dispute resolution
                    scheme, as well as processes for accessing it, both in marketing materials
                    about each product (including written materials and on the company’s
                    website) and at the time a complaint is made. Requirements should be
                    implemented that specify in detail the timeframes within which a response
                    should be provided to the consumer. There should also be requirements for
                    the insurer or broker to report on their scheme and to monitor trends in
                    complaints-handling.
Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                    A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek third-party
                    recourse in the event they cannot resolve a pensions-related issue
                    with their employer or a pension management company.
Description         Article 87 of the draft Pension Act states that, where a member or
                    beneficiary is not satisfied with the response of the Board of Trustees of the
                    pension scheme, they have the right to refer the matter to the Office of the
                    Ombudsman within a period not exceeding 30 days. In addition, where a
                    person who appealed to the Office of the Ombudsman is not satisfied with
                    the decision, he or she may file a case with a competent court.
                    Since the 2013 CPFL Review took place, the Office of the Ombudsman
                    confirmed that it would be responsible for handling financial consumer
                    issues going forward. Though capacity is still limited and needs to be
                    developed in this regard, two staff members have been assigned to the
                    financial sector unit, and initial training on financial consumer protection
                    issues and international best practice financial ombudsman scheme rules
                    and processes has taken place under the Rwanda FISF Program. However
                    the need remains to provide resources and capacity within the Office of the
                    Ombudsman in relation to the handling of pension related disputes since


                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 28
                                     PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    neither appeared present at the time of the Diagnostic Review and
                    especially given the complexity of pension products and related schemes.
                    The 2013 CPFL Review notes that from 2010–11, there were nine
                    insurance-related cases out of a total of 3,644 cases, being the smallest
                    complaints category. No cases concerning pensions have so far been
                    received.
                    Given the nascent development of the voluntary pensions sector, no cases
                    have in practice been brought to arbitration or court.
Recommendation      Both resources and capacity at the Office of the Ombudsman should be
                    enhanced to cover the handling of pensions-related disputes. Relevant staff
                    at the Office of the Ombudsman should also be invited to attend any
                    workshops or training on the new Pensions Law.
                    BNR should include a review of internal and external dispute mechanisms
                    (including how these mechanisms are made known to members) in their
                    supervisory oversight as it develops (e.g. it should be noted in off-site, on-
                    site supervisory manuals).
                    BNR should monitor complaints data received from pension scheme
                    providers and service providers, and publish statistics as appropriate.

SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND SAFETY PROVISIONS

Good Practice F.1   Guarantee Schemes and Safety Provisions
                    Guarantee and compensation schemes are less common in the
                    pensions sector than in banking and insurance. There are more likely
                    to be fiduciary duties and custodian arrangements to ensure the
                    safety of assets.
                    a. There needs to be a basic requirement in the law to the effect that
                       pension management companies should seek to safeguard
                       pension fund assets.
                    b. There should also be adequate depository or custodian
                       arrangements in place to ensure that assets are safeguarded.
Description
                    Paragraph (a)
                    The new Pensions Law (Article 76) confirms that a pension scheme
                    managed by a public institution (i.e. the mandatory scheme managed by the
                    RSSB) is guaranteed by the government. The new Pensions Law also
                    states that the rules of procedure shall determine modalities relating to
                    insurance of voluntary pension benefit, though it is not clear what this
                    means in practice.
                    See Private Pensions Good Practice A.1 relating to ‘fiduciary duty’.
                    The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 3 (a)) requires scheme trustees to
                    keep the money and other assets of the pension scheme separate from any
                    money and assets held by the trustees to finance administrative expenses.
                    Article 70 of the Draft Pensions Regulation and Article 59 of the new
                    Pensions Law require every pension scheme to establish an investment
                    policy containing investment guidelines for its development and in the best
                    interest of beneficiaries ‘pursuant to the national investment policy’. (It is
                    not clear what the last requirement refers to.) This is supported by the Draft
                    Pensions Regulation (Article 3) which also sets out the requirements of the
                    trustees to establish and follow an investment policy (including risks,



                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 29
                                                  PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                              liquidity, valuation and benchmarks).
                              Article 13 of the Draft Pensions Regulation also outlines rules for the
                              investments of pension schemes, including reviewing the investment policy
                              every three years (Article 13(d)). Investment class restrictions are also
                              outlined in an Annex to the Draft Pensions Regulation.
                              Article 30(c) also requires providers of personal retirement savings
                              accounts to formulate an investment strategy, to be revisited every three
                              years in line with investment regulations, and to be properly valued and
                              monitored.
                              Article 71 requires pension scheme performance monitoring to be
                              measured every three months against investment performance
                              measurement benchmarks. Article 72 requires the investment manager of
                              every pension scheme to prepare, update and submit to the trustee and
                              regulator a document on all pension investments. Article 74 provides
                              protection in that no more than 10 per cent of the assets can be invested in
                              the plan sponsor, no assets can be invested in service providers, and
                              pension fund scheme assets cannot be used to make loans or mortgages to
                              members.
                              Additionally, Article 82 requires pension schemes to establish and enforce
                              internal control, audit and compliance processes on recordkeeping,
                              investment activities and any other activities identified by the regulator.
                              The Draft Regulation on the Licensing of Voluntary Pension Schemes,
                              Licensing and Roles of Some Service Providers (Draft Pensions
                              Licensing Regulation) (Articles 7–9) also requires all occupational
                              schemes to develop a risk management plan.
                              The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 12) outlines when the regulator can
                              require a remedial plan to improve or repair the funding position of the
                              scheme.
                              Article 29 of the Draft Pensions Regulation clearly states that the account
                              owner of a personal retirement savings account is the beneficial owner of
                              the assets in the account. Article 37 also requires personal retirement
                              savings accounts to be kept separately from other assets of the financial
                              institution and provides that they shall not be part of the general assets of
                              such financial institution.
                              The RSSB has a well-articulated investment policy,21 although it is not
                              necessarily implemented fully in practice. A review of the policy and practice
                              is currently underway.
                              Insurance companies managing pension schemes have rudimentary
                              investment policies, with portfolios (basically consisting of bank deposits
                              and some property holdings) structured around liquidity requirements.
                              Industry practice will need to be improved now that the new Pensions Law
                              has been passed by Parliament. Requirements to manage pension scheme
                              assets separately are in place.
                              Paragraph (b)
                              Article 51 of the new Pensions Law states that each pension scheme shall
                              have a custodian approved by the regulator. The requirements to be a


21
     See Rwanda Social Security Board <http://www.csr.gov.rw> (accessed 8 July 2015).




                                                                                        FINANCE & MARKETS| 30
                                   PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                  custodian are also set out, and there is also a prohibition against custodians
                  acting in any other capacity for a pension scheme. Articles 54–6 sets out
                  prohibitions for custodians concerning related parties and conflicts of
                  interest. Article 62 outlines their obligations. Further details on the
                  custodian’s role and obligations are also set out in the Draft Pensions
                  Licensing Regulation (Articles 26–37).
                  Article 30 of the Draft Pensions Regulation requires contributions into a
                  personal retirement savings account be made to a licensed custodian
                  appointed by the provider.
                  In practice, custodial services are not used by pension schemes (including
                  the RSSB, whose assets under management constitute eight per cent of
                  gross domestic product (GDP)). Instead, pension assets are managed and
                  held by insurance companies themselves.
Recommendation    BNR should organize a workshop on the roles and responsibilities of the
                  different service providers (including custodians) for stakeholders (see
                  Private Pensions Good Practice A.1).

SECTION G        CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice    Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media
G.1
                 a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken to improve people's
                    financial capability.
                 b. The mass media should be encouraged by the relevant authority to
                    provide financial education, information and guidance to the public,
                    including on the private pensions sector.
                 c. The government should provide appropriate incentives and
                    encourage collaboration between governmental agencies, the
                    supervisory authority for private pensions, the private pension
                    industry and consumer associations in the provision of financial
                    education, information and guidance to consumers, particularly on
                    the private pensions sector.
Description      Paragraph (a)
                 The 2013 CPFL Review notes that, under the Rwandan Government’s Vision
                 2020 development program, the goal is to increase financial inclusion to 80
                 per cent by 2017, and to 90 per cent by 2020.
                 Through the work of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, BNR,
                 and Access to Finance Rwanda, Rwanda is in the process of implementing
                 an NFES. The aim of an NFES is to assess the state of financial inclusion in
                 Rwanda and to provide a framework to coordinate and implement future
                 financial education activities. The Rwandan Government announced an
                 ambitious NFES in 2013 that, in addition to those aims, prioritizes crucial
                 sectors of the population for financial education (children, youth, elders and
                 women), and outlines multiple delivery channels for each sector. Key
                 performance indicators have also been established to measure success
                 under the regular FinCap survey. The Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN) has
                 assumed responsibility for coordinating stakeholder involvement in the initial
                 formulation of an implementation plan and is in the process of hiring
                 dedicated staff for this project. Support will be provided through Rwanda’s
                 FISF program through technical assistance and capacity-building, and to
                 assist in the execution of the robust monitoring and evaluation plan set out in
                 Rwanda’s NFES to ensure that there is effective progress on improving
                 financial literacy and capability.


                                                                           FINANCE & MARKETS| 31
                                             PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                           The 2013 CPFL Review states that ‘financial education is required to
                           increase the currently small available pool of qualified financial services
                           workers, as recruiting staff even with basic financial skills is currently a
                           challenge. This has the flow-on effect of enabling customer service staff to
                           assist with the education of financial consumers.’22
                           In terms of insurance, it appears that there is a high level of awareness of the
                           national health insurance scheme, with the FinCap survey indicating that the
                           level of awareness of insurance is nearly as high as awareness of savings
                           products. However, a separate survey noted that 20.4 per cent of surveyed
                           Rwandans had not heard of insurance and 29.6 per cent did not know how to
                           use it; 22.1 per cent said they could not afford it.
                           No specific surveys or campaigns have as yet been conducted on pensions
                           on a national level. However, information of savings in general is a key part
                           of the campaign. MINECOFIN is keen to adopt a ‘life-cycle’ approach to their
                           messaging, to explain the importance of short-term savings (e.g. for mobile
                           phones), mid-term savings (e.g. for housing) and long-term savings (for
                           retirement). MINECOFIN has previously undertaken campaigns to
                           disseminate various laws, and agrees that the new Pensions Law could
                           provide a good opportunity to highlight the issue of pensions.
                           Paragraph (b)
                           See Private Pensions Good Practice A.2.
                           Paragraph (c)
                           As previously noted, the RSSB undertakes extensive awareness and
                           outreach programs (from radio and TV discussions, to brochures and
                           quarterly magazines, to regional events held with employers and employees)
                           aimed at improving knowledge of the benefits and responsibilities around
                           social security, with the goal of improving understanding and compliance.
                           These have not been coordinated with the national campaigns, but could
                           form a basis for, or certainly should be a part of, broader programs on long-
                           term savings and retirement income in general.
                           No campaigns have as yet been launched on pensions at an industry level.
                           The insurance companies expressed some interest in launching such
                           awareness campaigns on insurance and savings, mentioning radio dramas
                           and broadcasts as a possible mechanism.
Recommendation             Implementation of the ambitious NFES should continue to be supported as
                           part of Rwanda’s FISF program.
                           An awareness campaign on pensions could be launched now that the new
                           Pensions Law has been passed by Parliament (see also Private Pensions
                           Good Practice A.2 recommendations).

Good Practice              Unbiased Information for Consumers
G.2
                           a. Financial regulators and consumer associations should provide,
                              via the internet and printed publications, independent information
                              on the key features, benefits and risks –and where practicable the
                              costs- of the main types of financial products and services,
                              including private pensions.
                           b. The relevant authority should adopt policies that encourage non-

22
     2013 CPFL Review, p 127.




                                                                                      FINANCE & MARKETS| 32
                                  PRIVATE PENSIONS SECTOR



                    government organizations to provide consumer             awareness
                    programs to the public in the area of pensions.
Description      Paragraph (a)
                 See Private Pensions Good Practice B.7.
                 Paragraph (b)
                 See Private Pensions Good Practice A.2.
Recommendation   See Private Pensions Good Practices B.7 and A.2 recommendations.
Good Practice    Consulting Consumers and the Financial Services Industry
G.3
                    The relevant authority should consult consumer associations and
                    the private pension industry to help the authority develop financial
                    capability programs that meet the needs and expectations of
                    financial consumers, especially pension fund members and
                    affiliates.
Description      Paragraph (a)
                 See Private Pensions Good Practice A.2.
Recommendation   See Private Pensions Good Practice A.2 recommendations.




                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS| 33
                                     II. GOOD PRACTICES: SECURITIES SECTOR


SECTION A                      INVESTOR PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1              Consumer Protection Regime
                               The law should provide for clear rules on investor protection in the
                               area of securities markets products and services, and there should be
                               adequate institutional arrangements for the implementation and
                               enforcement of investor protection rules.
                               a. There should be specific legal provisions that create an effective
                                  regime for the protection of investors in securities.
                               b. There should be a governmental agency responsible for data
                                    collection and analysis (including complaints, disputes and
                                    inquiries) and for the oversight and enforcement of investor
                                    protection laws and regulations.
Description                    The legal and regulatory framework for the securities sector has been
                               generally well-prepared and the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) and
                               industry participants are currently in the process of completing and
                               implementing the legal provisions for investor protection (for example,
                               general operating procedures and procedures for conducting an audit of
                               licensed entities are currently being developed). The RSE is slowly adding
                               listed companies. It just listed a private IPO in July 2015. It has also been
                               cross-listing companies from Kenya. It is the hope of the RSE and CMA to
                               become more integrated in the East African Community (EAC) and regional
                               inspections of registrants by the East African Regulatory Association are
                               expected next year.
                               Paragraph (a)
                               Rwanda has passed a series of laws regulating the capital markets, among
                               the most important of which are: Law No. 11/2011 of 18/05/2011
                               Establishing the Capital Markets Authority (CMA Law); Law No. 01/2011 of
                               10/02/2011 Regulating the Capital Market in Rwanda (Capital Market Law);
                               and Law No. 40/2011 of 20/09/2011 Regulating Collective Investment
                               Schemes in Rwanda (CIS Law). Other laws of a more specialized nature
                               are part of the regulatory framework and are cited as necessary in this
                               report.23 Taken together with the regulations implementing the laws, they
                               form a large part of a comprehensive regulatory framework for the capital
                               markets in Rwanda and specifically for investor protection. However, the
                               development of the framework is not complete and there are some areas
                               that need further development, such as the procedures for conducting an
                               examination of a registrant, which will be noted in more detail in the
                               following analysis.
                               Paragraph (b)
                               The CMA Law provides for the creation of the CMA. Under Article 3(12) of
                               the CMA Law, one of the CMA’s primary duties is ‘to protect citizens and
                               investors in capital market from unfair and unsound practices or practices

23
     See Annex A for a full list of the laws and regulations that were reviewed for the purpose of this 2015 CPFL Review.




                                                                                                         FINANCE & MARKETS| 34
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



                    involving fraud, deceit, cheating or manipulation’. Due to its recent
                    establishment, the CMA is still developing a set of operating procedures and
                    the staff to implement them. The Inspection Department set up last year has
                    only one staff member. It is also currently developing a set of procedures for
                    conducting inspections.

                    The CMA is also charged with reviewing and settling investor disputes and
                    can review customer complaint logs at firms as required. Additionally, in
                    order for an entity to obtain a license to ‘conduct the business of a securities
                    exchange’, it must show that it has effective arrangements for investigating
                    customer complaints and share such information with the CMA. See
                    Regulation No. 01/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Markets (Licensing
                    Requirements) (Regulation on Licensing), Article 7(d).
Recommendation
                    The CMA will need additional resources to complete its supervisory and
                    regulatory procedures. It will also need to train a sufficient number of staff to
                    carry out its responsibilities in this area. The current number of one auditor
                    is insufficient and one or two more auditors will need to be added given the
                    additional responsibility of conducting reviews of filings by companies
                    registered with the CMA and listed on the RSE. Forensic accounting training
                    will initially be the most important training needed by the audit and
                    examination staff. Lastly, as the capital market develops, there should be
                    communication and consultation between BNR and the CMA in relation to
                    supervision of banks which distribute, and advise on, securities. It is
                    understood that there is an MoU in place between BNR and CMA which
                    may be helpful in this regard, but it should be reviewed and amended as
                    appropriate to ensure that it adequately convers consumer protection
                    issues.
                    .
Good Practice A.2   Code of Conduct for Securities Intermediaries, Investment Advisers
                    and Collective Investment Undertakings
                    a. Securities intermediaries, investment advisers and CIUs should
                       have a voluntary code of conduct.
                    b. If such a code of conduct exists, securities intermediaries,
                       investment advisers and CIUs should publicize the code to the
                       general public through appropriate means.
                    c. Securities Intermediaries, Investment Advisers and CIUs should
                        comply with the code and an appropriate mechanism should be in
                        place to provide incentives to comply with the code.
Description         There are currently no industry associations, apparently due to the relatively
                    early state of the securities industry. As such, there are no voluntary codes
                    of conduct. Nonetheless, the CMA, by regulation, has set forth a series of
                    basic principles for the conduct of firms in the market.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    There are no industry associations to create and administer a code of
                    conduct in the capital markets. Although there is no provision in the law that
                    provides for a self-regulatory organization (SRO), the Rwanda Stock
                    Exchange (RSE) considers itself to be a de facto SRO due to its ‘exempt’
                    status under Article 13 of the Capital Market Law. However, in practice, the
                    RSE has not developed the capacity of an SRO. For example, it has not yet
                    completed developing its trading manual or its disciplinary procedures for
                    market members. As to code of conduct, the Capital Markets Regulations


                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS| 35
                                                     SECURITIES SECTOR



                           contain a set of principles of conduct that must be followed by all firms
                           (Regulation No. 05/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Principles
                           (Regulation on Capital Market Principles)).24 These principles function as
                           a mandatory code of conduct, but are administered by the CMA.
                           Paragraph (b)
                           There are no current formal publication efforts to publicize a voluntary,
                           industry code of conduct since one does not currently exist. However, the
                           subject of proper market conduct that is required by the CMA is covered in
                           the general programs for public education regarding the stock market that
                           are put on by the CMA and RSE.
                           Paragraph (c)
                           Failure to comply with the mandatory principles for conduct will result in a
                           disciplinary action.
Recommendation             When the market grows to make it financially feasible, the various
                           subsectors of the securities sector should form associations to regulate their
                           activity and advocate for the members of the association. In addition, the
                           industry associations should issue enforceable codes of conduct governing
                           the conduct of their members to complement the regulatory activity of the
                           CMA.
Good Practice A.3          Other Institutional Arrangements
                           a. The judicial system should provide an efficient and trusted venue
                              for the enforcement of laws and regulations on investor protection.
                           b. The media should play an active role in promoting investor
                              protection.
                           c. The private sector, including voluntary investor protection
                               organizations, industry associations and, where permitted, self-
                               regulatory organizations should play an active role in promoting
                               investor protection.
Description                The judicial system is inexperienced in handling retail securities matters, but
                           the CMA’s complaint procedures can handle these matters as discussed
                           below. The media are just beginning to get involved in investor protection.
                           Paragraph (a)
                           There is no small claims court in Rwanda and thus all retail securities cases
                           would need to go through the courts of general jurisdiction. Due to the
                           nascent nature of the stock market, there has not been enough experience
                           with the court system to determine how effective it would be in handling
                           retail securities cases. The process would, in all likelihood, be long and the
                           CMA estimates that its complaints procedure would be more expeditious.
                           Paragraph (b)
                           The financial media is just beginning to develop an interest in the stock
                           market and there has been some coverage, particularly in regard to new
                           cross-listings from Kenya. The CMA is trying to develop more interest
                           among journalists through the use of workshops for journalists.
                           Nonetheless, the current main source of information appears to be the
                           official news releases made by government agencies, the RSE and

24
  The securities laws in Rwanda use the term ‘firm’ to mean any entity that has received a license to conduct business in the
capital market.




                                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS| 36
                                      SECURITIES SECTOR



                 corporations. One quarterly publication, the ‘Bull and Bear’, provides capital
                 markets information.
                 Paragraph (c)
                 Again, due to the nascent nature of the securities market, there are no
                 significant consumer protection organizations or industry associations. The
                 RSE considers itself an SRO, but this is not an official designation. In any
                 event, the RSE, along with the CMA, is active in promoting the capital
                 markets to the public.
Recommendation   The CMA and RSE should continue to educate members of the media on
                 the securities markets and investor protection, and encourage reporting on
                 these issues.




                                                                             FINANCE & MARKETS| 37
                                         SECURITIES SECTOR



Good Practice A.4   Licensing
                    a. All legal entities or physical persons that, for the purpose of
                       investment in financial instruments, solicit funds from the public
                       should be obliged to obtain a license from the supervisory authority.
                    b. Legal entities or physical persons that give investment advice and
                       hold customer assets should be licensed by the securities
                       supervisory authority.
                    c. If a jurisdiction does not require licensing for legal entities or
                         physical persons that give only investment advice, such persons
                         should be supervised by an industry association or self-regulatory
                         organization and the anti-fraud provisions of the securities laws or
                         other consumer laws should apply to the activity of such persons.
Description         All securities industry participants must obtain a license from the CMA in order
                    to conduct business in the securities markets. Salespersons that work for firms
                    do not have to obtain a separate license.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Article 6 of the Capital Market Law requires all persons who carry out capital
                    market business in Rwanda to be licensed. Article 10 of the Regulation on
                    Licensing provides a mechanism for applying and receiving a license for a
                    broker or dealer. The CIS Law requires the participants in a collective
                    investment scheme (CIS) to be licensed: promoters and distributors of
                    schemes (Article 5), asset managers (Article 7) and the schemes themselves
                    must also be registered (Article 10). Even though the laws are worded
                    generally, there does not appear to be a requirement that salespeople for firms
                    be licensed in their capacity as salespeople.
                    As of June 2015, there are no natural persons who are licensed
                    representatives or brokers. There are also no current CISs licensed to operate
                    in Rwanda.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Article 6 of the Capital Market Law and Article 12 of the Regulation on
                    Licensing apply to investment advisors and require that they be licensed.
                    Similar to brokers, there is no requirement that natural persons employed by a
                    licensed investment advisor also be licensed in their individual capacity.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Not applicable.
Recommendation      Natural persons who act as salespeople or advisors for firms should be
                    individually licensed and qualified.

SECTION B           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   General Practices
                    There should be disclosure principles that cover an investor’s
                    relationship with a person offering to buy or sell securities, buying or
                    selling securities, or providing investment advice, in all three stages of
                    such relationship: pre-sale, point of sale, and post-sale.
                    a. The information available and provided to an investor should inform
                       the investor of:
                       (i)   the choice of accounts, products and services;


                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 38
                                    SECURITIES SECTOR




                 (ii)   the characteristics of each type of account, product or service;
                 (iii) the risks and consequences of purchasing each type of account,
                       product or service;
                 (iv) the risks and consequences of using leverage, often called
                      margin, in purchasing or selling securities or other financial
                      products; and
                 (v)    the specific risks of investing in derivative products, such as
                        options and futures.
              b. A securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should be
                 legally responsible for all statements made in marketing and sales
                 materials related to its products.
              c. A natural or legal person acting as the representative or tied-agent of
                 a securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should disclose
                 to an investor whether the person is licensed to act as such a
                 representative and who licenses the person.
              d. If a securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU delegates or
                  outsources any of its functions or activities to another legal entity or
                  physical person, such delegation or outsourcing should be fully
                  disclosed to the investor, including whether the person to whom
                  such function or activity is delegated is licensed to act in such
                  capacity and who licenses the person.
Description   The Regulation on Capital Market Principles provides that a firm should give
              potential investors sufficient information about its services for the investor to
              make an informed decision. The regulations implement this requirement.
              Paragraph (a)
              (i) Article 5 of the Regulation No. 02/2012 of 25/06/12 on the Conduct of
              Business (Regulation on the Conduct of Business) provides that a firm
              should disclose to clients, inter alia, ‘the regulated activities it is permitted to
              undertake and the activities that it does undertake, and … the nature of its
              services and the risks associated with those services ... [s]o that the client is
              reasonably able to understand the nature, costs and risks of those services
              and is able to take an informed investment decision’.
              (ii) There is no provision that requires a firm to provide a description of every
              type of security it offers. However, Article 13 of the Regulation on Conduct of
              Business provides that a firm must provide a general description of capital
              market instruments it is discussing or recommending to a client and ‘that
              description must explain the nature of the specific type of instrument
              concerned, as well as the risks particular to that specific type of instrument in
              sufficient detail to enable the client to take investment decisions in an informed
              manner.’
              (iii) Article 10 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that
              information provided to clients ‘shall be accurate and in particular shall not
              emphasize any potential benefits of a capital markets service or instrument
              without also giving fair and prominent indication of relevant risks and
              disadvantages.’
              (iv) Article 13 provides that the description of risks should include ‘the risks
              associated with that type of capital markets instrument including where
              relevant an explanation of the effect of borrowing and the risk of losing the



                                                                            FINANCE & MARKETS| 39
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



                    entire investment’, as well as ‘any margin requirements or similar obligations,
                    applicable to instruments’ of the type being described.
                    (v) The general risk disclosure requirements in Article 13 of the Regulation on
                    the Conduct of Business discussed above would also apply to derivatives.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Article 66 the Capital Market Law provides that any person who knowingly
                    makes a false or misleading statement to induce a person to enter into or
                    refrain from entering into a transaction in a financial instrument commits an
                    offense punishable by a fine or imprisonment.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Representatives of firms who conduct sales activities are not licensed in
                    Rwanda.
                    Paragraph (d)
                    Article 5 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business permits a firm to
                    delegate some of its functions to third parties, subject to its responsibility to
                    supervise and be responsible for the third party’s activity. The information
                    regarding such delegations should be available to the CMA on request, but
                    there is no obligation for the firm to disclose these delegations to its clients.
                    A firm must ensure that the entity to which it has delegated responsibility is
                    authorized to conduct the delegated activity, but it is not required to disclose
                    this to the client. However, Article 8 of Regulation on the Conduct of Business
                    regarding capital market research requires any third party research that is
                    given to clients be identified as third party research.
Recommendation      The firms to whom the firm delegates responsibilities should be disclosed to
                    the client.

Good Practice B.2   Terms and Conditions
                    a. Before commencing a relationship with an investor, a securities
                       intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should provide the investor
                       with a copy of its general terms and conditions, as well as any terms
                       and conditions that apply to the particular account.
                    b. The terms and conditions should always be in a font size and
                       spacing that facilitates easy reading.
                    c. The terms and conditions should disclose:
                        (i)     details of the general charges;
                        (ii)    the complaints procedure;
                        (iii)   information about any compensation scheme that the
                                securities intermediary or CIU is a member of, and an outline of
                                the action and remedies which the investor may take in the
                                event of default by the securities intermediary or CIU;
                        (iv)    the methods of computing interest rates paid or charged;
                        (v)     any relevant non-interest charges or fees related to the
                                product;
                        (vi)    any service charges;
                        (vii)   the details of the terms of any leverage or margin being offered


                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS| 40
                                       SECURITIES SECTOR



                            to the client and how the leverage functions;
                     (viii) any restrictions on account transfers; and
                      (ix) the procedures for closing an account.
Description      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires firms to give to a client a
                 document setting out the terms and services provided by the ‘firm’ that is party
                 to the contract.
                 Note that the term ‘firm’ is used extensively in the Regulation on the Conduct
                 of Business, but not in other laws or regulations. However, it is not defined in
                 the Regulation on the Conduct of Business or other laws and regulations. The
                 term ‘societé’ is used for ‘firm’ in the official French translation of the
                 regulation. The word ‘societé’ is generally translated as ‘company’ in the other
                 laws and regulations. Consequently, it is assumed that ‘firm’ is the same as
                 ‘company’ and is a generic term for any business enterprise engaged in the
                 conduct of business in the capital market and registered with the CMA.
                 Paragraph (a)
                 Articles 5, 11 and 17 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business require
                 ‘firms’ to give a potential client a document setting out the basic terms and
                 conditions that apply to an account between the firm and the client, such as
                 the licenses that the firm has, the services that firm engages in, the charges
                 and fees for activity in the account, the venue where transactions will take
                 place and the risks involved in investing.
                 Paragraph (b)
                 There is no specific regulation regarding the font size of the contract, but
                 Article 10 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that
                 information given to clients shall be ‘presented in a way that is likely to be
                 understood by the average member of the group to which it is directed or by
                 whom it is likely to be received.’
                 Paragraph (c)
                 (i) Articles 9 and 15 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business require all
                 fees and charges to be disclosed.
                 (ii) Article 29 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business and Article 22 of
                 Regulation No. 04/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Complaints
                 (Regulation on Complaints) require the internal complaints procedure and
                 appellate process discussed below to be disclosed to the client.
                 (iii) The law and regulations do not contain such a requirement.
                 (iv) Articles 9 and 15 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business require all
                 fees and charges to be disclosed.
                 (v) See above paragraph (iv).
                 (vi) See above paragraph (iv).
                 (vii) Article 13 (i) and (iv) of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business require
                 margin lending and the effects on the client’s account profitability be disclosed
                 to the client.
                 (viii) The capital markets law and regulations do not contain such a
                 requirement.
                 (ix) The capital markets law and regulations do not contain such a
                 requirement.
Recommendation   The existence of the compensation scheme and how to make claims under it


                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS| 41
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



                    should be disclosed to the client.
                    In addition, the Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to
                    define the meaning of the term ‘firm’ and to require disclosure of any
                    restrictions on account transfers and the procedures for closing an account.
Good Practice B.3   Professional Competence
                    Regulators should establish and administer minimum competency
                    requirements for the sales staff of securities intermediaries, investment
                    advisers and CIUs, and collaborate with industry associations where
                    appropriate.
Description         There is no obligation for a salesperson of a firm to obtain a separate license
                    or to pass a competency examination to qualify him or her to act as a
                    salesperson for the firm.
                    The Capital Market Law does not provide for an authorized licensing
                    procedure by the CMA, industry association or professional training service.
                    Instead, it leaves the responsibility for training and qualifying employees to the
                    capital market firms. Article 5 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business
                    requires firms to ‘ensure that its personnel are aware of the procedures which
                    must be followed for the proper discharge of their responsibilities.’ Article 24 of
                    the Capital Market Law requires licensed persons to hire only ‘qualified’
                    persons. However, there is no definition in the CMA Law or the Regulation on
                    the Conduct of Business as to the characteristics of a qualified person.
Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to provide for
                    licensing and qualification of salespersons of firms.

Good Practice B.4   Know Your Customer (KYC)
                    Before providing a product or service to an investor, a securities
                    intermediary, adviser or CIU should obtain, record and retain sufficient
                    information to enable it to form a professional view of the investor’s
                    background, financial condition, investment experience and attitude
                    toward risk in order to enable it to provide a recommendation, product or
                    service appropriate to that investor.
Description         The Capital Market Law and the mandatory principles both require a broker or
                    investment advisor to obtain sufficient information about a customer to enable
                    them to give appropriate advice.
                    Article 16 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires firms to
                    obtain sufficient information from a client to enable the firm to give suitable
                    recommendations to the client.
Recommendation      None.
Good Practice B.5   Suitability
                    A securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should ensure that,
                    taking into account the facts disclosed by the investor and other relevant
                    facts about that investor of which it is aware, any recommendation,
                    product or service offered to the investor is suitable to that investor.
Description         The Capital Market Law and mandatory principles require a broker and
                    investment advisor to make suitable recommendations only to their customers.
                    Article 16 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires firms to
                    determine if an investment is suitable for a client before recommending it to
                    the client. The regulation is silent on the actions that the firm should take if the
                    client wishes to enter into the transaction against the advice of the firm or if the
                    transaction is client initiated.



                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS| 42
                                         SECURITIES SECTOR



Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to set out the
                    actions that should be taken by a firm in the event that a customer wishes to
                    engage in a transaction against the advice of the firm.
Good Practice B.6   Sales Practices
                    a. Legislation and regulations should contain clear rules on improper
                       sales practices in the solicitation, sale and purchase of securities.
                       Thus, securities intermediaries, investment advisers, CIUs and their
                       sales representatives should:
                       (i) Not use high-pressure sales tactics;
                       (ii) Not engage in misrepresentations and half truths as to products
                            being sold;
                       (iii) Fully disclose the risks of investing in a financial product being
                             sold;
                       (iv) Not discount or disparage warnings or cautionary statements in
                            written sales literature;
                       (v) Not exclude or restrict, or seek to exclude or restrict, any legal
                           liability or duty of care to an investor, except where permitted by
                           applicable legislation.
                    b. Legislation and regulations should provide sanctions for improper
                       sales practices.
                    c. The securities supervisory agency should have broad powers to
                        investigate fraudulent schemes.
Description         The capital market laws and regulations prohibit fraudulent sales practices.
                    The CMA is given considerable authority to investigate fraud but, as the result
                    of a principles-based regulatory system, the CMA is oriented towards voluntary
                    compliance rather than strict enforcement of the laws.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    (i) The law and regulations do not contain such a requirement.
                    (ii) Article 66 of the Capital Market Law makes it a violation to make false,
                    misleading or deceptive statements to induce a person to buy or sell a
                    security.
                    (iii) Articles 10 and 13 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business require
                    full disclosure of the risks of investing in a financial instrument.
                    (iv) Article 10 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that when
                    disseminating information, a firm ‘shall not disguise, diminish, obscure or omit
                    important items, statements and warnings.’
                    (v) Article 5 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business forbids any attempt
                    by a firm to restrict or exclude any duty or liability provided by law.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    The capital markets laws and regulations provide for sanctions for improper
                    sales practices. Article 19 of the Capital Market Law gives the CMA the power
                    to issue a broad range of sanctions, such as warnings, fines, injunctions, and
                    suspension of licenses and withdrawal of licenses, for violations of the
                    Regulation on Capital Market Principles, including sales fraud. Articles 24–7
                    provide additional authority for injunctions prohibiting unlicensed activity.
                    Article 66 provides criminal penalties for violations of the law and regulations


                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 43
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



                    that prohibit improper sales practices, including fines and imprisonment of six
                    months to two years. The CMA has not issued a significant number of
                    sanctions over the last six years.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Article 38 of the Capital Market Law gives the CMA the right to conduct
                    investigations if there are justifiable reasons to do so. Article 36 gives the CMA
                    the right to request information from any licensed or authorized person as
                    needed by it to carry out its functions. Under Article 37, the CMA has the
                    authority to enter the premises of any registered or approved person to obtain
                    information.
                    Article 39 gives the CMA the authority to request a court order to enter
                    premises person and seize records. It appears that this ‘search order’ can be
                    obtained against any person. However, the right to interview anyone on a
                    mandatory basis appears to apply only to licensed and approved persons.
                    Article 9 of Regulation No. 06/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market
                    Enforcement Guidance (Regulation on Enforcement Guidance) states that
                    the CMA is following a principles-based approach to enforcement which
                    focuses more on guidance and dialogue with regulated entities, rather than
                    disciplinary actions. Even so, the CMA has the authority to bring disciplinary
                    action if necessary. Nonetheless, it has not conducted many audits due to the
                    lack of an inspection procedures manual and the light staffing of the
                    Inspections Department which has only one staff member.
Recommendation      The legal prohibitions against false and misleading sales practices are well laid
                    out. The principles-based approach to regulation was used and advocated by
                    the Financial Services Authority in the United Kingdom. After the market crisis
                    of 2007, it was determined that this approach did not function well and it has
                    been replaced by a ‘Twin Peaks’ model for regulation. The CMA should
                    monitor carefully the extent to which the principles-based approach results in
                    compliance with the law in Rwanda. If there is significant increase in the
                    number of violations, erroneous filings with the CMA and restatements of
                    annual accounting statements, then the CMA should consider whether a more
                    detailed, rules-based regulatory structure would provide better compliance.

Good Practice B.7   Advertising and Sales Materials
                    a. All marketing and sales materials should be in plain language and
                       understandable by the average investor.
                    b. Securities intermediaries, investment advisers, CIUs and their sales
                       representatives should ensure their advertising and sales materials
                       and procedures do not mislead the customers.
                    c. Securities intermediaries, investment advisers and CIUs should
                       disclose in all advertising, including print, television and radio, the
                       fact that they are regulated and by whom.
Description         Promotional material for CISs is subject to prior approval by the CMA and
                    must be fair, accurate and not misleading.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Article 10 of the Regulation on Conduct of the Business provides that
                    information provided to clients must be ‘presented in a way that is likely to be
                    understood by, the average member of the group to which it is directed or by
                    whom it is likely to be received.’ Article 40 of CIS Law provides that all



                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS| 44
                                                         SECURITIES SECTOR



                             advertising for CISs should be ‘fair, clear and not misleading.’ Article 43 of the
                             CIS Law provides that the information needs of investors must be met and the
                             scheme directors must communicate to investors meaningful information in a
                             ‘clear and understandable manner.’
                             Paragraph (b)
                             Article 5 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that where a
                             firm ‘issues or approves an advertisement in respect of capital markets
                             business it must be able to show that it believes it on reasonable grounds to
                             be accurate, fair and not misleading.’ Article 41 of CIS Law provides that all
                             promotional material must be submitted to the CMA for approval and must not
                             be ‘misleading or incomplete.’
                             Paragraph (c)
                             Article 5 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that a firm
                             must provide to a client, in a durable medium,25 information regarding, inter
                             alia, its licensed status and the activities it is authorized to undertake.
                             However, the requirement does not extend to making such disclosures in
                             media presentations.
Recommendation               The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be modified to require
                             disclosure of the license status of their licenses in all advertising.

Good Practice B.8            Relationships and Conflicts
                             a. A securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should disclose
                                to its clients all relationships that it has which impact on the client’s
                                account, such as banks, custodians, advisers or intermediaries
                                which are used to maintain and manage the account.
                             b. A securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should disclose
                                 all conflicts of interest that it has with the client and the manner in
                                 which the conflict is being managed.
Description                  The capital markets laws and regulations require a firm to have a conflicts
                             policy and procedures, and to disclose these to a client. There is no obligation
                             to disclose all of the firm’s relationships that can have an impact on a client’s
                             account.
                             Paragraph (a)
                             The capital markets laws and regulations do not contain such a requirement.
                             Paragraph (b)
                             Article 7 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that a firm
                             shall ‘establish, implement and maintain’ a conflicts of interest policy which
                             specifies the procedures to be taken to manage the conflict. Disclosure of the
                             conflicts policy to a client ‘shall be in a durable medium and contain sufficient
                             detail, taking into account the nature of the client, to enable that client to take
                             an informed decision.’
Recommendation               The Regulation on Conduct of Business should be amended to require a firm
                             to disclose all service providers that can have an impact on a client’s account.
Good Practice B.9            Specific Disclosures by CIUs

25
   ‘Durable medium’ is defined in Article 2 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to mean ‘any instrument which enables a
client to store information addressed personally to that client in a way accessible for future reference for a period of time adequate
for the purposes of the information and which allows the unchanged reproduction of the information stored’.




                                                                                                          FINANCE & MARKETS| 45
                                       SECURITIES SECTOR




                 a. CIUs should disclose to prospective and existing investors:
                    (i) the CIU’s policies with regard to frequent trading and the risks to
                          investors from such policies;
                    (ii) any inducements that it receives to use particular intermediaries
                          or other financial firms, such as “soft-money” arrangements; and
                    (iii) a fair and honest description of the performance of the CIU’s
                          investments over several different periods of time that accurately
                          reflect the CIU’s performance.
                 b. In addition, a CIU should provide a Key Facts Statement for each
                     fund that it is offering to the client that succinctly explains the fund
                     in clear language. Such document is in addition to any other
                     disclosure documents required by law.
Description      There is no requirement in the capital markets laws or regulations for a CIS to
                 give an investor a KFS regarding the characteristics of the CIS, or to disclose
                 any inducements given to it by service providers.
                 Paragraph (a)
                 (i) There is no such requirement in the capital markets laws or regulations.
                 (ii) There is no such requirement in the capital markets laws or regulations
                 (iii) There is no obligation to give information on past performance, but if it is
                 given, Article 10 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires that a
                 description of past performance be five years or the life of the instrument or
                 service (whichever is shorter), and be based on discrete 12-month periods.

                 Paragraph (b)
                 There are no KFS requirements in the capital markets law or regulations.
Recommendation   The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to require
                 CISs to provide a KFS to new investors. In addition, policies and practices
                 regarding frequent trading and inducements from service providers should also
                 be disclosed in the KFS and prospectus.
Good Practice    Specific Disclosures by Investment Advisers
B.10
                 a. Investment advisers should disclose to prospective and existing
                    clients:
                     (i)  whether the investment adviser is also registered in another
                          capacity and whether the adviser deals with the client’s account
                          in the second registered capacity; and
                     (ii) whether the financial instruments that the investment adviser is
                          recommending are held in the adviser’s own inventory or the
                          inventory of a legal or natural person related to the adviser and
                          will be bought from or sold to its own inventory or the inventory
                          of a related party.
                 b. An investment adviser should provide prospective and existing
                      clients with a Key Facts Statement for each product or service that is
                      being offered or sold to the client that succinctly explains the
                      product or service in clear language.
Description      There is no requirement for an investment advisor to give an investor a KFS of
                 its services.
                 Paragraph (a.)



                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS| 46
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR




                    (i) There is no such requirement in the capital markets laws or regulations
                    (ii) There is no such requirement in the capital markets laws or regulations.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    There are no KFS requirements in Rwandan laws or regulations.
Recommendation      Investment advisors should give prospective clients a KFS regarding their
                    services. The full nature of the advisor’s relationship with the client should also
                    be disclosed including, for example, the fee structure, the extent to which the
                    advisor will have discretion over the client’s account, whether the assets are
                    held by the advisor and whether the advisor sells assets to the client from a
                    related entity.

SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Segregation of Funds
                    Funds of investors should be segregated from the funds of all other
                    market participants.
Description         The capital markets laws and regulations in Rwanda provide for the
                    segregation of client assets from the assets of other clients and all other
                    market participants.
                    Articles 6 and 30 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provide that
                    assets of clients held by a firm or a custodian on behalf of a firm be held so
                    that it is clear that they do not belong to the firm, custodian or any other third
                    party holding client assets.
                    Article 30 of the CIS Law provides that the assets of a CIS should be kept
                    separate from the assets of the custodian, promoter, or asset manager. Article
                    18 provides that the custodian should keep the assets separately from the
                    assets of any other CIS for whom it acts as the custodian. The CMA has
                    licensed several banks as custodians, although due to the lack of CISs in
                    Rwanda, their custodial activity is mainly directed towards natural persons and
                    business activities. Article 10 of the Law No. 26/2010 of 28/05/2010 Governing
                    the Holding and Circulation of Securities (CSD Law) provides that the Central
                    Securities Depository (CSD) and its participants shall keep records separating
                    the assets of each client from their own.
Recommendation      None.
Good Practice C.2   Contract Note
                    a. Investors should receive a detailed contract note from a securities
                       intermediary or CIU confirming and containing the characteristics of
                       each trade executed with them, or on their behalf.
                    b. The contract note should disclose the commission received by the
                       securities intermediary, CIU and their sales representatives, as well
                       as the total expense ratio (expressed as total expenses as a
                       percentage of total assets purchased).
                    c. In addition, the contract note should indicate the trading venue
                       where the transaction took place and whether (i) the intermediary for
                       the transaction acted as a broker in the trade, (ii) the intermediary or
                       CIU acted as the counterparty to its customer in the trade, or (iii) the
                       trade was conducted internally in the intermediary between its
                       clients.




                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS| 47
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



Description         The Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires a contract note to be sent
                    to a client after a transaction, but does not set out the contents of the note.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Article 18 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that a broker
                    must send a detailed contract note confirming a trade for the client as soon as
                    possible and no later than one day from the execution. The regulation does not
                    contain details as to the content of the contract note, merely stating that it must
                    contain the ‘essential information’ of the transaction. Whilst Rule 12.7 of the
                    RSE Rule Book provides for details of the contents of a contract note to be
                    given to a client after a transaction, it is considered that the CMA’s own
                    regulations should also contain a detailed list of contents (in co-ordination with
                    the RSE Rules). This is so that CMA can bring an enforcement action for
                    failure to provide all necessary information required to be in a contract note to
                    an investor after a transaction.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    See paragraph (a).
                    Paragraph (c)
                    See paragraph (a).
Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to include, at
                    least, the content requirements for a contract note that are contained in this
                    Good Practice.
Good Practice C.3   Statements
                    a. An investor should receive periodic, streamlined statements for each
                       account with a securities intermediary or CIU, providing the complete
                       details of account activity in an easy-to-read format.
                        (i) Timely delivery of periodic securities and CIU statements
                            pertaining to the accounts should be made.
                        (ii) Investors should have a means to dispute the accuracy of the
                             transactions recorded in the statement within a stipulated period.
                        (iii) When an investor signs up for paperless statements, such
                              statements should also be in an easy-to-read and readily
                              understandable format.
                    b. If a legal or natural person who provides only investment advice to
                        customers also holds client assets, the client statements should be
                        prepared by and sent from the custodian for the assets and not from
                        the investment adviser.
Description         The Regulation on the Conduct of Business contains a requirement to send an
                    account statement, but it does not set out the contents of the statement, how
                    often the statement should be sent to the client and the readability of the
                    statements.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Article 20 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires that
                    statements of an account be sent to clients at least once a year. There is no
                    specific requirement of readability.
                    (i) There is no requirement as to delivery time.
                    (ii) There is no specific provision allowing for the client to dispute the
                    statement, although the filing of a complaint as set out in Good Practice E.1


                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS| 48
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



                    below would provide a mechanism for disputing a statement.
                    (iii) There is no requirement as to readability for a paperless statement.

                    Paragraph (b)
                    There is no specific provision in the capital markets law or regulations
                    regarding assets held by an advisor.
Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to provide for
                    statements to be sent at least once a year and also on a periodic basis relating
                    to activity in the client’s account — for example, a statement should be sent for
                    each quarter or each month during which a transaction is made. The
                    Regulation on the Conduct of Business should also contain provisions as to
                    format and readability, such as minimum font size, to avoid the situation where
                    there is technical compliance with the requirement to send statements, but the
                    statement is not useful due to poor format or lack of readability.
Good Practice C.4   Prompt Payment and Transfer of Funds
                    When an investor requests the payment of funds in his or her account, or
                    the transfer of funds and assets to another securities intermediary or
                    CIU, the payment or transfer should be made promptly.
Description         There is no specific requirement in the capital markets laws or regulations
                    regarding the prompt payment and transfer of funds.
Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to contain a
                    requirement that, on a client’s request, funds be transferred promptly to his or
                    her bank account or to another brokerage account.
Good Practice C.5   Investor Records
                    a. A securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should maintain
                       up-to-date investor records containing at least the following:
                        (i)     a copy of all documents required for investor identification and
                                profile;
                        (ii)    the investor’s contact details;
                        (iii)   all contract notices and periodic statements provided to the
                                investor;
                        (iv)    details of advice, products and services provided to the
                                investor;
                        (v)     details of all information provided to the investor in relation to
                                the advice, products and services provided to the investor;
                        (vi)    all correspondence with the investor;
                        (vii) all documents or applications completed or signed by the
                              investor;
                        (viii) copies of all original documents submitted by the investor in
                               support of an application for the provision of advice, products
                               or services;
                        (ix)    all other information concerning the investor which the
                                securities intermediary or CIU is required to keep by law;
                        (x)     all other information which the securities intermediary or CIU
                                obtains regarding the investor.
                    b. Details of individual transactions should be retained for a reasonable
                       number of years after the date of the transaction. All other records


                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS| 49
                                            SECURITIES SECTOR



                         required under a. to j. above should be retained for a reasonable
                         number of years from the date the relationship with the investor
                         ends. Investor records should be complete and readily accessible.
Description         Article 28 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires records
                    related to the firm’s business and dealings with clients to be maintained for 10
                    years. However, the regulation does not prescribe the specific records that
                    must be maintained.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Article 28 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business provides that a firm
                    must keep records on its own activities and those of its clients. The regulation
                    does not set out a detailed list of the records that must be maintained.
                    (i) –(ix) Not specified in Article 28.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Article 28 provides that all records that set out the rights and obligations of the
                    firm and client must be maintained 10 years.
Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to specifically
                    set out the minimum types of records that must be maintained by a firm
                    containing at a minimum the records set out in this Good Practice.

SECTION D           PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                    Investors of a securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU have a
                    right to expect that their financial activities will remain private and not
                    subject to unwarranted private and governmental scrutiny. The law
                    should require that securities intermediaries, investment advisers and
                    CIUs take sufficient steps to protect the confidentiality and security of a
                    customer’s information against any anticipated threats or hazards to the
                    security or integrity of such information, and against unauthorized
                    access to, or use of, customer information.
Description         There are no privacy or data protection laws of general application in Rwanda.
                    However the 2013 CPFL Review notes that Article 22 of Rwanda’s
                    Constitution provides for the right to privacy.
                    Article 49 of the Capital Market Law provides for privacy provisions that
                    apparently apply to governmental agencies that have obtained information in
                    the course of their duties. It is not clear if this provision is applicable to capital
                    market firms.
Recommendation      The Capital Market Law should be amended to provide for the privacy of
                    information of customers in regards to firms that hold their financial information
                    as provided for by this Good Practice.
                    In the longer term, it is recommended that a specific data protection law be
                    introduced in Rwanda to ensure that personal data receive consistent and
                    specific protection across all financial services sectors.

Good Practice D.2   Sharing Customer’s Information
                    Securities intermediaries and CIUs should:
                    (i)   inform an investor of third-party dealings in which they are required
                          to share information regarding the investor’s account, such as legal
                          enquiries by a credit bureau, unless the law provides otherwise;


                                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS| 50
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR




                    (ii) explain how they use and share an investor’s personal information;
                    (iii) allow an investor to stop or "opt out" of certain information sharing,
                          such as selling or sharing account or personal information to
                          outside companies that are not affiliated with them, for the purpose
                          of telemarketing or direct mail marketing, and inform the investor of
                          this option.
Description         There are no provisions in the law or regulations regarding the sharing of
                    confidential information.
                    (i) There is no such requirement in the law or regulations.
                    (ii) There is no such requirement in the law or regulations.
                    (iii) There is no such requirement in the law or regulations.
Recommendation      If the decision is made to allow the sharing of customer information between
                    commercial entities, the law and regulations should contain provisions defining
                    the permissible scope of this sharing, such as credit information, and income
                    and purchase history.
Good Practice D.3   Permitted Disclosures
                    a. If there are to be any specific procedures and exceptions concerning
                       the release of customer financial records to government authorities,
                       these procedures and exceptions should be stated in the law.
                    b. The law should provide for penalties for breach of investor
                         confidentiality.
Description         Articles 49 and 50 of the Capital Market Law set out the circumstances in
                    which information held by the government can be released without the consent
                    of the concerned person, such as by court order, during a criminal
                    proceedings, for use by an investigator of the CMA, or use by an agency
                    administering the compensation scheme.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    The existing disclosure provisions relate to the circumstances in which
                    information held by the government can be disclosed to other persons. It does
                    not deal with the reverse situation concerning the circumstances in which
                    client information held by a firm is released to government authorities.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Article 72 of the Capital Market Law provides that any person convicted for
                    disclosing restricted information shall be liable for ‘imprisonment for six (6)
                    months to two (2) years and a fine of five million Rwandan francs (Rfw
                    5,000,000) or one of these penalties.’
Recommendation      The Capital Market Law should provide for penalties for the disclosure of
                    confidential, restricted information relating to investors by a non-governmental
                    entity, such as a broker or advisor.

SECTION E           DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Dispute Settlement
                    a. An internal avenue for claim and dispute resolution practices within
                       a securities intermediary, investment adviser or CIU should be
                       required by the securities supervisory agency.
                    b. Securities intermediaries, investment advisers and CIUs should



                                                                                   FINANCE & MARKETS| 51
                                         SECURITIES SECTOR



                        provide designated employees available to investors for inquiries
                        and complaints.
                    c. Securities intermediaries, investment advisers and CIUs should
                       inform their investors of the internal procedures on dispute
                       resolution.
                    d. The securities supervisory agency should provide oversight on
                        whether securities intermediaries, registered investment advisers
                        and CIUs comply with their internal procedures on investor
                        protection rules.
Description         The Regulation on the Conduct of Business has extensive provisions on the
                    establishment of an internal complaints-handling procedure at firms. However,
                    complaints statistics are only required to be sent to the CMA for review on
                    request by the CMA.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    Article 29 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires all firms to
                    have an internal complaints system for existing and potential clients, although
                    it does not specify the exact nature of the procedure or the proceedings to be
                    conducted under the complaint system.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    There is no provision in the laws or regulations requiring a firm to have
                    designated individuals to handle complaints.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Article 29 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires all firms to
                    inform their clients of the internal complaints procedure. This includes how to
                    file a complaint and what actions the client can take, if the firm does not
                    address the problem to the satisfaction of the client.
                    Paragraph (d)
                    Article 29 of the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires all firms to
                    maintain a log of all complaints and to provide the log to the CMA on request.
                    These requests are commonly made during the course of an annual audit by
                    the regulatory agency, but since the CMA currently only has one person
                    assigned to audits, these audits may be done on an irregular basis until
                    additional staff are added to the audit/inspection unit. Consequently, as
                    explained by the CMA, it will not have a good view of the extent of customer
                    complaints until it puts examination procedures in place and the examinations
                    unit is properly staffed.

Recommendation      The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should require firms to send their
                    complaint log to the CMA on a regular basis, such as once a month in order for
                    the CMA to analyze the extent of complaints and problems in the securities
                    sector in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the regulatory system. The
                    CMA should publish analyses of this data so that investors will have
                    information as to the problems in the securities sector that they should look out
                    for.
Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                    There should be an independent dispute resolution system for resolving
                    disputes that investors have with their securities intermediaries,
                    investment advisers and CIUs.



                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS| 52
                                   SECURITIES SECTOR




              a. A system should be in place to allow investors to seek third-party
                 recourse, such as an ombudsman or arbitration court, in the event
                 the complaint with their securities intermediary, investment adviser
                 or CIU is not resolved to their satisfaction in accordance with
                 internal procedure, and it should be made known to the public.
              b. The independent dispute resolution system should be impartial and
                 independent from the appointing authority and the industry.
               c. The decisions of the independent dispute resolution system should
                   be binding on the securities intermediaries and CIUs. The
                   mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of these decisions should be
                   established and publicized.
Description   The Complaints Regulation provides for an independent review of a client
              complaint by the CMA Complaints Committee. It can render an award,
              including costs for a frivolous complaint, and the aggrieved party in the award
              can appeal to the CMA’s Independent Review Panel. The Office of the
              Ombudsman in Rwanda can also independently review complaints.
              Paragraph (a)
              Article 3 of the Regulation No. 04/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Markets
              Complaints (Complaints Regulation) provides for the creation of a
              Complaints Committee at the CMA to hear complaints of investors and other
              participants in the capital markets, including complaints against the CMA.
              Article 8 is to the effect that the powers of the Committee include (in summary)
              power to facilitate resolution of complaints against any person licensed or
              approved to perform a regulated activity under the Capital Market Law, to
              approve any agreed settlement and to adjudicate complaints which do not
              settle. Under Article 12 of the Complaints Regulation, a client of a firm must
              first go through the internal complaint procedures of the firm before filing a
              complaint with the CMA. However, notwithstanding the regulation, the CMA
              has stated that currently a customer of a broker can start the complaint
              process directly with the CMA without going through the broker first, as well as
              coming to the CMA directly for complaints about the CMA itself. The
              procedures for filing a complaint must be disclosed to a client in the account-
              opening documents with the firm pursuant to Article 29 of the Regulation of the
              Conduct of Business and Article 22 of the Complaints Regulation.
              Law No. 25/2003 of 15/08/2003 Establishing the Organization and Functioning
              of the Office of the Ombudsman (Ombudsman Law I) established the Office
              of the Ombudsman. The powers and responsibilities of the Office of the
              Ombudsman are set out in Law No. 76/2013 of 11/9/2013 Determining the
              Mission, Powers, Organization and Functioning of the Office of the
              Ombudsman (Ombudsman Law II). Under Article 4 of the Ombudsman Law
              II, the Office of the Ombudsman is authorized to receive complaints in regards
              to, inter alia, private institutions which would include securities firms. Under
              Article 8, the Office of the Ombudsman should refer complaints to another
              institution that specializes in the matters the subject of the complaint. As a
              result, securities markets complaints should be referred to the CMA. However,
              the complainant can return to the Office of the Ombudsman if the expert
              agency has neglected the matter. The Ombudsman can request that the CMA
              take action or explain why it has not done so and can even request the CMA to
              take specific sanctions. The Ombudsman can also act as an institution with the
              powers of the Judicial Police under Article 11. This could create conflict with
              the CMA, if the CMA determines that there is no substance to the complaint.



                                                                         FINANCE & MARKETS| 53
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR




                    Paragraph (b)
                    The Complaints Committee of the CMA is made up of members of the Board
                    of Directors of the CMA. It is independent of the firms and their clients, but not
                    of the regulatory structure. However, if a client is dissatisfied with the decision
                    of the CMA regarding the complaint, he or she can, pursuant to Article 19 of
                    the Complaint Regulation, appeal to the Independent Review Panel created
                    under Article 63 of Capital Market Law. The powers of the Independent
                    Review Panel include (in summary) power to review decisions of the CMA in
                    relation to the issue of licenses and other authorizations, disputes and
                    disciplinary proceedings and also any award made by the Complaints
                    Committee. The exact makeup of the Independent Review Panel was under
                    consideration at the time of the Review. However it is to be noted that, under
                    Article 16 of the Regulation on Enforcement Guidance, the Panel is
                    independent of the CMA.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    Under Article 19 of the Complaints Regulation, the award of the Complaints
                    Committee is final subject to appeal to the Independent Review Panel. Article
                    21 states that the award is final and if the award of the complaints committee
                    or order of the Panel is not implemented by the firm against whom it is issued,
                    then the CMA can take disciplinary action as it sees fit.
Recommendation      1. The CMA and the Office of the Ombudsman should enter into a
                    memorandum of understanding (MOU) regarding their enforcement efforts, so
                    as not to conflict with each other.
                    2. The CMA needs to take strong measures if the decision of the Complaints
                    Committee is not implemented. Such measures should be set out in the
                    Regulation on Enforcement Guidance.

SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Investor Protection
                    a. There should be clear provisions in the law to ensure that the
                       regulatory authority can take prompt corrective action on a timely
                       basis in the event of distress at a securities intermediary, investment
                       adviser or CIU.
                    b. The law on the investors’ guarantee fund, if there is one, should be
                       clear on the funds and financial instruments that are covered under
                       the law.
                    c. There should be an effective mechanism in place for the pay-out of
                       funds and transfer of financial instruments by the guarantee fund or
                       insolvency trustee in a timely manner.
                    d. The legal provisions on the insolvency of securities intermediaries,
                         investment advisers and CIUs should provide for expeditious, cost-
                         effective and equitable provisions to enable the timely payment of
                         funds and transfer of financial instruments to investors by the
                         insolvency trustee of a securities intermediary or CIU.
Description         The CMA has the power to take prompt action in the event that a firm is in
                    distress or engaging in fraud. Capital Market Regulation No. 11/2012 of
                    31/12/2012 Establishing the Compensation Scheme in Rwanda (Regulation
                    on the Compensation Scheme) provides a mechanism for compensating
                    investors who have been defrauded by a firm.


                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS| 54
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR




                    Paragraph (a)
                    The capital markets laws and regulations give the CMA the authority to take
                    corrective action as necessary if a firm is in distress of engaged in fraud. Since
                    no firms have as yet required the use of these procedures, it is not clear how
                    well they will work in practice. Article 30 of Capital Market Law provides a
                    mechanism for the CMA to place the assets of a licensed person under the
                    control of an independent trustee for the protection of the assets. Articles 55–
                    60 provide for the appointment of a Special Administrator if the CMA
                    determines that it is in the interests of the investors.
                    Article 53 of the CIS Law gives the CMA the power to mandatorily liquidate a
                    CIS if it is in the interests of the investors to do so. The CMA can also transfer
                    the management of the company to another management company. Under
                    Article 55 of the CIS Law, the CMA can appoint a Special Administer to
                    manage, reorganize or oversee the liquidation or transfer of the CIS
                    management and assets.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Articles 55 and 56 of the Capital Market Law provide for the creation of a
                    compensation scheme for investors. The Regulation on the Compensation
                    Scheme provides for coverage of the fund for ‘persons who suffer pecuniary
                    loss from any defalcation or fraud committed by any licensed dealer, its
                    representative or investment adviser’. It does not cover investors in CISs.
                    Article 5 of the Regulation on the Compensation Scheme does not deal with
                    specific instruments held by the firm, but allows a client of a regulated person
                    to apply for compensation if the client ‘sustains a loss as result of any
                    defalcation or fraud committed’ by any licensed person or its representative.
                    The regulation does not detail the method for calculating the loss, but leaves it
                    to the discretion of the Compensation Committee created under the regulation
                    to determine the loss.
                    Paragraph (c)
                    The Regulation on the Compensation Scheme does not have specific
                    provisions on the timing of a payout. It does provide for an application process
                    for payment, an adjudication procedure and an appellate process, but there
                    are no time period given.
                    Paragraph (d)
                    Article 35 of Capital Market Law provides for mandatory winding-up of a firm if
                    the CMA applies to a court and the court decides such an order is just and
                    equitable, or the entity is insolvent. There are no specific provisions as to
                    payout mechanisms or timing. Article 55–60 of CIS Law provides for a special
                    administrator for CIS to wind it up. There are also no specific provisions as to
                    payout mechanisms or timing in the CIS Law.
Recommendation      The Regulation on the Compensation Scheme should provide for the speedy
                    resolution of claims with a prescribed timeframe in order to provide for a
                    prompt payout to investors in a firm covered by the Scheme.

SECTION G           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice G.1   Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                    a. A broadly based program of financial education and information
                       should be developed to increase the financial capability of the



                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS| 55
                                         SECURITIES SECTOR



                        population.
                    b. A range of organizations–including government, state agencies and
                       non-governmental organizations–should be involved in developing
                       and implementing the financial capability program.
                    c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central
                         bank or a financial regulator to lead and coordinate the development
                         and implementation of the national financial capability program.
Description         The Government of Rwanda has established a financial education strategy
                    that is under the overall leadership of MINECOFIN. The CMA is taking the lead
                    in the securities sector where it spends approximately 50 per cent of its budget
                    on financial literacy, which includes outreach to business entities to use the
                    securities market for capital formation. There is no breakdown on the amount
                    of resources spent on the education of retail investors and business entities.
                    For details of the CMA’s retail investor program, see Securities Good Practice
                    G.2(a). The RSE provides mainly corporate informational programs to
                    businesses to explain the purpose and operation of the exchange, as well as
                    the advantages of listing on the exchange as a means of capital formation.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    MINECOFIN, with the active engagement of BNR, has developed a NFES for
                    Rwanda. For a general description of the strategy, see above Pensions Good
                    Practice G.1(a). The strategy includes in its objectives education on capital
                    markets for urban adults between the ages of 36 and 65. However, so far no
                    specific programs have been put in place to meet this goal. On the other hand,
                    the CMA has developed its own strategy which is more specifically geared
                    towards the securities markets and which it feels is effective in the securities
                    sector because of its narrower focus. However, this strategy is not as formally
                    laid out as the NFES.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    In the securities sector, the CMA and RSE are the main implementers of the
                    education program. However, brokers and other participants in the securities
                    markets participate in the securities education program that is set forth in
                    Securities Good Practice G.2(a).
                    Paragraph (c)
                    MINECOFIN, with the active engagement of BNR, has overall responsibility for
                    financial education strategy. However, the CMA, due to its mandate for
                    securities market development, takes the lead in financial education in the
                    securities sector.
Recommendation      None.
Good Practice G.2   Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media
                    a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken to improve people's
                       financial capability.
                    b. This should include encouraging the mass media to provide financial
                          education, information and guidance.
Description         The CMA has used a variety of channels for its securities sector education
                    programs both for investors and for corporations regarding the benefits of
                    listing on the RSE.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    The CMA, BNR and RSE all conduct public education in the finance sector.


                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS| 56
                                          SECURITIES SECTOR



                    The majority of the effort in the securities sector is educating corporations,
                    particularly SMEs, in the value and benefit of using the capital markets to raise
                    capital for their businesses. In the view of these institutions, the development
                    of the securities market needs to precede the education of the investors.
                    Nonetheless, financial literacy regarding the markets is provided to potential
                    retail investors. The CMA, the institution with the responsibility for market
                    development, uses a number of different channels for providing consumer
                    financial education. Roadshows are given in other parts of the country where
                    brokers are included in the presentations. The CMA also conducts roadshows
                    and presentations with BNR. They provide internships for students and have
                    included quizzes in the university curriculum the last three years. In addition, a
                    radio program and a TV talk show were used for several months to provide
                    information to listeners regarding the capital markets. One publication, the
                    quarterly ‘Bull and Bear’, is issued to discuss capital markets issues.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    The CMA has conducted workshops for journalists to encourage them to cover
                    the securities sector.
Recommendation      None.

Good Practice G.3   Unbiased Information for Investors
                     a. Financial regulators should provide, via the Internet and printed
                         publications, independent information on the key features, benefits
                         and risks—and where practicable the costs— of the main types of
                         financial products and services.
                     b. Non-governmental organizations should be encouraged to provide
                         consumer awareness programs to the public regarding financial
                         products and services.
Description         The CMA provides some information on its website regarding basic financial
                    instruments such as bonds and unit trusts, but due to the lack of product this
                    information is limited.
                    Paragraph (a)
                    The CMA provides some information on its website, such as information on
                    bonds and unit trusts. It also provides such information in more detail in its
                    workshops and investor outreach programs.
                    Paragraph (b)
                    Due to the nascent nature of the securities markets in Rwanda, non-
                    governmental programs in Rwanda dealing with investor protection issues in
                    the securities markets have not been established.
Recommendation      The dissemination of market information by the CMA and RSE is limited due to
                    the small size of the market. As the market develops, more information in a
                    clear format will help investors in making their investment decisions. This
                    information on the RSE would include complete daily and monthly analyses of
                    activity on the market going back at least five years. In addition, information
                    sheets regarding the different types of financial instruments that investors can
                    buy should be available on both the CMA and RSE websites in hard copy. All
                    filings made by listed companies, intermediaries and mutual funds should be
                    available on the CMA website.
Good Practice G.4   Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                    a. The financial capability of consumers should be measured through a



                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS| 57
                                      SECURITIES SECTOR



                     broad-based household survey that is repeated from time to time.
                 b. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be
                     evaluated.
Description      The financial capability of consumers was measured in 2012, but the securities
                 sector was not included due to its small size and lack of retail investor
                 involvement at this stage of the development of the securities sector.
                 Paragraph (a)
                 A study has been done of the capability of consumers, FinCap Rwanda 2012,
                 which evaluated the financial literacy of Rwanda citizens. However, due to the
                 nascent nature of the RSE, no data was gathered regarding consumer
                 attitudes towards, and the use of, the securities markets.
                 Paragraph (b)
                 The CMA has stated in interviews that there have not been reviews done of
                 the financial capability initiatives as of this date.
Recommendation   The securities sector should be included in the next consumer financial
                 capability survey, if the market has developed sufficiently to justify it.




                                                                           FINANCE & MARKETS| 58
                                          ANNEX: LAWS AND REGULATIONS

The following table contains a list of the principal laws, regulations, codes and guidelines considered for
the purposes of this 2015 CPFL Review.

Abbreviation                                                                            Law
Capital Market Law                                 Law No. 01/2011 of 10/02/2011 Regulating the Capital Market.
                                                   Law No. 36/2012 of 21/09/2012 Relating to Competition and
CCP Law
                                                   Consumer Protection.
                                                   Law No 55/2007 of 30/11/2007 Governing the Central Bank of
Central Bank Law
                                                   Rwanda.
                                                   Law No. 40/2011 of 20/09/2011 Regulating Collective Investment
CIS Law
                                                   Schemes in Rwanda.
                                                   Law No. 11/2011 of 18/05/2011 Establishing the Capital Markets
CMA Law
                                                   Authority.
                                                   Law No. 26/2010 of 28/05/2010 Governing the Holding and
CSD Law
                                                   Circulation of Securities.
                                                   Decree Law 22/08/1974 on the Organization of Social Security in
CSR Law
                                                   Rwanda.
Direct Tax Law                                     Law No. 16/2005 of 18/08/2005 on Direct Taxes on Income.
                                                   Decree Law 20/75 of 20/06/1975 on Insurance, as modified and
Insurance Law
                                                   completed by Law No 01/2002 of 19/01/2002.
                                                   Law No. 02/2008 of 10/09/2008 Governing the Organization of
Insurance Business Law
                                                   Insurance Business.
                                                   Law No. 25/2003 of 15/08/2003 Establishing the Organization and
Ombudsman Law I
                                                   Functioning of the Office of the Ombudsman.
                                                   Law No. 76/2013 of 11/9/2013 Determining the Mission, Powers,
Ombudsman Law II
                                                   Organization and Functioning of the Office of the Ombudsman.
                                                   Law No. 05/2015 of 30/03/2015 Governing the Organization of
Pensions Law
                                                   Pension Schemes.
                                                   Law No. 45/2010 of 14/12/2010 Establishing Rwanda Social
RSSB Law                                           Security Board (RSSB) and Determining its Mission, Organisation
                                                   and Functioning.
                                                   Law No. 20/2013 of 25/03/2013 Regulating Creation Trusts and
Trusts Law
                                                   Trustees.
Abbreviation                                                            Regulation / Code
                                                   Regulation No. 04/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Markets
Complaints Regulation
                                                   Complaints.
                                                   Draft Regulation on the Licensing of Voluntary Pension Schemes,
Draft Pensions Licensing Regulation
                                                   Licensing and Roles of Some Service Providers.26
                                                   Draft Regulation on Minimum Operating Standards and Supervision
Draft Pensions Regulation
                                                   of (Voluntary and Mandatory) Pension Schemes.27
Insurance Corporate Governance                     Regulation No. 07/2009 of 29/07/2009 on Corporate Governance
Regulation                                         Requirements for Insurance Business.
Insurance Intermediaries Licensing                 Regulation No. 06/2009 of 29/07/2009 on Licensing Requirements
Regulation                                         and Other Requirements for Insurance Intermediaries.
                                                   Regulations No. 05/2009 of 30/10/2012 on Insurers Licensing
Insurers Licensing Regulation
                                                   Requirements.


26
   This report refers to provisions of the Draft Pensions Licensing Regulation set out in the version submitted to Parliament in the
fourth quarter of 2014.
27
   This report refers to provisions of the Draft Pensions Regulation set out in the version submitted to Parliament in the fourth
quarter of 2014.

                                                                 59

                                                                                                         FINANCE & MARKETS| 59
                                         SECURITIES SECTOR


                                     Regulation No 12/2009 of 13/10/2009 on Market                 Conduct
Market Conduct Regulation
                                     Requirements for Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries.
                                     Regulation No. 06/2012       of   02/07/2012   on   Capital    Market
Regulation on Enforcement Guidance
                                     Enforcement Guidance.
                                     Regulation No. 01/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Markets (Licensing
Regulation on Licensing
                                     Requirements).
Regulation on Capital Market
                                     Regulation No. 05/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Principles.
Principles
Regulation on the Compensation       Capital Market Regulation No. 11/2012 of 31/12/2012 Establishing
Scheme                               the Compensation Scheme in Rwanda.
Regulation on the Conduct of         Regulation No. 02/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Market Conduct of
Business                             Business.
                                     Code of Practice for Insurance Brokers, set out as Appendix I to the
Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct
                                     Market Conduct Regulation.




                                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS| 60
