 TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016




TDRP Quarterly Report
 FY16-17: JULY-SEPTEMBER 2016




                                         1
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


Table of Contents

Acronyms............................................................................................................................................................................. 3
Summary of Activities ...................................................................................................................................................... 4
Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations .................................................. 4
  African Union DDR Capacity Program .................................................................................................................. 4
  Central African Republic ........................................................................................................................................... 5
  Democratic Republic of Congo ................................................................................................................................. 7
  Republic of Mali ........................................................................................................................................................... 9
  Republic of South Sudan ......................................................................................................................................... 10
Knowledge Management .............................................................................................................................................. 11
  Republic of Yemen ..................................................................................................................................................... 11
Program Management and Status of Trust Fund .................................................................................................... 11
  Progress of No-Cost Extension................................................................................................................................ 11
  Transfer of Leadership .............................................................................................................................................. 13
  World Bank Staff and Consultants ........................................................................................................................ 13
  Status of Trust Fund and Disbursement Rate ...................................................................................................... 14




                                                                                          2
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


ACRONYMS

 ACFPE         Agence Centrafricaine pour la Formation Professionnelle et l’Emploi
 APSA          African Peace and Security Architecture
 AU            African Union
 AUDDRCP       African Union DDR Capacity Program
 BETF          Bank Executed Trust Fund
 BICC          Bonn International Center for Conversion
 CAR           Central African Republic
 CEMAC         Central African Economic and Monetary Community
 CMU           Country Management Unit
 CoE           Center of Excellence
 DDR           Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
 DDRR          Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Reinsertion
 DRC           Democratic Republic of Congo
 FAO           Food and Agriculture Organization
 FCV           Fragility, Conflict and Violence
 ICRS          Information, Counselling and Referral System
 INPP          Institut National de Préparation Professionnelle
 JMEC          Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
 MDTF          Multi Donor Trust Fund
 MINUSCA       United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
               African Republic
 MINUSMA       United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
 MIS           Management Information Systems
 MONUSCO       United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
               Congo
 NDDRC         National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission
 NTF           Nordic Trust Fund
 OGN           Operational Guidance Note
 OMC           Operational Mechanism for Coordination
 PAD           Project Appraisal Document
 PIU           Project Implementation Unit
 PSD           Peace and Security Department
 PSO           Peace Support Operation
 REC           Regional Economic Community
 ToR           Terms of Reference
 UEPNDDR       Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement, Démobilisation et
               Réintégration
 UNMISS        United Nations Mission in South Sudan




                                                 3
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


I.      Summary of Activities

During the first quarter, TDRP activities covered technical assistance, operational and financial support
in Central African Republic [CAR], Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC], Republic of Mali and Republic
of South Sudan, in addition to the ongoing assistance provided to the African Union [AU] Peace and
Security Department in coordination with the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Activities delivered through the African Union DDR Capacity Program [AUDDRCP] centered on
ongoing knowledge management activities. In CAR and Mali, preparations are currently underway for
Bank involvement through a community-based socio-economic reinsertion program. Reinsertion
processes are being operationalized in DRC. Meanwhile, the task team is also currently providing
technical assistance on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration [DDR] to South Sudan and
produced mapping on armed groups in Yemen.

The task team takes this opportunity to clarify that while all activities noted below are associated with
the TDRP portfolio, not all deliverables or outputs were directly funded through the TDRP trust fund.
There are pre-existing bank and other trust fund allocations, through projects or otherwise, outside of
TDRP that support engagement with the African Union, CAR, DRC, Mali and South Sudan. Similarly,
consultants and staff working with TDRP are not paid entirely by the TDRP Trust Fund, but as well as
through bank budget for DDR operations across UN-WB Trust Fund, CAR, DRC, Mali, South Sudan etc.

II.     Technical Assistance and Financing of Reinsertion/Reintegration Operations:

African Union DDR Capacity Program
From the previous quarter, the experts’ workshop has been placed on hold until the African Union [AU]
identifies additional financing resources. The progress and practice brief has been finalized and
published, with additional translation support from the task team. In addition, the Sixth issue of the AU
DDR Newsletter and the Operational Guidance Note [OGN] on National Frameworks has been finalized,
published and widely disseminated.

The TDRP task team provided technical assistance in the coordination and development of documents
for the African Union Security Sector Reform [SSR]/Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Training Workshop in Bangui, Central African Republic during August 17-18. The Minister, Special
Advisor to the President on Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation [DDRR], SSR
and National Reconciliation, H.E. Jean Willybiro-Sako, chaired the event. The President, H.E. Faustin-
Archange Touadéra, inaugurated the forum and outlined the following priorities:
I.       Conduct a series of outreach visits to initiate dialogue with armed groups;
II.      Propose roadmap and practical solutions to socio-economic reintegration and integration into
         uniformed forces, as per the Bangui Accord. To that end, the President encouraged international
         partners involved in the DDRR and SSR working groups to support the Government in
         finalizing the DDRR Program Document and other relevant technical and strategic documents
         by the end of the ongoing working sessions, for the donor conference


                                                    4
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


III.     Implement DDRR and SSR programs simultaneously. Both processes cannot succeed without the
         implementation of development programs to support socio-economic development, poverty
         reduction, human rights and good governance reform processes. To achieve this broader
         development strategy, the President reaffirmed the need for international community assistance.
More than 70 staff members across diverse sectoral ministries, UN and WB staff attended the workshop.
The workshop informed participants on DDR concepts and approaches through sharing experiences,
lessons learnt and best practices in the implementation of DDR processes in diverse contexts. The
Workshop also aimed at forging a common understanding on the implementation of DDR,
strengthening political commitment and further current engagement.

In addition, the task team also established a temporary DDR resource center as per the AU DDR
Capacity Program. The center created a repository of original paper documentations on DDR and SSE-
related issues. As the Peace and Security Department’s [PSD] new location is now ready due to be
opened, the DDR resource center is scheduled to move to the departmental library by early next year. As
such, the task team is supporting the PSD staff in instituting the optimum system and structure to
maintain the database. Doing so involves assisting in installation of the electronic software,
classification and cataloguing of existing documents, acquisition and collection of additional resources
etc. to promote easy access to paper and electronic resources.

During the quarter, the task team also successfully applied for and obtained as 250K USD grant from
the World Bank’s Nordic Trust Fund [NTF] whose objective is to develop an informed view of how
human rights relate to the World Bank’s work. The proposal has an overarching development objective
to enable increased learning for AU through AUDDRCP as well as the Fragility, Conflict and Violence
[FCV] community of practice in the Bank on linkages between human rights and reintegration as
implemented in programing and includes the secondary objectives:
I.      Increased knowledge and learning of emerging DDR thematic areas amidst AU, its member
        states, the Bank and key implementing partners in fragile contexts such that linkages between
        human rights and DDR are clearly understood and embedded in programming
II.     Adoption of DDR knowledge products by AU, member states, Bank and partners in the
        development and implementation of DDR activities across the continent and beyond to set the
        foundation for rights-based training and cultural integration into local, national and regional
        jurisdictions
III.    Capacity-building of the African Union to reduce interventions by external stakeholders,
        expand its role in operationalizing DDR programming across the continent, embed intrinsic
        human rights and create an organizational culture that prioritizes human rights in all contexts.
In other words, the proposal will support the development of rights based DDR knowledge products and
training manuals to complement the pre-existing workplan on TDRP engagement with the AU.

Central African Republic
During this quarter, the TDRP team undertook a series of missions in CAR —July 1-12, August 1-21
and August 25-September 21, 2016— to provide technical support to the Government on the
development of a DDRR strategy, the implementation of an inclusive DDRR program and its


                                                   5
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


corresponding CAR Reintegration of Ex-combatants Project [P160272]. The team also undertook a rapid
beneficiary survey and mapping of conditions to assess socio-economic opportunities to inform the
design of the reintegration activities.

The mission met with the Government, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in CAR [MINUSCA], armed group signatories, as well as international development partners,
bilateral donor partners and civil society to discuss mobilization of resources and approach for
successful implementation and results. Since early August, the Government began appointing staff for
the strategic and technical committees for the coordination of DDRR, Security Sector Reform [SSR] and
National Reconciliation, as per the Presidential decree adopted on July 2, 2016.1 Appointed DDRR
officers have taken up their duties as part of the DDRR working group, comprising of Government,
MINUSCA and World Bank representatives. Government DDRR officers are currently working under
the leadership of Colonel Noël Selesson, Director of the DDRR Project Implementation Unit [PIU],
housed at the Presidency.

In response to a request received from the Government to provide technical support on DDRR, the TDRP
team provided technical assistance on the development of a DDRR Strategy Document finalized in mid-
July. The Government intends to endorse this document and share it with international partners
following the meeting with Comité Consultatif et de Suivi in mid-October.

Since August 1, 2016, the team holds weekly meetings with the DDRR working group to finalize the
DDRR Program Document. The document will be finalized by mid-October, and will provide details on
responsibilities, activities and corresponding costs.

To this end, the mission carried out field visits to areas with high concentration of combatants,
including Bangui, N’délé, Kaga Bandoro, Bambari and Bria. It interviewed local authorities, armed
group leaders, combatants and community members, as well as international organizations such as
OCHA and IOM, and non-governmental organizations like Mercy Corps for preliminary data on:
I.       socio-economic profiling of combatants, including information on age, gender, literacy levels,
         family status, preferences of host communities, skills training and income-generating activities;
II.      socio-economic opportunities in communities with high concentration of armed groups and,
         the cost analysis for reintegration activities in target communities, and;
III.     basic services and small infrastructure in need of rehabilitation in these communities.
Findings of these consultations will be discussed with the Government and MINUSCA, and inform the
design of reintegration activities and the reintegration component of the DDRR Program Document.
This mapping will also lead up to a detailed matrix with proposed activities, cost estimates and main
areas of intervention, prior to the donor conference on November 17, 2016 in Brussels, Belgium.

The mission also held discussions with the government on the implementation arrangements for the
project. It advised the government to have two PIUs— one at the Presidency for project activities and
another within a separate Ministry for procurement and financial management. The mission met with

1



                                                    6
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


representatives of government agencies including the Director General of Agence Centrafricaine pour
la Formation Professionnelle et l’Emploi, [ACFPE] to explore potential working mechanisms between
ACFPE programs and the planned project. In addition, the mission held consultations with NGOs,
particularly those with capacity to provide on-site support on mapping socio-economic opportunities
nationwide, especially in areas with high concentration of armed groups.
During the aforementioned SSR/DDR workshop held during August 17-18, the World Bank
underscored the importance of linkages and sequencing of DDRR and SSR, as the latter can affect DDRR.
The mission advised that both DDRR and SSR efforts shall be timed carefully to complement each other.

Following the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of States and Government of the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community [CEMAC] held in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, in July, four
countries —Republic of Congo, Cameroon, Gabon and Equatorial Guinea— committed to contribute
approximately 7M USD to support the CAR DDRR program. The arrangements for its allocation are
pending. In this context, the Government has requested the Bank to establish a new Bank-executed
multi-donor trust fund [MDTF] to finance the program. Additional fundraising is needed to cover the
total estimated 30M USD required for reintegration activities beyond the IDA commitment of 15M USD.
The pledging conference to be held in Brussels on November 17, 2016, will provide an opportunity to
raise additional funds for the DDRR program, estimated to cost 43.5M.

Democratic Republic of Congo
This quarter, TDRP team undertook two implementation support missions to Kinshasa during June 28-
July 4 and September 17-October 8 respectively to support the DRC Reinsertion and Reintegration
Project [P152903].

Whilst the project is progressing according to the initial plan devised during the preparation phase,
continued disturbances in Eastern DRC hindered its implementation during the quarter. As of October
5, the Project had disbursed 35.59 percent of the total grant amount of 21.5M USD— 5.95M of the
6.5M USD Swedish contribution through TDRP and 1.70M of the 15M USD IDA allocation. Owing to
delays in disbursement, the grant deadline of the TDRP funding [TFA0087] was extended on August 31,
2016 till June 30, 2017 owing to ongoing political delays in ratification of grant agreement and grant
effectiveness.

A total of 1076 ex-combatants —1,002 male and 74 female— have been transferred to East. Of them,
556 are from North Kivu, 245 from South Kivu, 190 from Haut Katanga, 29 from Ituri, 41 from
Tanganyika, 12 from Haut Lomami, 2 from Lualaba, and 1 from Tshopo. 280 of the total transfers are
dependents. On September 15, Unité d’Exécution du Programme National de Désarmement,
Démobilisation et Réintégration [UEPNDDR] revealed initial plans for transferring 800 demobilized ex-
combatants using aircrafts provided by the government. Given fuel expenses, further transportation
may be delayed further.

Priorities in initiating reintegration operations involve planning the upcoming waves of transfer,
following up on those transferred to the communities, deploying of implementing partners and


                                                    7
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


ensuring access to reintegration kits in coordination with UEPNDDR and the Ministry of Defense. The
project also continues to receive new batches of recently disarmed ex-combatants. Of the 541 ex-
combatants entering Kitona CPR on September 27, 228 have already undergone screening and
registration, and are currently awaiting training.

Given external conditions, suppliers continue to face barriers to storage of kits and UEPNDDR has been
storing kits with United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo [MONUSCO] instead. In addition, the task team is currently engaging them on finalizing the
jointly produced evacuation plan by UEPNDDR and MONUSCO, which is currently pending. UEPNDDR
and MONUSCO continue to emphasize on coordination to collaborate on tasks going forward.

Despite past delays on procurement deliverables and operational activities, UEPNDDR, with support
from the task team, has made significant progress since it convened on August 24. The task team is
supporting UEPNDDR to identify eligible candidates to replace the previous Senior Operations Advisor.
All implementing partners —Caritas, FAO and INPP— have received their contracts and are expected to
sign by early-October. Invitations for technical and financial proposals for external audits have been
shared with five eligible firms. Eligible consultants are being identified for internal auditing and
communications activities, with the latter planned to be finalized on October 3. The task team is
supporting UEPNDDR to devise an updated procurement plan to enable additional changes.

The task team and its M&E expert continue to work with the M&E team to develop tools and
reintegration database to centers to train staff on data collection and entry. These systems will allow to
monitor the movements and activities of the demobilized.

The task team recently recruited a psychosocial specialist to follow up on implementation support and
identify areas for improving the quality and coverage of such activities throughout the program. The
expert created an action plan based on priorities and designed an integrated and multi-layered model
of mental health and psychosocial support that includes specific psychosocial activities in the project
and a two-folded strategy of staff training in psychosocial sensitivity and in psychosocial support using
a Train the Trainers methodology. Psychosocial training, targeted support, sensitization and life skills
training were provided to ex-combatants in CPRs. While sensitization activities are being conducted
with host communities, the task team will provide further assistance to UEPNDDR on developing
psychosocial support and life skills workshops to ex-combatants and their dependents. Next steps
include improving workshop curriculum, monitoring, on-demand counseling and referrals during
reinsertion and reintegration.

The task team is also currently providing technical assistance to UEPNDDR to strengthen its
coordination with UNICEF on support to child soldiers through review of Operations Manual, trainings
for FARDC on standards for prevention of recruitment of children into armed groups, and support on
MoU between UNICEF and UEPNDDR. In addition, it continues to provide support to UEPNDDR on
sensitizing local authorities, host communities and ex-combatants as they arrive at communities for
reintegration purposes.


                                                     8
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


Republic of Mali
During this quarter, the TDRP task team worked on addressing implementation arrangements to assess
capacity of the Project Implementation Unit [PIU] as well as commitment from donors to fulfill the
financing gaps towards the Mali Reinsertion of Ex-Combatants Project [P157233].

The Government has yet to invite potential donors to leverage additional financing for the Project. The
task team has been providing technical assistance to finalize the DDR Program Document and the
PowerPoint Presentation in collaboration with the DDR Working Group, which includes representatives
from the Government, the two armed group coalitions, MINUSMA and the World Bank. Both
documents have been pending with the Government since April 2016. While the Minister of Defense
intended to call for donor support in May 2016, it was delayed for several reasons:
I. During May 2016, inter- and intra-community tensions in Mopti, Central Mali fueled a surge in
     violence involving Fulani and Bambara communities, which led to the killing of more than 40
     people.
II. Local communities in Northern Mali objected to the agreement on interim authorities signed
     between the government and armed group signatories on June 19, 2016. Groups in Gao
     demonstrated against the privileges of armed groups hidden behind these appointments, source of
     clan rivalries, and culminated with two deaths.
III. Since July 2016, a breakdown in the peace process, coupled with renewed hostilities in Kidal has
     been ongoing. Heavy weapons were reportedly used during confrontations between armed
     movements for control Kidal, and resulted in over 30 deaths,
IV. In addition, negotiations between the Government and armed groups on the roadmap and criteria
     for integration into armed forces are pending. Membership to the National Commission from both
     the Government and armed groups is also awaiting finalized lists of combatants.

As such, the Government is currently focusing on alleviating the recent resurgence of violence. It has
established informal mediation committees to resolve ongoing disputes. It also continues to explore
mechanisms for enforcing the interim agreement, redeployment of the decentralized departments and
the implementation of the Operational Mechanism for Coordination [OMC], to conduct joint patrols.

Given limited progress, the environment does not seem to be favorable for the Government to call for
donors support on DDR. The task team has been following up with the Government focal points, armed
groups representatives and United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
[MINUSMA], and awaits indication from parties to organize the donor roundtable. It has also requested
an audience with the Minister of Defense, H.E. Abdoulaye Idrissa Maiga, appointed on September 2,
during the upcoming mission in mid-October 2016.

Since the National Commission for DDR will report to the Prime Minister, the Government proposed for
the future Project Implementation Unit [PIU] to be housed at the Office of the Prime Minister, even
though it has delegated some relevant operations to the Minister of Defense. The Bank’s fiduciary team,
including Financial Management and Procurement specialists, assessed relevant departments in June
2016 as part of the appraisal processes, and their findings have been incorporated into the Project


                                                   9
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


Appraisal Document [PAD]. The analysis will be used for negotiations between the World Bank and the
Government on the terms of financial support for the project.

Technical experts from the task team are working with counterparts in MINUSMA and the Government
to develop a DDR Management Information System [MIS] by October 2016. They are also developing
data synchronization applications and questionnaires to track ex-combatants.

In June 2016, MINUSMA completed the construction of three solid cantonment sites. The five
remaining sites will be operational in October 2016, as in organized under tents, having electricity and
water supplies, while solid construction will continue in parallel.

The task team has prepared the negotiations package, however due to above-mentioned uncertainties
and the lack of progress on the Government’s side, the negotiations and board approval dates for the
project have been postponed to February 2016.

Republic of South Sudan
The Bank continues to engage with stakeholders on feasible means to provide technical assistance to the
government of South Sudan in preparing for DDR. Following up on the workshop on DDR in South
Sudan organized in Washington, DC during the previous quarter, the Bonn International Center for
Conversion [BICC] in close collaboration with the German Federal Foreign Office organized another one
during September 13-14. The event brought together representatives from US, Norway, Germany, UK,
United Nations Mission in South Sudan [UNMISS], Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission [JMEC],
and others to discuss the way forward in terms of demobilization, support to cantonment and
reintegration in South Sudan in light of the current socio-political climate in the nation.

In addition, the task team produced a Guidance Note to provide an understanding of DDR experience in
South Sudan based on Bank engagement in technical assistance, financing and supervision of
reintegration processes of the pilot program during 2011 and lessons learnt elsewhere. It emphasizes
the need to establish linkages between DDR, SSR and long-term development initiatives in order to
enable broader stabilization and peacebuilding efforts. It also includes a brief analysis of the current
country context and estimated number of armed forces for future reintegration programming.

In addition, the task team also produced a workplan on South Sudan based on a 33,000 USD budget
until the closure of TDRP that encompasses engagement with international partners, technical
assistance to National DDR Commission and refining of the Management Information System [MIS] for
a forthcoming DDR project. To that end, the task team will collaborate with BICC on the production of a
paper on community-based reintegration in South Sudan and participate in technical meetings on DDR.
It will also assist the National DDR Commission in South Sudan to draft a common DDR strategic plan
in coordination with UNMISS and other relevant partners. And, it will upgrade the registration
mechanisms of the Information, Counselling and Referral System [ICRS] to process a larger caseload of
ex-combatants.



                                                   10
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


III.         Knowledge Management

Republic of Yemen
Given limited access to primary data and need to reconcile existing literature amidst the ongoing
conflict, the task team undertook a mapping of armed groups to complement future DDR and recovery
programming in Yemen. It conducted desk reviews of pre-existing literature and analyzes secondary
data on warring factions in Yemen, tribal political structures, state and non-state armed groups to
understand the capacity of national security forces to respond to proliferation of violence, and suggest
appropriate immediate and long-term stabilization measures. It identifies socio-political exclusion as a
trigger and strong tribal networks for violence committed by armed groups. As such, any DDR
programming conducted should involve a larger network of stakeholders party to the conflict, and be
integrated with broader stabilization and post-conflict development initiatives.

IV.          Program Management and Status of Trust Fund

Progress of No-Cost Extension
As of August 25, 2016, the end disbursement date of the TDRP Trust Fund has been officially extended
to December 31, 2017 in addition its two Child Bank-Executed Trust Funds [BETF]. These include
TF095098: TF Program Management and Administration, and TF095167: Technical Assistance and
Enhanced Supervision. Below is the action plan for the extension period of the Trust Fund and
achievement of its objectives:
a. Plan for Transfer of AUDDRCP Activities to the African Union:
    From the first phase of the World Bank support through AUDDRCP since 2013, the TDRP task team
    created the core capacity of the AU Defense and Security Division to emphasize DDR activities. AU’s
    plans for the upcoming fiscal year are centered on providing operational support to its Member
    States, RECs and RMs, and Peace Support Operations [PSOs]; institutional training and partnerships;
    and knowledge development and management. Following activities are planned for proposed TDRP
    extension period with the funds earmarked for transfer to the African Union:

        i.      Prepare Communication Strategy for Knowledge Products: The task team will support AU in
                preparing the strategy to disseminate evidence-based knowledge materials. The task team
                will further coordinate to identify suitable knowledge architecture to store, access and share
                DDR experiences worldwide.
       ii.      Produce Training Program and Manual: The task team will continue to design trainings for
                RECs, the African Peace and Security Architecture [APSA], Centers of Excellence [CoE] and
                member states. To ensure that best practices are embedded across AU and APSA partners,
                the program will utilize a knowledge management system to develop operational guidance
                and policy on important thematic areas. In addition, it will train experienced staff, conduct
                capacity-building through Training of Trainers programs, collaborate to publish training
                manuals and identify gaps in learning that will enable the division to initiate its own
                training programs.



                                                       11
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


      iii.   Strengthening cross-institutional knowledge transfer through joint assessment, planning
             and mentoring: The task team will assist the AU towards creating mechanisms for
             mentoring missions for RECs and member states, and selecting staff for secondment to PSOs
             or placement within Liaison Offices to lend expertise to member states.
      Whilst the task team expects to transition its various responsibilities and deliverables to AU
      following the proposed extension period, it remains available to provide technical support later as
      needed.

b. Technical Assistance to Republic of Mali
   Through seed technical assistance funded by the TDRP Trust Fund, the task team has made
   significant progress in enabling government and stakeholder readiness in launching the DDR
   Program. The Bank is planning to provide IDA support to the national DDR program in Mali.
   Budget earmarked for Mali will finance technical assistance missions, developing programmatic
   documents, and supporting the Government in the preparation of the national program.

c. Technical Assistance to Central African Republic
   The TDRP task team has been collaborating with the UN Peacekeeping Mission in CAR, MINUSCA,
   on establishing a DDR program prior to the signing of “Republican Pact for Peace, national
   reconciliation and reconstruction in the Central African Republic” and “Agreement on the Principles
   of Disarmament, Demobilizations, Reintegration and Repatriation [DDRR]” between the government
   and the armed group. Given government prioritization of DDR, during the proposed extension
   period, the funds earmarked for CAR will finance technical assistance and provide support to the
   development of an IDA-financed socio-economic reintegration operation in CAR.

d. Technical Assistance to South Sudan
   The TDRP task team had worked alongside the South Sudan National DDR Commission on
   redesigning the National DDR Strategy and Program. Whilst conditions for new DDR program in
   South Sudan are yet to be conducive, there exists international support and demand for Bank
   involvement in the dialogue and technical assistance to DDR affairs in South Sudan. In this context,
   the earmarked funds will be used to ensure ongoing technical engagement with stakeholders in
   South Sudan.

e. Additional Requests
   Past successes in responding to technical assistance requests in Libya and Somalia raises further
   demand in affected countries to deliver quality technical work as a rapid response mechanism and
   the program will continue to address demands as they arise.

f.   Trust Fund Administration
     Minimal trust fund administrative costs have been allocated to continue regular reporting to
     donors, disseminate communication materials to showcase end-results, and conduct donor
     meetings.



                                                    12
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


Transfer of Leadership
As of September 28, 2016, the management responsibilities of the Trust Fund has been officially handed
over to Daniel Owen, Senior Social Development Specialist as Abderrahim Fraiji, ex-TDRP Manager has
officially moved to work in a different capacity with the Middle East and North Africa [MNA] region of
the Bank. Mr. Owen will now forth conduct the tasks previously supervised by Mr. Fraiji and coordinate
with donors on required outputs and decision-making.

In addition, Ms. Lena Schildt has retired from her final role as Deputy Head of Regional Cooperation at
the Embassy of Sweden in Ethiopia as of August 15. She has been replaced by Aklilu Desta, Program
Officer as the focal point representing Sweden in the TDRP Trust Fund.

World Bank Staff and Consultants
 Staff Members
 Abderrahim Fraiji        TDRP Manager & Senior Operations Officer, Washington D.C.
 Benjamin Burckhart       Social Development Specialist, Washington D.C.
 Caroline Guazzo          Language Program Assistant, Washington D.C.
 Murat Onur               Social Development Specialist, Washington D.C.
 Consultants
 Djeina Kalidi            Social Development Analyst, Bamako, Mali
 Faizaa Fatima            Social Development Consultant, Washington, D.C.
 Farwah Qasim             Social Development Consultant, Washington, D.C.
 Lina Abdullahi           Liaison Officer, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
 Linda Kiriinya           Social Development Consultant, Nairobi, Kenya
 Olivier Mukarji          Senior Advisor, Copenhagen, Denmark
 Graham Carrington        Senior Advisor to Dr. Tarek A. Sharif, Head of Defense and Security Division,
                          African Union, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
N.B.: Consultants are not paid entirely by the TDRP Trust Fund, but as well as through bank budget for
DDR operations across UN-WB Trust Fund, CAR, DRC, Mali, South Sudan etc.




                                                   13
TDRP Quarterly Report April-June 2016


Status of Trust Fund and Disbursement Rate
During this quarter, contributions to TDRP trust fund remained at 42,583,887.89 USD, with
disbursement reaching 97.91 percent at 41,694,863.55 USD. The remaining balance of 1,044,926.98
USD includes 550,512.60 USD of the Government of Sweden’s contribution to co-finance the DRC
Reinsertion and Reintegration Project activities.




                                               14
