                      Responsible Financial Access
                 Finance & Markets Global Practice




                           RWANDA

     Diagnostic Review of
  Consumer Protection and
        Financial Literacy
                (Private Pensions and Securities)



Volume I: Key Findings and Recommendations



                                     November 2015
DISCLAIMER

This Diagnostic Review Report is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.




                                                                                      FINANCE & MARKETS
                                                           Table of Contents

Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................................................... i
Preface ............................................................................................................................................................. ii
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................................ 1
Financial Sector Context for Consumer Financial Services and Financial Literacy ............................... 6
General Framework for Consumer Protection in Rwanda .......................................................................... 9
   A.      Institutional Arrangements .................................................................................................................... 9
   B.      Legal and Regulatory Framework ....................................................................................................... 12
   C.      Transparency and Consumer Disclosure ............................................................................................ 14
   D.      Business practices .............................................................................................................................. 16
   E.      Complaints-Handling and Dispute Resolution .................................................................................... 18
   F.      Financial Literacy/Capability ............................................................................................................... 20
Annex: Summary of All Recommendations .............................................................................................. 22

Tables:
Table 1: Summary of High Priority Recommendations ..................................................................................... 3
Table 2: Stock market capitalization as % of GDP (in USD) of countries in the East African Community ....... 8
Table 3: Financial Consumer Protection Regulators and Supervisors ........................................................... 10
Table 4: List of Overall Recommendations ..................................................................................................... 22




                                                                                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS
                        Abbreviations and Acronyms


2013 CPFL Review        WBG CPFL review of the banking and non-banking sectors in Rwanda
2015 CPFL Review        WBG CPFL review of the pension and securities sectors in Rwanda
ADECOR                  Rwanda Consumer’s Rights Protection Organization
ASSAR                   Association of Rwandan Insurers
BID                     Basic information document
BNR                     National Bank of Rwanda
CCP Law                 Law No. 36/2012 of 21/09/2012 Relating to Competition and Consumer
                        Protection
Central Bank Law        Law No. 55/2007 of 30/11/2007 Governing the Central Bank of Rwanda
CEO                     Chief executive officer
CHROR                   Consumer Human Rights Organization of Rwanda
CIS                     Collective investment scheme
CIS Law                 Law No. 40/2011 of 20/09/2011 Regulating Collective Investment Schemes in
                        Rwanda
CIU                     Collective investment undertaking
CMA                     Capital Market Authority
CMA Law                 Law No. 11/2011 of 18/05/2011 Establishing the Capital Markets Authority
CMAC                    Capital Market Advisory Council
Complaints Regulation   Regulation No. 04/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Complaints
CPFL                    Consumer protection and financial literacy/capability
CSD                     Central Securities Depository
CSD Law                 Law No. 26/2010 of 28/05/2010 Governing the Holding and Circulation of
                        Securities
CSR                     Social Security Fund of Rwanda
DC                      Defined contribution
Draft Pensions          Regulation on Minimum Operating Standards and Supervision of (Voluntary
Regulation              and Mandatory) Pension Schemes
DSE                     Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange
EIOPA                   European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
FISF Program            Financial Inclusion Support Framework Program
FSDP                    Financial Sector Development Plan
GDP                     Gross domestic product
Global Survey           WBG 2013 Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection
HR                      Human resources
IFC                     International Finance Corporation


                                                                                FINANCE & MARKETS | I
Insurance Brokers’      Code of Practice for Insurance Brokers, set out as Appendix I to the Market
Code of Conduct         Conduct Regulation
IOPS                    International Organisation of Pension Supervisors
KFS                     Key Facts Statement
KYC                     Know your customer
Market Conduct          Regulation No 12/2009 of 13/10/2009 on Market Conduct Requirements for
Regulation              Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries
MINECOFIN               Ministry of Finance
MINICOM                 Ministry of Trade and Industry
MOU                     Memorandum of understanding
NBFI                    Non-bank financial institution
NFES                    National Financial Education Strategy
NICA                    National Inspectorate and Competition Authority
Ombudsman Law II        Law No. 76/2013 of 11/9/2013 Determining the Mission, Powers, Organization
                        and Functioning of the Office of the Ombudsman
OPSG                    EIOPA Occupational Pensions Stakeholder Group
Pensions Law            Law No. 05/2015 of 30/03/2014 Governing the Organization of Pension
                        Schemes
Regulation on Capital   Regulation No. 05/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Principles
Market Principles
Regulation on           Regulation No. 01/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Markets (Licensing
Licensing               Requirements)
Regulation on the       Regulation No. 02/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Market Conduct of Business
Conduct of Business
RSE                     Rwandan Stock Exchange
RSSB                    Rwanda Social Security Board
RSSB Law                Law No. 45/2010 of 14/12/2010 Establishing Rwanda Social Security Board
                        (RSSB) and Determining its Mission, Organisation and Functioning
SMS                     Short messaging service
SRO                     Self-regulatory organization
Vision 2020             Vision 2020 Umurenge Program
WB                      World Bank
WBG                     World Bank Group




                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS
                                    Acknowledgements
This report was produced under the World Bank Group’s Financial Inclusion Support Framework (FISF)
country support program in Rwanda (P151374) led by Gunhild Berg and Leyla Castillo. It contains the findings
and recommendations from a World Bank (WB) mission to Rwanda from March 20 to 27, 2015, which took
place for the purposes of a diagnostic review of the Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy/Capability
(CPFL) laws, institutions and practices applicable to certain regulated financial services in Rwanda (2015
CPFL Review). The pensions and securities sectors were considered, along with relevant financial
literacy/capability programs in Rwanda. The 2015 CPFL Review complements the CPFL review of the banking
and non-bank credit institutions sectors that was conducted in 2013 (2013 CPFL Review).
The FISF Program is a World Bank Group (WBG) initiative supported by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which provides technical assistance and capacity-building support to
countries to help them accelerate the achievement of their financial inclusion commitments and targets. The
WBG’s Good Practices for Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy/Capability were used as a benchmark
for the review.1 CPFL reviews against Good Practices have been conducted by the WBG in more than 30
countries worldwide, including in many African countries.2
The 2015 CPFL Review was undertaken by a team led by Rosamund Grady (Senior Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR, and Technical Lead). Other members of the team included Fiona Stewart (Senior
Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR, and Pensions Expert) and Richard Symonds (Consultant, Securities
Expert). Research support was provided by Stephanie Chu (Consultant, GFMDR) and Marco Traversa
(Consultant, Research Analyst, GFMDR). Administrative support was provided by Suran Kc Shrestha
(Program Assistant, GFMDR) and Sylvie Ingabire (Team Assistant, AFMRW).

Peer review comments on this report were received from Sau Ngan Wong (Senior Financial Sector Specialist,
GFMDR), Denise Dias (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR), and Anthony Randle (Consultant,
GFMDR). Overall guidance was provided by Douglas Pearce (Global Lead, Responsible Financial Access,
GFMDR). The mission team is grateful for their valuable contributions.
Extensive consultations were held with relevant stakeholders for the purposes of the review. They included
the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR), the Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN), the Rwanda Capital Market
Authority (CMA), other government entities and public agencies, financial institutions, industry associations,
consumer associations and professional bodies.
The mission team is grateful for the support and collaboration extended by all stakeholders. The team wishes
to express its appreciation particularly to the Rwandan authorities for their strong support for the 2015 CPFL
Review and their assistance during, and after, the abovementioned mission.




                                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS | I
                                                                   Preface
The existence of a sound financial consumer protection framework is fundamental to increasing
access to and usage of financial services, and the quality of those financial services, along with
supporting further financial sector deepening. Financial consumer protection is a necessary precursor to
building trust in the formal financial sector and thus in encouraging financial inclusion. Further, consumer
protection helps ensure that expanded access benefits consumers and the economy as a whole. While
increased access can result in significant economic and societal benefits, it can be neutral or even harmful if
consumers: (i) cannot exercise their rights as consumers, (ii) cannot select the financial products that suit
them best; and (iii) are not protected from mis-selling, fraud and other market abuses.
The World Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection are an assessment tool for
diagnostic reviews of a country’s consumer protection and financial literacy framework (Good
Practices).3 More than 30 such reviews have been conducted worldwide. The Good Practices were
developed using international benchmarks and take account of the legal and regulatory frameworks in
developed and developing countries.4
The main objective of a Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL) review is to assess the
legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks for financial consumer protection in a country, with
reference to the Good Practices. The following areas are addressed: (i) Institutional Arrangements; (ii) the
Legal and Regulatory Framework; (iii) Transparency and Disclosure; (iv) Business Practices, (v) Complaints
Handling and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms; and (vi) Financial Literacy/Capability. All parts of a financial
sector can be considered including banking, non-bank credit institutions, insurance, securities, private
pensions and credit reporting.
There is an increased international focus on consumer protection in the financial sector. As shown by
the World Bank’s 2013 Global Survey on Financial Consumer Protection (Global Survey), a legal framework
for financial consumer protection exists in 112 out of the 114 countries surveyed. The most common approach
is to have a financial sector–specific consumer protection regulatory framework (which exists in 103 countries).
The Global Survey also showed that the number of regulatory agencies with specific responsibility for financial
consumer protection increased from 74 in 2010 to 97 in 2013.
As a complement to a strong financial consumer protection framework, it is important to have high
levels of financial literacy/capability so that consumers have the necessary knowledge and
understanding to make informed decisions, and to help meet financial inclusion targets by building
trust in the financial sector. For instance, any regulations that require financial institutions to disclose, clearly
and fairly, the key information on terms and conditions associated with their products and service will not affect
a consumer’s behavior if the consumer does not understand why it is important to read disclosure documents
or if they fail to understand the information contained in these documents. Likewise, any requirement for
financial institutions to have standardized procedures for dealing with consumer complaints will be ineffective
if consumers are not aware of their rights and the available complaints mechanisms or if they prefer not to
take action to deal with a complaint. Financial literacy is especially important in an environment where there
are high levels of innovation in the design and delivery of financial products.




3
    World Bank Group, Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection (2012), available at <http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/
~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Misc/Good-practices-for-financial-consumer-protection.pdf> (last visited on December 11, 2014).
4
  Relevant international standards include the principles released by the Basel Committee, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
and International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) and Organisation for Economic Co-operation Development (OECD) recommendations for
financial literacy and awareness on pensions, insurance and credit products.



                                                                                                                           FINANCE & MARKETS | II
                                      Executive Summary

1. Key Findings and Recommendations presented in this report are based on the World Bank’s Good
   Practices for Financial Consumer Protection and consider the pensions and securities sectors in
   Rwanda (2015 CPFL Review). The report reflects the legal and regulatory framework, and relevant
   aspects of the financial sector, at the time of the 2015 CPFL Review, with limited reference to existing and
   proposed changes of which the authors of the report were aware at the time of writing. The 2015 CPFL
   Review complements the CPFL review of the banking and non-bank credit institutions sectors that was
   conducted in 2013 (2013 CPFL Review).

    Key Findings and Recommendations
2. As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, the general legal and regulatory framework for financial
   consumer protection in Rwanda is at a very early stage of development. The Parliament of Rwanda
   has passed an impressive array of financial sector laws in the past five years and there are strong
   consumer protection provisions in financial sector regulation in some areas (see 2013 CPFL Review for
   further discussion). In the context of the pensions sector, this includes Regulation No 12/2009 of
   13/10/2009 on Market Conduct Requirements for Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries (Market
   Conduct Regulation) which applies to sale of retirement products by insurance companies. However,
   overall, the institutional framework for financial consumer protection in Rwanda is fragmented because of
   a lack of clarity in the roles and responsibilities of different institutions and enforcement capacity is weak.
   In particular, there is overlap between the consumer protection responsibilities of the National Bank of
   Rwanda (BNR) and the competition and consumer protection regulatory body, the National Inspectorate
   and Competition Authority (NICA) which operates under the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM).
3. Prior to the passage of the new Law No. 05/2015 of 30/03/2014 “Governing the Organization of
   Pension Schemes” (Pensions Law), private pension funds were unregulated. The new Pension Law
   should provide a sound basis for protection of members of private pension funds; however, there is still
   room for improvement on many CPFL aspects. On the public pensions side, to date, the Rwanda Social
   Security Board (RSSB) has provided defined benefit pensions (and healthcare and other protection) on a
   mandatory basis to all workers formally employed in the public and private sectors under the supervision
   of BNR under Law No. 55/2007 of 30/11/2007 Governing the Central Bank of Rwanda (Central Bank Law).
   However the new Pensions Law will regulate both the RSSB and private pension funds going forward
   under the supervision of BNR. Combined with the Draft Pensions Regulation, the pension’s regulatory
   framework is reasonably comprehensive in coverage, including on consumer protection issues. However
   there remain some consumer protection issues still to be addressed, which are detailed below.
4. In the securities sector, a number of existing laws and regulations provide the foundation of a
   comprehensive regulatory framework for the capital markets in Rwanda. These include
   Law No. 11/2011 of 18/05/2011 Establishing the Capital Markets Authority (CMA Law), which established
   the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) as the capital markets regulator; Law No. 01/2011 of 10/02/2011
   Regulating the Capital Market in Rwanda (Capital Market Law); and Law No. 40/2011 of 20/09/2011
   Regulating Collective Investment Schemes in Rwanda (CIS Law). While these laws provide a sound
   regulatory framework for the relatively young capital markets in Rwanda, the framework is not yet
   complete and work is still being done in some areas (e.g. the CMA’s regulatory and supervisory
   procedures). However there remain outstanding investor protection issues which need to be addressed
   (see below).

5. The main consumer protection and financial literacy/capability challenges are as follows (with the
   related high priority recommendations set out in Table 1 below):
    •   BNR’s supervisory capacity, including over the pensions sector, is limited. Support to establish
        a robust supervisory oversight for the sector in general, and over consumer protection issues in



                                                                                          FINANCE & MARKETS | 1
                                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



    particular, will be needed. Supervisory capacity needs to be strengthened as soon as possible so that
    effective industry supervision is available now that the new Pensions Law is in effect.
•   The passage of the new Pensions Law provides an important opportunity for BNR to hold a
    workshop on pension issues and consumer protection issues for the sector. Participants should
    include other institutions with a financial oversight role (e.g. the CMA), the Office of the Ombudsman,
    consumer protection associations (e.g. the Rwanda Consumer’s Rights Protection Organization
    (ADECOR)), as well as to members of the public.
•   Existing occupational schemes will need to transition to the new structure created by the
    Pensions Law, establishing Trustee Boards, segregating assets and appointing custodians
    (amongst other things). BNR should host industry consultations with occupational plan sponsors
    (i.e. human resources (HR) representatives from employer firms) and providers (i.e. life insurance
    companies and the National Association of Insurers of Rwanda (ASSAR)) to explain the new Pensions
    Law, the implications for service providers and stakeholders (e.g. the roles and responsibilities of
    trustees, the requirement to appoint custodian) and the standards which BNR expects.
•   The Draft Pensions Regulation could be strengthened with the inclusion of additional
    consumer protection provisions. For example, provisions could be added on trustee training
    requirements, the designation of HR representatives by sponsoring employers, the selling of pension
    products to individuals, the provision of information on guarantees, fees and withdrawal rights, and on
    the confidentiality of member personal information.
•   A review of the selling of retirement products being sold to individuals by insurance
    companies needs to be conducted, as many individuals do not appear to understand the
    products for which they are signing up. Recommendations made in the 2013 CPFL Review on the
    selling of long-term savings/retirement products should be applied (e.g. accurate information on
    investment returns, disclosure of commissions, customer suitability requirements, client
    acknowledgment that the financial advice they received has been understood).
•   The passage of the new Pensions Law also provides a good opportunity to launch a public
    awareness campaign on pensions. Such a campaign could be part of the National Financial
    Education Strategy (NFES), currently being done by the Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN).
•   Like BNR, the CMA would also benefit from additional resources to undertake its regulatory
    and supervisory responsibilities in the securities sector. The CMA has broad responsibility for
    the protection of investors (including the review and handling of investor complaints), but it has limited
    resources. For example, its Inspection Department, which was created in 2014, has only one staff
    member. Greater resources would enable the CMA to become more effective as the securities
    industry continues to become more active in Rwanda.
•   Licensing requirements do not currently apply to natural persons who provide investment
    advice or broking services. All persons who carry out a capital markets business in Rwanda are
    required to be licensed under the Capital Market Law. Broker–dealer firm, promoters and dealers of
    collective investment schemes (CISs), asset managers and the schemes themselves can apply to be
    licensed or registered. However, there do not appear to be specific requirements for investment
    advisors and broker–dealers to be licensed in their individual capacity.
•   Similarly, the specific qualification requirements for individual investment advisors are
    unclear. The Capital Market Law requires licensed capital market firms to hire only ‘qualified’ persons,
    but there is no definition for the characteristics of a qualified person. There is also no requirement to
    pass a competency examination in order to act as a salesperson for the firm.
•   There is potential for the CMA and the Office of the Ombudsman (which covers the entire
    financial sector) to make conflicting determinations with respect to the same complaint in
    relation to securities matters. This is because although the Office of the Ombudsman can refer
    complaints relating to securities matters to the CMA as the specialist agency in these matter, the
    complainant can return to the Office of the Ombudsman if the CMA has neglected the matter. The
    Office of the Ombudsman can then request that the CMA take specific action, impose specific



                                                    2
                                                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



              sanctions or even act as an institution with powers of the Judicial Police. This could create potential
              conflict with the CMA if the CMA determines there is no substance to the complaint. The CMA and
              the Office of the Ombudsman should enter into a memorandum of understanding (MoU) regarding
              their enforcement activities to avoid such conflicts.
        •     There are no privacy or data protection laws that provide for the confidentiality of personal
              information in either the pensions and securities sectors. There should be an express
              requirement on the confidentiality of personal information in both the Draft Pensions Regulation and
              Capital Market Law. As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, in the longer term, it is recommended that a
              specific data protection law be introduced in Rwanda to ensure that personal information receives
              consistent and specific protection across all financial services sectors.
6. A summary of the High Priority Recommendations is outlined in Table 1 below. The implementation
   activities in respect of these recommendations should commence as soon as possible, although it is
   acknowledged that some of these recommendations may take longer than others to implement (see
   reference to the relevant Term). All recommendations, not only the high priority ones, are summarized in
   Annex 2 to this Volume I. Further detail is provided in the Volume II of this report.

        Table 1: Summary of High Priority Recommendations5
     SECTOR                                  RECOMMENDATION                                                       RESPONSIBILITY   TERM*
                                              INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
    Pensions           Conduct capacity building on consumer protection supervision
                       aspects of the new Pensions Law for BNR, and general
                       awareness for other institutions with relevant financial sector                            BNR              ST
                       responsibilities (e.g. CMA), the Office of the Ombudsman and
                       consumer associations (e.g. ADECOR).
    Securities         Increase CMA resources and capacity to supervise new
                       investor protection rules as capital markets in Rwanda become                              CMA              MT
                       more active.
                                          LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
    Pensions           Consult with industry in relation to consumer protection
                       aspects of the new Pensions Law and related regulations
                       regarding roles, obligations and supervisory standards, so as                              BNR              ST
                       to enhance comprehension and implementation of the new
                       requirements.
                       Include additional consumer protection measures in the Draft
                       Pension Regulation (e.g. trustee training requirements;
                       designation of HR representatives by sponsoring employers;
                       rules on the selling of pension products; information on
                                                                                                                  BNR              ST
                       guarantees, fees and withdrawal rights; confidentiality of
                       member information (see below); cooling-off periods;
                       disclosure of financial position by pension fund management
                       companies; general disclosure requirements).
                       Introduce an express requirement in the Draft Pensions
                       Regulation regarding the confidentiality of pension scheme                                 BNR              ST
                       member personal information.
    Securities         Introduce licensing and qualification/training requirements for
                       natural persons who act as salespeople or advisors for                                     CMA              MT
                       investment firms.


5
    A reference to “laws” includes a reference to Acts, regulations and other forms of subordinate legislation.



                                                                                3
                                          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



SECTOR                            RECOMMENDATION                               RESPONSIBILITY      TERM*
             Monitor the extent to which the principles-based regulatory
             approach to investor protection in the capital markets in
                                                                               CMA                 MT
             Rwanda results in compliance, and revise approach if
             necessary.
             Introduce the following provisions into the Capital Markets
             Law:
             • Provisions on the privacy and confidentiality of customer
                  information held by firms; and                               CMA                 ST
             • Penalties for the disclosure of confidential, restricted
                  information in relation to investors by non-government
                  entities such as a broker or adviser.
                            TRANSPARENCY AND CONSUMER DISCLOSURE
Pensions     See recommended provisions for inclusion in the Draft
             Pensions Regulation (see above section on Legal and BNR                               ST
             Regulatory Framework).
             Review the information that is provided by pension schemes
             and sponsors to their scheme members and provide further
                                                                               BNR                 MT
             guidance on disclosure requirements under the new Pensions
             Law if necessary.
Securities   Require summary Key Facts Statements (KFSs) for CISs and
             advisory services, and the disclosure of policies and practices CMA                   MT
             on frequent trading and inducements from service providers.
                                           BUSINESS PRACTICES
Pensions     Complete a thorough stocktaking of the occupational funds
                                                                               BNR                 ST
             currently operating.
             Complete a survey of the long-term insurance products (e.g.
                                                                               BNR                 ST
             retirement products) that are being sold on a retail basis.
             Improve information collected on the pensions sector,
             including the number and nature of funds, membership and BNR                          MT
             asset data, and performance and fee information.
             Implement recommendations of the 2013 CPFL Review on the
             selling of insurance products to the selling of retirement/long-
             term savings products (e.g. concerning accurate information
                                                                               BNR                 MT
             on investment returns, disclosure of commissions, customer
             suitability     requirements        and      obtaining     client
             acknowledgements as to the financial advice received).
                         COMPLAINTS-HANDLING AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Pensions     Enhance resources and capacity of the Office of the
                                                                               Office of the
             Ombudsman to cover the handling of pensions-related                                   MT
                                                                               Ombudsman
             disputes.
             Include a review of internal and external dispute mechanisms
             (including how these mechanisms are made known to
                                                                               BNR                 MT
             members) in BNR’s supervisory oversight as it develops (e.g.
             it should be noted in off-site, on-site supervisory manuals).
Securities   Clarify overlap between the roles of the CMA’s Complaints
             Committee, the Independent Review Panel and the Office of
                                                                               CMA/Office of the
             the Ombudsman regarding capital markets disputes.                                     ST
                                                                               Ombudsman
             The CMA and Office of the Ombudsman should enter into an
             MoU regarding their enforcement efforts.




                                                    4
                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



  SECTOR                            RECOMMENDATION                               RESPONSIBILITY TERM*
                                     FINANCIAL LITERACY/CAPACITY
  Pensions Launch a media strategy on the new Pensions Law, to be
               coordinated with the NFES, with the aim of explaining the
               advantages of occupational pension schemes and BNR/MINECOFIN ST
               encouraging more employers to offer these benefits to their
               employees.
  Securities Educate members of the media on issues relating to the capital
               markets and investor protection, and encourage reporting on CMA/RSE                    MT
               these issues.
               Provide more market information, in an unbiased manner,
                                                                                 CMA/RSE              MT
               about the risks and benefits of investing in the capital markets.
               Include the securities sector in the next financial capability
                                                                                 CMA/RSE              LT
               survey, if the market has developed sufficiently.
* ST = Short term (i.e. within one year). MT = Medium term (i.e. within two years). LT = Long term (i.e. within
three years).




                                                       5
    Financial Sector Context for Consumer Financial Services
                      and Financial Literacy

1. The financial sector in Rwanda is at an early stage of development. Despite significant existing
   challenges, the institutional elements of an emerging and formal financial sector are in place: bank and
   non-bank deposit-taking institutions, credit providers, insurance companies and a nascent industry of
   investment and private pension funds and capital markets firms, are present and growing. A number of
   informal channels still co-exist, filling an important gap in the provision of financial services (savings
   and credit) for the lower income segment, and in particular in the rural areas. Further details of the
   overall financial sector are in the 2013 CPFL Report.

2. There is a nascent industry of private pension funds and capital market firms which are
   providing and expanding the range of products and services available in the market. Private
   pension schemes have begun to develop in anticipation of the introduction of the legal framework, with
   the enactment of the new Pensions Law expected to provide greater certainty and a foundation for
   expanding contractual savings. Further, efforts to develop the capital markets are ongoing. Measures
   include the issuance of instruments with longer maturities, the quarterly issuance of government bonds,
   and ongoing collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) as regard to issuing both
   regional bonds, and developing technical expertise and infrastructure in Rwanda. Additionally, an
   automated clearing and settlement platform is now in place and the authorities are currently working
   on implementing an automated trading platform. Initiatives are also ongoing to connect the various
   markets in the region.

3. Levels of financial inclusion in the private pensions and securities markets are currently low.
   For example, the World Bank’s Global Findex Database 2014 showed that only 4.9% of adults over 15
   years of age saved for their old age (this figure was 9.8% in Sub – Saharan Africa).6 Such savings
   could include savings in private pension funds, as well as other long term investments. However the
   Global Findex Database does not separately identify levels of investment in the capital markets by
   individuals.

4. The ongoing implementation of Rwanda’s Financial Sector Development Plan II aims to tackle
   the impediments to financial intermediation and increase saving and investment opportunities,
   thereby furthering financial inclusion. For example, the Plan expresses the expectation that the new
   Pensions Law will mobilize long-term savings and contribute to capital market development. The Plan
   also highlights the objectives of finalizing the capital markets legal infrastructure, developing the
   government bond market and encouraging new listings and inter- listings on the RSE.7




6
    http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/country/rwanda
7
    See summary at page xii at: http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/fileadmin/templates/documents/Rwanda_Financial_Sector_development_program_II.pdf




                                                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 6
                                        GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION



     Private Pensions Sector
5. The Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB) provides defined benefit pensions (along with
   healthcare and other protection) on a mandatory basis to all workers formally employed in the
   public and private sectors.8 The scheme was established under Law No. 45/2010 of 14/12/2010
   Establishing Rwanda Social Security Board (RSSB) and Determining its Mission, Organization and
   Functioning (RSSB Law) as a result of a merger between the Social Security Fund of Rwanda (CSR)
   and the medical scheme. It is supervised by the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR) under Law No 55/2007
   of 30/11/2007 Governing the Central Bank of Rwanda (Central Bank Law) and is overseen by the
   Ministry of Finance (MINECOFIN). The scheme has around 350,000 contributors and pays pensions
   to around 30,000 retirees, which constitutes less than 10 per cent of the labor force in the country or
   around three per cent of the population. The fund currently manages over US $500 million in assets
   (covering both retirement and medical schemes), which constitutes around eight per cent of GDP. The
   UK Government Actuary’s Department estimates that the scheme will be financially secure until the
   2040s.9
6. Social protection is also covered by an old age grant, paid to around one million vulnerable
   citizens. The grant is targeted on a geographical and household poverty basis (i.e. it is not specifically
   targeted toward the elderly). More broadly, under the Vision 2020 Umurenge Program (Vision 2020),
   the goal is to reach national coverage for social protection in Rwanda by 2018.10
7. In terms of voluntary private pensions, only around 50 companies (e.g. banks, brewing
   companies) offer occupational pensions to their workers. These schemes are offered in addition
   to the RSSB membership. The decision to offer the fund is taken by the employer and there is
   no employee choice (of membership, pension fund provider or investment portfolio) involved.
   BNR had a list of 54 such occupational pension funds as at September 2014. These are managed by
   life insurance companies11 as guaranteed savings products (generally at four to five per cent interest,
   with some contracts having additional profits or ‘bonus’ clauses) that provide a lump sum payment at
   retirement. These group funds cover approximately 5,000 people. Assets under management are
   estimated at US $50 million.12
8. Insurance companies also sell retirement products directly to individuals.13 These are long-term
   savings products that combine a guaranteed return savings element with a life insurance product.
   Around 100,000 contracts have been signed so far. Life insurance companies confirm that this type of
   retirement product is one of their main product lines, with assets estimated at around US $12 million,
   being total assets of the insurance sector estimated at US$ 385 million, at the end of 2014.14
9. The private pensions industry in Rwanda has been unregulated until the recent passage of the
   Pension Law in15. At the date of this report, Law No. 05/2015 of 30/03/2014 Governing the
   Organization of Pension Schemes (Pensions Law) had just been passed by Parliament and was
   awaiting final gazetting procedures. The Pensions Law will cover the operation of public and private
   pension schemes in the country. BNR, which will be the supervisor of the pensions industry going
   forward, has also prepared the Draft Regulation on Minimum Operating Standards and Supervision of

8
  The monthly contribution rate is six per cent of gross salary: three per cent payable by employees and three per cent by employers. The self-employed
can insure voluntarily on a monthly basis if their declared salary is between the minimum salary and the statutory cap. Old age pension is payable from
55 years of age to individuals with a minimum of 15 years of service. Members can continue to contribute until age 65. The pension amount is calculated
based on the final salary, two per cent of which is added to the calculated pension for each year of service.
9
  D Grenham and J McDaid, UK Government Actuary’s Department, Actuarial Valuation of the Rwanda Pension and Occupational Hazards Scheme as at
30 June 2012 (2012).
10
   http://www.rw.undp.org/content/dam/rwanda/docs/povred/VUP-VISION-2020-UMURENGE-DOCUMENT.pdf
11
   The life insurance companies managing these occupational pensions are Soras Vie, Saham (Corar) Vie, Prime Life and Sonara Life. Additionally, BNR
runs its own pension fund in-house. The main banks also offer ‘savings schemes’ to employers to invest on behalf of their employees on an aggregate.
As these are not pension funds per se, they are not included in this report (although it is expected that some may establish themselves as pension funds
under the new Pensions Law).
12
   No official statistics on the membership or assets of these schemes are available as the industry has to date been unregulated.
13
   The new Pensions Law allows for the establishment of Personal Retirement Savings Accounts. These products are not as yet offered in practice in
Rwanda.
14
   Business Insurance, Insurance Sector Opens in Rwanda, 02/03/2015, available at
http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20150302/NEWS09/150309994
15
   Note however that the taxation of mandatory and voluntary pension funds is covered in Law No. 16/2005 of 18/08/2005 on Direct Taxes on Income
(Direct Tax Law).




                                                                                                                        FINANCE & MARKETS | 7
                                        GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


     (Voluntary and Mandatory) Pension Schemes (Draft Pensions Regulation). It is expected that the
     Draft Pension Regulation will be put into effect imminently, now that the Pensions Law has been passed
     by Parliament.

10. Voluntary private pensions will be deemed ‘complementary occupational pension schemes’
    under the Pensions Law. Life insurance companies indicate that there is likely to be further interest
    from clients in these occupational pension schemes now that the new Pensions Law has passed and
    also when the new regulatory structure for the industry becomes clearer. These providers and RSSB
    welcomed the new Pensions Law and the Draft Pensions Regulation, as well as regulation of the
    pensions industry in general.16

     Securities Sector
11. The securities sector remains underdeveloped in Rwanda, although it compares favorably to
    some of its peers. Only seven equities are listed and nine bonds (seven government bonds and two
    corporate bonds).17 The 2013 market capitalization was US$2 billion which was 27.24 per cent of GDP
    (see Table 2). Prior to 2011, the Capital Market Advisory Council (CMAC) had been set up to guide the
    development of capital markets in Rwanda and operate as the capital markets regulator, pending the
    creation of the Capital Market Authority (CMA) under Law No. 11/2011 of 18/05/2011 Establishing the
    Capital Markets Authority (CMA Law). CMAC facilitated the creation of the Rwandan Stock Exchange
    (RSE). Both the CMA and the RSE commenced operations in 2011.

Table 2: Stock market capitalization as % of GDP (in USD) of countries in the East African Community
      Country                  Year                             2011                      2012                     2013                     2014
                          Capitalization              1,590,436,751            1,694,294,297            2,048,512,305             1,930,894,049
      Rwanda                   GDP                    6,406,727,020            7,219,656,634            7,521,261,791                         N/A
                            % of GDP                            24.82                    23.47                    27.24                       N/A
                          Capitalization            10,383,745,558           14,837,436,605            22,565,298,332           26,053,949,644
       Kenya                   GDP                41,953,433,591.4         50,410,164,013.6          54,930,813,987.9         60,936,509,778.0
                            % of GDP                            24.75                    29.43                    41.08                    42.75
                          Capitalization              3,713,013,025            8,250,090,428           10,460,098,728           12,800,235,255
     Tanzania                  GDP                33,561,501,962.0         38,808,657,767.1          44,333,456,244.7         49,183,884,817.5
                            % of GDP                            11.06                    21.26                      23.6                   26.02
                         Capitalization*              7,727,269,981            7,294,133,434
      Uganda                   GDP                18,661,302,214.7         23,724,745,221.4         No Available Data        No Available Data
                            % of GDP                             41.4                     30.7
      Burundi           Capitalization                                                No stock exchange
      *includes cross-listed stocks
      Sources: Rwanda: RSE and CMA. Kenya: GDP – World Bank Indicators 2015; market capitalization – Nairobi Securities
      Exchange; currency – Oanda. Tanzania: GDP – World Bank Indicators 2015; market capitalization – Dar es Salaam Stock
      Exchange (DSE), currency – DSE. Uganda: GDP – World Bank Indicators 2015; market capitalization – World Bank Indicators
      2015; currency – World Bank Indicators 2015.

12. The number of domestic stock listings on the exchange has not increased significantly over the
    last four years. However, three companies from Kenya cross-listed by the end of 2014 and one
    additional Kenyan company cross-listed by May 2015. The number of bonds has increased as both the
    corporate and government sectors have turned to the market to raise money and provide benchmarks
    for treasury issues.




16
   Much of the Pension Law and pension regulations currently in draft cover both the mandatory and the voluntary schemes. Though members of the
mandatory scheme are not strictly ‘consumers’ the good practices relating to reporting and supervisory oversight should also apply to the scheme in
order to protect members and instill international good practice.
17
   See Rwanda Stock Exchange <http://www.rse.rw/listed-securities> (as at Daily Report of 20 August 2015).


                                                                                                                      FINANCE & MARKETS | 8
                            GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


13. In contrast the number of securities accounts has steadily increased over the last four years.
    Although the records do not distinguish between natural and legal persons, the number of accounts
    would indicate that there are an increasing number of individual investors.


  General Framework for Consumer Protection in Rwanda
                         A. Institutional Arrangements
1. The institutional arrangements for regulation and supervision of each part of the financial sector
   merit careful review. Of particular importance are the following issues: who is responsible for
   consumer protection in each sector? Are there gaps/overlaps/capacity/resource issues to be
   considered? Is there an appropriate allocation between prudential supervision and consumer protection
   supervision? Is there coordination between multiple agencies? Is the private sector involved (e.g.
   through self-regulatory codes of conduct)? Does the supervisor concerned have adequate resources,
   skills and expertise? There is, however, no “best practice” on how to structure financial consumer
   protection institutionally. The appropriate model in any country depends on the country-specific
   characteristics such as size and structure of the financial system and existing regulatory and
   supervisory arrangements.

    General Overview
2. The principal regulators that are the subject of this 2015 CPFL Review are BNR for the pensions
   sector and the CMA and RSE for the securities sector, with potential overlap with other
   regulators. As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, the overall institutional framework for financial
   consumer protection in Rwanda is fragmented because of a lack of clearly defined roles and
   responsibilities among different institutions and unclear enforcement capacity. The BNR’s consumer
   protection responsibilities overlap with those of the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MINICOM) under
   Law No. 36/2012 of 21/09/2012 Relating to Competition and Consumer Protection (CCP Law) and the
   Competition and Consumer Protection Regulatory Body (the National Inspectorate and Competition
   Authority (NICA) operating under MINICOM). Additionally, BNR is currently in the process of setting up
   a separate market conduct unit, which will require co-ordination with prudential supervisors.
3. Although consumer associations have standing to make a request for the regulator to
   commence an investigation and to bring civil proceedings on behalf of consumers, they lack
   capacity. As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, the MINICOM has supported the creation of two
   consumer associations that advocate for the rights of consumers: the Rwanda Consumer’s Rights
   Protection Organization (ADECOR) based in Kigali, and the Consumer Human Rights Organization of
   Rwanda (CHROR) based in Rubavu. Under the CCP Law, consumer associations have standing to
   make a request to NICA to commence an investigation into anti-competitive conduct. After a request is
   made, NICA must undertake consultation and consider the request. Registered consumer protection
   organizations may also commence civil proceedings in respect of a breach of a consumer protection
   law, either at the request of a consumer or if damages are claimed. In practice, financial sector issues
   are new to ADECOR and the pensions sector has not been covered. With the passage of the new
   Pensions Law, some training and awareness-building on pension issues could be provided.




                                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS | 9
                             GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


    Table 3: Financial Consumer Protection Regulators and Supervisors
          Authority                    Principal laws                     Entities supervised/functions
      Banque National         Law No 55/2007 of 30/11/2007             •   Banks
      du Rwanda (BNR)         Governing the Central Bank of            •   Microfinance institutions
                              Rwanda (Central Bank Law).               •   Non-bank financial institutions
                                                                           (NBFIs) (including insurance
                                                                           and pensions)
        Capital Market        Law No. 11/2011 of 18/05/2011            Holds regulatory powers with respect
       Authority (CMA)        Establishing the Capital Markets         to:
          (reports to         Authority (CMA Law).                     • The capital market; and
         MINECOFIN)                                                    • Collective investment schemes
                                                                           (CISs).
       Central Securities     Law No. 26/2010 of 28/05/2010            Securities clearing and settlement
       Depository (CSD)       Governing the Holding and                system.
       (operated by BNR)      Circulation of Securities (CSD Law)
         Rwanda Social        Central Bank Law                         Provides mandatory medical and
         Security Board       Law No. 45/2010 Establishing             pension coverage to all employers
            (RSSB)            Rwanda Social Security Board             and workers engaged in public and
      (supervised by BNR      (RSSB) and Determining Its               private sector works in the “formal
      and overseen by the     Missions, Organisation and               sector”.
          MINECOFIN)          Functioning (RSSB Law)

    Key Recommendation
4. The 2013 CPFL Review recommended that consideration be given to amending the CCP Law to
   clarify that it does not apply to financial services. These amendments could also clarify that BNR
   has primary responsibility for the supervision of laws and regulations applicable to consumer protection
   in the financial sector, with CMA having responsibility for the securities sector.

    Private Pensions Sector
5. Under the Central Bank Law, BNR is charged with supervising and regulating the activities of
   pension funds. This responsibility sits with the NBFI Division. Currently, BNR’s supervisory capacity,
   including in relation to the pension sector, is extremely limited. Specifically, there are only two staff
   members charged with supervisory responsibility for the pensions sector.
6. Although there is a proposal to establish a Market Conduct Unit within BNR, the unit is unlikely
   to be operational until the beginning of 2016 or to have pension expertise for some time. there
   is an urgent need for support to develop robust supervisory capacity with respect to the pensions sector
   and related consumer protection issues, which should be scaled up over time having regard to the size
   of the market. In particular, there is a need for greater oversight of the selling of retirement products on
   a retail basis by insurance companies. Consumers do not appear to fully understand the products, as
   many cash out after only a few years and do not understand why they receive less back than what they
   had put in (due to the life insurance element of the product), or why they receive less than they could
   have received in a bank account (due to the long-term guarantee of the return).




                                                                                      FINANCE & MARKETS | 10
                                         GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


        Key Recommendation(s)
7. BNR’s supervisory capacity needs to be strengthened as soon as possible so that there is
   effective supervision of the pensions industry now that the Pensions Law has come into effect.
   In particular there is a need for early capacity building in respect of the detail of the requirements of the
   new Pensions Law and the new Regulation (once it is finalized), the current state of the pensions market
   and appropriate methods for conduction on-site and off-site risk based supervision of the consumer
   protection aspects of the new regulatory framework. This supplements recommendations made in the
   2013 CPFL Review to strengthen BNR’s supervisory capacity more generally with respect to financial
   consumer protection. As an initial step, the passage of the new Pensions Law should offer a good
   opportunity to hold a workshop on general pension issues and on consumer protection issues for the
   sector. The workshop should involve not only BNR staff, but other oversight groups (such as the CMA),
   consumer associations (e.g. ADECOR) and the Office of the Ombudsman.

        Securities Sector
8. The CMA Law establishes the CMA as the capital markets supervisor in Rwanda. Under
   Article 3(12) of the CMA Law, one of the CMA’s primary duties is ‘to protect citizens and investors in
   capital market from unfair and unsound practices or practices involving fraud, deceit, cheating or
   manipulation’. To carry out this mandate, the CMA’s responsibilities include reviewing and settling
   investor disputes and reviewing firms’ customer complaint logs. Firms must be able to demonstrate that
   it has effective arrangements for investigating customer complaints and sharing such information with
   the CMA in order to obtain a license to ‘conduct the business of a securities exchange’.18
9. The CMA and RSE are functioning reasonably well in the context of low levels of retail activity
   at present in the capital markets in Rwanda. Depository functions are currently carried out by BNR
   and are in the process of being integrated into the RSE trading system. There are currently no industry
   associations in the capital markets to create or administer a voluntary code of conduct for the industry,
   which is likely due to the relative newness of capital markets in Rwanda. At present, the securities
   industry has a relatively close relationship with the CMA.

10. Several external dispute resolution systems exist or are in the process of being established.
    These include the CMA Complaints Committee and its appellate body, the CMA Independent Review
    Committee, and the Office of the Ombudsman. A compensation scheme has also been established,
    albeit with limited resources, to provide coverage for ‘persons who suffer pecuniary loss from any
    defalcation or fraud committed by any licensed dealers, its representatives or investment adviser’.19
11. The CMA will however need to build its supervisory capacity and resources for investor
    protection as a priority. The CMA is still in at an early stage of development, despite having been in
    existence (in the form of its predecessor, CMAC) since 2008. For example, it is still in the process of
    developing its general operating procedures and procedures for conducting audits of licensed entities,
    and there is only one auditor in the Inspection Department that was set up last year. As Rwanda’s
    capital markets continue to grow, the CMA will require more resources to conduct its supervisory
    activities. These resources should be in place before individuals are actively encouraged to invest in
    the capital markets.

        Key Recommendation(s)
12. The CMA needs additional resources to undertake its supervisory activities. As a priority, it should
    complete its general operating procedures and finalize its audit procedures. It is recommended that
    one or two additional staff members be added to assist with conducting reviews of filings by companies
    registered with the CMA and listed on the RSE. Forensic accounting training should also be prioritized
    initially for the audit and examination staff. Lastly, as the capital market develops, there should be
    communication and consultation between BNR and the CMA in relation to supervision of banks which
    distribute, and advise on, securities. It is understood that there is an MoU in place between BNR and

18
     Regulation No. 01/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Markets (Licensing Requirements), Article 7(3) (Regulation on Licensing).
19
     Capital Market Regulation No. 11/2012 of 31/12/2012 Establishing the Compensation Scheme in Rwanda, Articles 55–6.


                                                                                                                   FINANCE & MARKETS | 11
                             GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


    CMA which may be helpful in this regard, but it should be reviewed and amended as appropriate to
    ensure that it adequately convers consumer protection issues.

                      B.     Legal and Regulatory Framework
13. A strong legal and regulatory framework for financial consumer protection is crucial to protect
    financial consumers and proactively prevent market abuses. Market conduct regulation should, at
    a minimum, ensure that consumers: (i) receive information to allow them to make informed decisions;
    (ii) are not subject to unfair or deceptive practices; and (iii) have access to recourse mechanisms to
    resolve disputes. All laws and subordinate legislation relating to consumer protection in the financial
    sector should be considered in this context with a view to assessing their scope and sphere of
    application, any related gaps and overlaps and with a particular focus on issues such as licensing,
    transparency and disclosure, business conduct, recourse mechanisms, data protection and credit
    reporting. The legal and regulatory framework should also be supported by supervisory agencies that
    have the capacity to ensure effective implementation (see above Section A on Institutional
    Arrangements).

    Private Pensions Sector
14. Around the time of preparation of this report, the Pensions Law was passed by the Rwandan
    Parliament and final gazettal procedures had been completed. Voluntary, private pension schemes
    in Rwanda had previously been unregulated. The Pensions Law covers the operation of public pension
    schemes (i.e. the RSSB) and private pension schemes going forward. The Pensions Law imposes new
    requirements on new and existing pension funds, including requirements to establish trustee boards to
    oversee their operations, to appoint external service providers (e.g. fund managers), to separate fund
    assets and to appoint a custodian. Custodial services are not currently used by any pension schemes,
    whether occupational schemes or the RSSB. Instead, pension assets are managed and held by the
    insurance companies themselves. The Pensions Law also includes other general consumer protection
    provisions covering disclosure, the obligation to act with due care, and managing conflicts of interest.
15. BNR has also prepared the draft Pensions Regulation that supplements the Pensions Law. The
    Draft Pensions Regulation includes more detailed provisions that impose additional requirements and
    address additional issues (e.g. vesting). The draft Pensions Regulation is expected to be approved by
    the BNR Board in September 2015.

16. There are no specific provisions for the confidentiality, privacy and security of pension fund
    member information. As noted in the 2013 CPFL Review, there are no privacy or data protection laws
    of general application in Rwanda. The Draft Pensions Regulation (Article 7(c)(vi) requires the service
    level agreement between a pension scheme and any external pension administrators to include
    provisions concerning the external administrator’s obligations with respect to the confidentiality, privacy
    and security of member personal information. Beyond this, there are no specific provisions in the
    Pensions Law or the Draft Pensions Regulation regarding the confidentiality, privacy and security of
    member information.
17. Overall, the new legal framework for pensions appears to provide a good basis for protecting
    pension fund members, but some areas can be further improved. This report suggests some
    additional consumer protection provisions for inclusion in the Draft Pensions Regulation (see below
    paragraph 20).

    Key Recommendation(s)
18. BNR should undertake industry consultation with existing pension schemes and occupational
    scheme providers in relation to the new Pensions Law. An important objective of any such
    consultations should be to explain relevant consumer protection aspects of the new Pensions Law, the
    implications for service providers and stakeholders (e.g. the role and responsibilities of trustees and
    the need to appoint a custodian), and BNR’s expectations in its capacity as the pensions regulator and
    supervisor going forward.


                                                                                      FINANCE & MARKETS | 12
                                            GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION




19. Existing occupational schemes will need support in transitioning to the new structure created
    by the Pensions Law. Amongst other things, sponsoring employers and employee representatives
    must appoint trustee boards, make arrangements to segregate the assets of the scheme from assets
    that the trustees may hold to finance administrative expenses, and appoint a custodian approved by
    BNR. Industry consultation for occupational plan sponsors (i.e. HR representative of sponsoring
    employers) should be held. Providers such as life insurance companies and the life insurance industry
    association (ASSAR) should also be explained, in particular, the new obligations under the Pensions
    Law and the impact on service providers and stakeholders (e.g. role and responsibilities of trustees,
    the requirement for trustees to appoint a custodian).
20. Additional consumer protection provisions should be included in the Draft Pensions
    Regulation. For example, provisions that could be added include: the training of trustees; a
    requirement for sponsoring employees to designate HR representatives; rules on advice and the selling
    of pension products (i.e. on a retail basis to individuals); information on guarantees, fees and withdrawal
    rights; cooling-off periods; and the disclosure of financial positions by pension fund management
    companies. Additionally, although there do not appear to have been any material breaches of
    confidentiality to date with respect to member personal information by the RSSB or occupational
    pension schemes, the Draft Pensions Regulation should include express requirements regarding the
    confidentiality of personal information (potentially including rules regulating when member information
    may be used for cross-selling purposes within financial groups).

        Securities Sector
21. Significant work has been undertaken to develop a sophisticated legal and regulatory
    framework for capital markets in Rwanda. The key laws and regulations for the sector include: the
    CMA Law; the Capital Market Law; the CIS Law; the CSD Law; Regulation No. 02/2012 of 25/06/2012
    on Capital Market Conduct of Business (Regulation on the Conduct of Business); Regulation No.
    05/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Principles (Regulation on Capital Market Principles);
    Regulation No. 01/2012 of 25/06/2012 on Capital Markets (Licensing Requirements) (Regulation on
    Licensing); and Regulation No. 04/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Complaints (Complaints
    Regulation).
22. In general terms, this legislative package reflects a ‘light touch’, principles-based approach to
    regulation, rather than a prescriptive, rules-based approach. The principles-based approach was
    first used in the United Kingdom in the 1990s, but has since been de-emphasized in favor of a more
    rules-based approach. The CMA should accordingly consider assessing the effectiveness of the current
    principles-based legislative package in protecting investors, assess whether the existing investor
    protection provisions are sufficient, and revise its approach, if necessary.
23. Licensing requirements do not currently apply to natural persons who provide investment
    advice or broking services. Article 6 of the Capital Market Law requires all persons who carry out a
    capital market business in Rwanda to be licensed. The Regulation on Licensing provides a mechanism
    for broker–dealer firms to apply for a license.20 The CIS Law requires promoters and dealers of CISs,
    and asset managers, to be licensed, and the scheme itself must also be registered.21 However, there
    does not appear to be a requirement for salespersons or investment advisors employed by broker–
    dealer firms to be licensed in their individual capacity. Similarly, there are no training or qualification
    requirements for salespersons or investment advisors. The Capital Market Law requires licensed
    persons to hire only ‘qualified’ persons, but there is no definition as to the characteristics of a qualified
    person.




20
     Regulation on Licensing, Article 10.
21
     CIS Law, Articles 5, 7, 10.


                                                                                        FINANCE & MARKETS | 13
                              GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION




24. The Capital Market Law contains obligations relating to the privacy of personal information, but
    their application to capital market firms is unclear. Article 49 sets out privacy obligations that
    apparently apply to governmental agencies that have obtained investors’ personal information in the
    course of their duties. However, it is not clear if this provision is applicable to capital market firms. As
    noted above, there are no privacy or data protection laws of general application in Rwanda.

    Key Recommendation(s)
25. The CMA should assess the extent to which the current principles-based legislative package
    results in compliance. Should there be an increase in the number of sales violations, erroneous filings
    with the CMA or restatements of annual account statements, the CMA should consider whether a more
    detailed, rules-based regulatory approach would result in better compliance.
26. Consideration could be given to including additional investor protection provisions in the
    existing laws and regulations. For example, provisions could be added regarding the notification of
    investors of their withdrawal rights and associated fees, and strengthening the CMA’s enforcement
    powers. At present, the Capital Market Law gives the CMA the right to conduct investigations if there
    are justifiable reasons to do so and it may request information from any licensed or authorized person
    as needed to carry out its functions. Consideration could be given to amending the rules to allow the
    CMA to compel any person, not just those who are licensed or authorized, to provide information to
    assist it with any ongoing investigations.
27. Natural persons who are employed by firms as salespersons or investment advisors should be
    required to be licensed individually and meet minimum competency requirements. The Capital
    Market Law (and relevant regulations) should be amended to clarify that licensing requirements also
    apply to salespersons and investment advisors in their individual capacity. The Capital Market Law and
    the Regulation on the Conduct of Business should also be amended to define the characteristics of a
    ‘qualified person’ and introducing minimum training requirements. Consideration could also be given to
    introducing a competency examination for such individuals as part of the licensing process.
28. The Capital Market Law should be amended to provide for the confidentiality and security of
    investors’ personal information when held by capital market firms. Consideration should also be
    given to introducing penalties for the disclosure of confidential, restricted information in relation to
    investors by non-government entities (e.g. capital market firms include broker–dealers and investment
    advisors).

               C. Transparency and Consumer Disclosure
29. Specific disclosure requirements can help create an informed consumer marketplace, enable
    product comparisons, encourage competition and promote financial inclusion. It is, however,
    important that any new requirements in this regard are proportionate in the sense of reflecting the risks
    of the relevant activity and the literacy/capability level of the relevant consumers, and do not impose
    costs which outweigh the benefits.

    Private Pensions Sector
30. Disclosure requirements are well covered in the Pensions Law and Draft Pensions Regulation.
    The requirements to disclose information regarding occupational pension schemes are adequate.
    Article 80 of the Pensions Law requires all pension schemes to provide members with information on
    the status of their scheme, its duties, decisions taken in relation to members and their rights under the
    scheme. Information that must be provided in the scheme rules is prescribed by the Pensions Law and
    elaborated in further detail in the Draft Pensions Regulation. Article 43 of the Pensions Law requires all
    information to be written in plain language in Kinyarwanda, French and English.




                                                                                       FINANCE & MARKETS | 14
                             GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


31. The Draft Pensions Regulation also prescribes the minimum information that must be provided
    to a scheme member. This includes: membership benefits; the scheme design; the rights and
    obligations of members and beneficiaries; complaints resolution procedures; the procedure for claiming
    benefits; contribution rates; any covenants made by the trustees and sponsoring employers; and the
    names and contact information of the trustees and service providers. This information must be provided
    to a scheme member together with a membership number and a membership booklet summarizing the
    provisions of the scheme rules.
32. Some additional areas could be covered in greater detail in the Draft Pensions Regulation. For
    example, specific transparency and disclosure provisions should be included in the Draft Pensions
    Regulation, including information on guarantees, fees, changes in scheme rules, and confidentiality of
    member information.

33. At present, the quality of information provided to scheme members differs between sponsoring
    employers in practice. Generally, an information package is prepared by the insurance company and
    provided to sponsoring employers who, in turn, provide individual certificates of membership and
    summary information on the scheme and to employees whom they sponsor into the scheme. Some
    scheme sponsors provide fairly comprehensive information to employees. Others (as suggested by the
    anecdotal evidence of former members of occupational schemes whom the WB mission team met)
    pass on little information to employees, who ultimately have low levels of understanding of the benefits
    and functioning of the scheme. Standards should improve under the new Pensions Law and once the
    Draft Pensions Regulation setting minimum standards of disclosure is adopted.
34. Neither the Pensions Law nor the Draft Pensions Regulation contains any provisions on the
    selling of retail retirement products or long-term insurance products. Currently, retail retirement
    products are sold mostly by insurance agents and, less commonly, by brokers. In practice, many
    individuals purchasing retirement products from insurers (usually through workplace contacts) do not
    understand the nature of the product, which are in essence guaranteed savings products with a life
    insurance component. It is understood that many individuals choose to cash out these products after a
    few years and are unlikely to be able to understand why they get back less than they had put in (due
    to the life insurance element they had purchased), or less than what they could have received in a bank
    account (due to the long-term guarantee of the return). Improvements in how information on these
    products is presented (and how they are sold by insurance agents and brokers) are clearly needed.

    Key Recommendation(s)
35. As noted above, additional consumer protection provisions could be added to the Draft Pension
    Regulation to strengthen transparency and consumer disclosure standards. For example, the
    Draft Pensions Regulation could include additional requirements on: general disclosure; the provision
    of information on guarantees, fees and withdrawal; the disclosure of financial position information by
    pension fund companies; and the selling of retirement products on a retail basis (see further below
    paragraph 37).
36. BNR should review the information that is provided by pension schemes and sponsors to
    scheme members under the new Pensions Law. If necessary, BNR should provide further guidance
    on the disclosure requirements under the new Pensions Law.
37. As recommended in the 2013 CPFL Review, transparency and disclosure requirements for the
    retail selling of long-term insurance products and retirement products should be introduced.
    This could include requirements to provide accurate information as to investment returns, prohibiting
    the use of misleading information in all sales materials, and guidance on maximum guarantees and
    how to determine profit/bonus payouts.




                                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS | 15
                                           GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION



        Securities Sector
38. Overall, the consumer disclosure rules applicable to the securities sector are strong. The
    Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires firms to disclose key information so that the client is
    ‘reasonably able to understand the nature, costs and risks of those services and is able to take an
    informed investment decision.’22 This includes information about ‘the regulated activities that [the firm]
    is permitted to undertake and the activities that it does undertake’, ‘the nature of those services and the
    risks associated with those services’, and ‘the charges or fees which are payable for its services or in
    relation to the capital markets instruments it offers’. Firms are required to give clients a document setting
    out the basic services and terms of agreement with the client.23 They are also required to provide a
    general description of the nature and risks of capital market instruments, ‘taking into account in
    particular the client’s status as a private or professional client’, and the nature and risks of the specific
    type of instrument in sufficient detail to enable clients to take an informed investment decision.24
39. There are no specific disclosure requirements for investment advisors. For example, there is no
    requirement for investment advisors to disclose whether they are registered in another capacity and
    whether the advisor deals with the client’s account in the second registered capacity. Investment
    advisors are not required to disclose whether the financial instruments they recommend are held in
    their own account or by a related party. There are also no KFS requirements for investment advisors in
    relation to each product or service that is being offered.

40. Other disclosure provisions could also be enhanced. For example, there is currently no
    requirement for the preparation of standardized, summary KFSs for CISs (although many of the
    elements usually contained in a summary KFS are already required to be disclosed in different forms).
    The prospectus requirements for CISs are also very general. Moreover, there is no requirement for an
    investment advisor to give prospective and existing clients a KFS for each product or service that is
    being offered.

        Key Recommendation(s)
41. The Regulation on the Conduct of Business should be amended to require summary KFSs for
    CISs and investment advisory services. In addition, policies and practices on frequent trading and
    inducements from service providers should be disclosed. The full nature of the investment advisor’s
    relationship with the client should also be disclosed.
42.

                                                  D. Business Practices
43. A key consumer protection concern is that financial service providers, and their staff and other
    intermediaries, do not engage in fair business practices. Specific issues in this context include
    proper training of retail sales officers and other intermediaries, product suitability advice, responsible
    lending standards, misleading and deceptive advertising and sales practices, tying and bundling of
    different types of financial services and products, unfair contract terms, cooling-off periods and debt
    collection practices.

        Private Pensions Sector
44. Pension management companies currently work with sponsoring employers to provide
    occupational pension schemes and do not advertise to the public. Relationship between
    occupational pension schemes and sponsoring employers are usually built through brokers, or directly
    through the marketing department of the occupational pension schemes. Retail retirement products are
    usually sold to consumers by insurance agents and brokers, and products are commonly sold through

22
     Regulation on the Conduct of Business, Article 5.
23
     Regulation on the Conduct of Business, Articles 5, 11, 17.
24
     Regulation on the Conduct of Business, Article 13.


                                                                                        FINANCE & MARKETS | 16
                             GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


    workplace contracts. For example, the largest provider of retail retirement products confirmed that most
    of the contracts had been signed with teachers at schools.
45. Issues relating to the selling of insurance products that were raised in the 2013 CPFL Review
    also apply to the selling of retail retirement/long-term savings products by insurance
    companies. Retirement and long-term savings products may involve significant investment decisions
    due to the fact that these are usually guaranteed savings products with a life insurance component.
    However, it appears that these products are not currently well-understood by consumers. As noted
    above, most individuals choose to cash out these products after a few years and are unable to
    understand why they get back less than they had put in or less than what they could have received in
    a bank account.

    Key Recommendation(s)
46. BNR should undertake a review of the private pensions sector. As the private pensions sector has
    been unregulated until now, BNR should complete a thorough stock take of the private occupational
    pension funds that are currently operating, as well as the retirement products that are being sold on a
    retail basis, to gain an improved understanding of the types of retail product that are being offered and
    how they are being sold. It would also be helpful to collect additional information on the number and
    nature of the funds, membership and asset data, and performance and fee information. These efforts
    would complement the recommendations above for BNR to consult with industry in relation to
    obligations under the new Pensions Law which will apply to both the RSSB and complementary
    occupational pension schemes.
47. The recommendations of the 2013 CPFL Review on the selling of insurance products should be
    implemented with respect to the selling of retirement/long-term savings products on a retail
    basis. Of particular importance are the recommendations concerning the provision of accurate
    information on investment returns, the disclosure of commissions, customer suitability requirements
    and obtaining client acknowledgements as to the receipt of financial advice. These recommendations
    could be implemented by way of additional provisions on the selling of pension products in the Draft
    Pensions Regulation (see above paragraph 20).




                                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS | 17
                                              GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION



        Securities Sector
48. The laws and regulations for the securities sector adequately address most business practices,
    but there are still some matters of detail to be covered. Topics concerning record-keeping,
    customer notification, segregation of assets, sales practices, fraud and other basic provisions are
    covered. However there is no coverage of issues such as: distance-selling, high-pressure sales tactics,
    the omission of material facts during a sales presentation (e.g. concerning the level of risk in an
    investment), the action that a firm should take if a client wishes to enter into a transaction against the
    advice of the firm. There are also no specific requirements on the prompt payment and transfer of funds.
    Finally, although the Regulation on the Conduct of Business requires records relating to a firm’s
    business and dealings with clients to be maintained for 10 years,25 it does not specify the types of
    records that must be retained.

        Key Recommendation(s)
49. The Regulation on Conduct of Business should be amended in several respects. For example, it
    should be amended to include: a requirement for funds to be transferred promptly to a client’s account,
    or to another brokerage account, upon a client’s request; minimum record-keeping requirements
    (including details on the types of records that must be retained); rules on the actions that a firm should
    take if a customer wishes to engage in an action against the advice of the firm, or if the transaction is
    client-initiated; and more robust prohibitions against the fraudulent sale of securities to investors.

                 E. Complaints Handling and Dispute Resolution
50. One of the key pillars of a robust system of financial consumer protection is to provide easily
    accessible, well-known and free recourse mechanisms for consumers who have a complaint
    about a financial product or service. Similarly, there is a need for an independent, transparent,
    accessible and, ideally free, external dispute resolution body.

        Private Pensions Sector
51. The new Pensions Law and Draft Pensions Regulation contain provisions relating to dispute
    resolution and member complaints. In particular, pension scheme rules and contracts for individual
    pension accounts are required to include provisions dealing with the manner in which disputes are to
    be resolved.26 Pension fund members and their beneficiaries have a right to appeal the decision of a
    pension scheme relating to a complaint by making a written request for the decision to be reviewed by
    the relevant trustee board.27
52. To date there are no known examples of disputes concerning pensions which have been
    escalated to external arbitration or court proceedings. Pension disputes mostly involve
    administrative issues relating to records, contribution collection and benefit payments. Currently, most
    such disputes are handled internally by the relevant corporate sponsor’s human resources department
    and pension providers. However the need for external dispute resolution in relation to pensions may
    change once private pensions become more prevalent. The Office of the Ombudsman in Rwanda has
    responsibility for dealing with disputes concerning private pensions under new arrangements whereby
    it assumes responsibility with respect to all financial sector disputes. However, the Office of the
    Ombudsman does not currently have the capacity or the expertise to handle disputes concerning
    pensions.




25
     Regulation on the Conduct of Business, Article 28.
26
     Draft Pensions Regulation, Articles 4(a)(xxiii), 26(a)(xxviii).
27
     Pension Law, Article 87.


                                                                                          FINANCE & MARKETS | 18
                                           GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


53. There appear to be basic requirements on complaints-handling that apply to insurance
    companies and brokers that sell retirement products to individuals. Under the Market Conduct
    Regulation, insurers are required to have an internal dispute resolution process that addresses
    policyholders’ complaints in a timely and fair manner, and to communicate the process and procedures
    to policyholders. However, it is unclear whether these rules apply to complaints by non-policyholders.
    Brokers must comply with certain basic requirements under the Code of Practice for Insurance Brokers,
    set out as Appendix I to the Market Conduct Regulation (Insurance Brokers’ Code of Conduct).
    These include requirements for complaints to be accepted by phone or in writing, and to have a system
    for recording and monitoring complaints.

        Key Recommendation(s)
54. The financial sector team at the Office of the Ombudsman should be included in any pension-
    specific consumer protection training. Additional resources would also assist the Office of the
    Ombudsman in dealing with the escalation of complaints by pension scheme members as occupational
    pension schemes become more popular (as well as with complaints from the financial sector more
    broadly).
55. BNR should include a review of internal and external dispute mechanisms in its supervisory
    oversight as it develops. For example, it could review how internal dispute resolution processes and
    procedures are made known by pension funds to members. These observations should be included in
    on-site and off-site supervisory manuals.

        Securities Sector
56. The Regulation on the Conduct of Business has extensive provisions on the establishment of
    internal complaints-handling procedure by firms. All firms are required to have an internal
    complaints-handling system for existing and prospective clients.28 Firms are required to inform their
    clients of the procedure, which must address how to file a complaint and the actions a client can take
    if the firm does not address the complaint to the client’s satisfaction. As a condition of licensing, capital
    market firms must have effective arrangements for investigating customer complaints, maintain a
    complaints log and to provide the log to the CMA on request.29
57. Investors may also lodge complaints against capital market firms (and against the CMA) with
    the CMA’s Complaints Committee. Under Article 3 of Complaints Regulation, complaints should first
    go through internal complaints-handling processes before being lodged with the Complaints
    Committee, but the CMA has stated that investors may, at least currently, file a complaint directly with
    the CMA at first instance. If an investor is dissatisfied with the decision of the CMA Complaints
    Committee, they may appeal to the statutorily created Independent Review Panel at the CMA.30
58. There is potential overlap between the functions of the CMA Complaints Committee and the
    Independent Review Panel and those of the Office of the Ombudsman. Under Article 4 of Law No.
    76/2013 of 11/9/2013 Determining the Mission, Powers, Organization and Functioning of the Office of
    the Ombudsman (Ombudsman Law II), the Ombudsman is authorized to receive complaints in regards
    to private institutions, which would include securities firms. Although the Office of the Ombudsman
    should refer complaints relating to securities matters to the CMA as the specialist agency in these
    matters, the complainant can return to the Office of the Ombudsman if the CMA has neglected the
    matter.31 The Office of the Ombudsman can then request that the CMA take specific action, impose
    specific sanctions or even act as an institution with powers of the Judicial Police. This could create
    conflict with the CMA if the CMA determines there is no substance to the complaint.




28
     Regulation on the Conduct of Business, Article 29.
29
     Regulation on Licensing, Article 7(d).
30
     Complaint Regulation, Article 19.
31
     Ombudsman Law II, Article 8.



                                                                                        FINANCE & MARKETS | 19
                                 GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


     Key Recommendation(s)
59. The roles of the CMA’s Complaints Committee, its Independent Review Panel and the Office of
    the Ombudsman should be clarified with respect to capital market disputes. If the Office of the
    Ombudsman is indeed to have jurisdiction over capital markets disputes, the CMA and the Office of the
    Ombudsman should also enter into an MoU to mitigate conflict between the enforcement decisions of
    each body. Additionally, as with complaints relation to pensions, there is a need to strengthen the
    resources and capacity of the Office of the Ombudsman concerning capital markets matters.


                            F. Financial Literacy/Capability
60. As a complement to a strong financial consumer protection framework, it is important to have
    high levels of financial literacy/capability so that consumers have the necessary knowledge and
    understanding to make informed decisions, and to help meet financial inclusion targets by
    building trust in the financial sector. For instance, any regulations that require financial institutions
    to disclose, clearly and fairly, the key information on terms and conditions associated with their products
    and service will not affect a consumer’s behavior if the consumer does not understand why it is
    important to read disclosure documents or if they fail to understand the information contained in these
    documents. Likewise, any requirement for financial institutions to have standardized procedures for
    dealing with consumer complaints will be ineffective if consumers are not aware of their rights and the
    available complaints mechanisms or if they prefer not to take action to deal with a complaint. Financial
    literacy is especially important in an environment where there are high levels of innovation in the design
    and delivery of financial products.

     Private Pensions Sector
61. No financial literacy campaigns or surveys have yet been conducted on pensions at either the
    national or industry level. However, the introduction of the new Pensions Law provides a good
    opportunity to launch a public awareness campaign for the sector.

     Key Recommendation(s)
62. BNR is encouraged to launch a media strategy promoting public awareness on the new
    Pensions Law. The media strategy should aim to explain the advantages of occupational pension
    schemes and encourage more employers to offer these benefits to their employees. At the same time,
    the strategy should aim to make consumers aware of their rights as members of pension funds. The
    strategy should also educate consumers about the importance of an insurer’s financial strength.
63. This public awareness campaign should be coordinated with MINECOFIN in the context of
    implementing the NFES. Continued support should be given to the NFES as part of Rwanda’s FISF
    program.

     Securities Sector
64. Low financial literacy levels with respect to securities matters in Rwanda is regarded as one of
    the primary impediments to the growth of the capital markets. The CMA and RSE are making
    considerable efforts to educate the general public and companies on the benefits of the capital markets.
    The CMA considers public education to be one of its key roles and spends considerable resources on
    this activity. There is a focus on both providing financial literacy training to individuals and to companies
    that would be appropriate for RSE listing, especially SMEs. This is appropriate at this stage of market
    development. Relevant activities have included public education and awareness programs in the form
    of workshops, print media articles, radio and television shows, and the annual ‘Capital Market University
    Challenge’.32



32
   See Capital Market Authority, Annual Report & Financial Statements 2013 (2013) p 23, available at <http://www.cma.rw/sites/
default/files/fa%20cma%20annual%20report%20%202012_2013.pdf>.


                                                                                                  FINANCE & MARKETS | 20
                             GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR CONSUMER PROTECTION


65. It is important that the CMA and RSE provide unbiased market information for investors
    regarding the risks and benefits of investing in the capital market. At present, aside from the
    educational programs noted above which promote the benefits of investing in the capital markets, there
    is limited dissemination of market information (such as information on monthly market activity,
    information about the types of financial instruments that are available, and filings by listed companies)
    due to the small size of the market. It is important that the CMA and RSE provide such market
    information as the market develops, as well as clear, unbiased information about both the risks and
    benefits of investing in the capital markets (and not simply the benefits).

    Key Recommendation(s)
66. The CMA and RSE should aim to provide further education to members of the media on issues
    relating to the capital markets and investor protection. The CMA should continue to conduct
    workshops for journalists to encourage them to cover securities issues in their reporting.
67. The CMA and RSE should provide, in an unbiased manner, more market information about both
    the risks and benefits of investing in the capital markets. Such market information could include:
    complete daily and monthly analyses of market activity going back at least five years; information sheets
    regarding the different types of financial instruments on the market (to be made available on the CMA
    and RSE websites, and in hard copy); and all filings made by listed companies, intermediaries and
    mutual funds. All information should be provided in a clear format.
68. The securities sector should be included in the next financial capability survey, if the market
    has developed sufficiently to justify it.




                                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS | 21
               Annex: Summary of All Recommendations
This is a high level summary list of all recommendations resulting from the 2015 CPFL Review (i.e. not just
the High Priority recommendations). See Volume II of the 2015 CPFL Review for details of these
recommendations.
To the extent that the 2015 CPFL Review restates recommendations contained in the 2013 CPFL Review,
these recommendations have not been included in the list below.

Table 4: List of Overall Recommendations
 SECTOR                            RECOMMENDATION                                 RESPONSIBILITY      TERM*
                                     INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
 Pensions       Conduct capacity building on consumer protection
                supervision aspects of the new Pensions Law for BNR, and
                general awareness for other institutions with relevant            BNR                 ST
                financial sector responsibilities (e.g. CMA), the Office of the
                Ombudsman and consumer associations (e.g. ADECOR).
                Develop training for trustees.                                    BNR                 MT
 Securities     Complete CMA’s supervisory and regulatory procedures.             CMA                 ST
                Form industry associations to regulate the industry and           Various
                advocate for members of the association as capital markets        subsectors of the   MT
                in Rwanda continue to grow.                                       securities sector
                Increase CMA resources and capacity to supervise new
                investor protection rules as capital markets in Rwanda            CMA                 LT
                become more active.
                 As the capital market develops, there should be
                communication and consultation between BNR and the CMA
                in relation to supervision of banks which distribute, and
                                                                                  CMA, BNR            LT
                advise on, securities and the MoU between BNR and CMA
                should be reviewed and amended as necessary for this
                purpose.
                                  LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
 Pensions       Conduct industry consultation with existing occupational plan
                sponsors (i.e. HR representatives of employers) and pension
                scheme providers to explain the new Pensions Law, the
                                                                                  BNR                 ST
                implications for service providers and stakeholders (e.g. the
                roles and responsibilities of trustees, the requirement to
                appoint custodians) and the standards that BNR expects.
                Meet with life insurance companies and ASSAR to clarify the
                new marketing and selling obligations that apply to the sale      BNR                 ST
                of retirement products to individuals.
                Provide guidance on maximum guarantees and how to
                                                                                  BNR                 ST
                determine profit/bonus payouts.
                Add the following consumer protection provisions to the Draft
                Pensions Regulation:
                • The regulator may introduce trustee training
                     requirements;
                                                                                  BNR                 ST
                • Sponsoring employers should be required to designate
                     an HR representative to cover pension scheme issues;
                • Regulation around the selling of pension products and/or
                     notification that provisions from other financial sectors


                                                                                     FINANCE & MARKETS | 22
                                                ANNEX



                   apply;
             •     Regulator should be given powers to provide guidance
                   on maximum guarantees, and the distribution of profits
                   and bonuses;
             • Members should be required to be notified of changes to
                   scheme rules;
             • Scheme rules should be required to include disclosure of
                   fees charged, the existence of any guarantees, and
                   information on withdrawal and transfer arrangements;
             • Confidentiality of member information should be made
                   explicit (including for cross-selling purposes within
                   financial groups);
             • A minimum cooling-off period (one week is
                   recommended) should be specified when selling
                   retirement products (as recommended in the 2013 CPFL
                   Review);
             • Requirements for pension fund management companies
                   to disclose their financial position;
             • All information provided to members (sales material,
                   contracts, annual statements etc.) should be written in
                   clear and easily understood language, using a readable
                   font.
             Introduce training for HR staff responsible for pension issues.   BNR               MT
             Publish information on the pensions sector at least annually
                                                                               BNR               MT
             and in an annual report format.
             Review international experience in KYC rules applicable to
             pensions and introduce regulations and/or provide guidance        BNR               MT
             if a retail market develops in future.
             Develop regulations on investment choice if providers start to
             offer products that allow members to choose between               BNR               LT
             accounts, products and services in future.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to define
                                                                               CMA               ST
             the meaning of ‘firm’.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to require
             disclosure of any restrictions on account transfers and the       CMA               ST
             procedures for closing an account.
Securities   Introduce the following provisions into the Capital Markets
             Law:
             • Provisions on the privacy and confidentiality of customer
                   information held by firms; and                              CMA               ST
             • Penalties for the disclosure of confidential, restricted
                   information in relation to investors by non-government
                   entities such as a broker or adviser.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to
             introduce licensing and qualification/training requirements for
                                                                               CMA               MT
             natural persons who act as salespeople or advisors for
             investment firms.
             Monitor the extent to which the principles-based regulatory
             approach to investor protection in the capital markets in
                                                                               CMA               MT
             Rwanda results in compliance, and revise approach if
             necessary.
             Introduce provisions in the Capital Markets Law and relevant
                                                                               CMA               MT
             regulations that define the permissible scope of the sharing

                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 23
                                           ANNEX



          of customer information (e.g. credit information, and income
          and purchase history), if the decision is made to share such
          information between commercial entities.
Cross-    As per 2013 CPFL Review, consider amending the CCP Law
                                                                         BNR, MINECOM      LT
cutting   to clarify that it does not apply to financial services
          Introduce a specific data protection law to ensure that
          personal data receive consistent and specific protection       BNR               LT
          across all financial services sectors.




                                                                           FINANCE & MARKETS | 24
                                              ANNEX




                          TRANSPARENCY AND CONSUMER DISCLOSURE
Pensions     See recommended provisions for inclusion in the Draft
             Pensions Regulation (see above section on Legal and BNR                          ST
             Regulatory Framework).
             Review the information that is provided by pension schemes
             and sponsors to scheme members and provide further
                                                                             BNR              MT
             guidance on disclosure requirements under the new
             Pensions Law if necessary.
             Study international examples of KFS for pension products,
             develop a form of statement suitable for use in Rwanda and
                                                                             BNR              MT
             require pension fund management entities and plan sponsors
             to provide such information to occupational fund members.
Securities   Introduce requirement for firms to disclose to investors any
                                                                             CMA              ST
             outsourcing or delegation arrangements.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to require
                                                                             CMA              ST
             disclosure by firms of the status of their licenses.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to require
             firms to disclose all service providers that can have an impact CMA              ST
             on a client’s account.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to require:
             • CISs to provide summary KFSs to new investors; and
                                                                             CMA              ST
             • Disclosure of policies and practices on frequent trading
                  and inducements from service providers.
             Introduce requirement for investment advisors to give
             prospective clients summary KFSs regarding their services
                                                                             CMA              ST
             and to disclose the nature of the advisor’s relationship with
             the client.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to include
                                                                             CMA              ST
             the minimal content requirements for a contract note.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to provide
             for statements to be made available on a periodic basis (e.g.
             quarterly or monthly) relating to the activity in the client’s CMA               ST
             account and relating the format and readability requirements
             to such statements.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to require
             disclosure of any restrictions on account transfers and the CMA                  ST
             procedures for closing an account.




                                                                              FINANCE & MARKETS | 25
                                              ANNEX




                                        BUSINESS PRACTICES
Pensions     Complete a thorough stocktake of complementary
                                                                           BNR                  ST
             occupational funds that are currently operating.
             Organize a workshop for stakeholders on the roles and
             responsibilities of different service providers (including    BNR                  ST
             custodians) under the new Pensions Law.
             Complete a survey of the long-term insurance products
             (e.g. retirement products) that are being sold on a retail    BNR                  ST
             basis.
             Improve information collected on the pensions sector,
             including the number and nature of funds, membership and      BNR                  MT
             asset data, and performance and fee information.
             Implement recommendations of the 2013 CPFL Review on
             the selling of insurance products to the selling of
             retirement/long-term savings products (e.g. concerning
             accurate information on investment returns, disclosure of     BNR                  MT
             commissions, customer suitability requirements and
             obtaining client acknowledgements as to the financial
             advice received).
             Introduce training for HR staff responsible for pension
                                                                           BNR                  MT
             issues.
             Review qualifications and information provided by pension
                                                                           BNR                  LT
             consultants employed by external managing entities.
Securities   Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to set
             out the actions that should be taken by a firm in the event
                                                                           CMA                  ST
             that a customer wishes to engage in a transaction against
             the advice of the firm.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to
             contain a requirement that fund be transferred promptly to
                                                                           CMA                  ST
             a client’s account, or to another brokerage account, upon a
             client’s request.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business
             regarding minimum record-keeping requirements (e.g. the       CMA                  ST
             types of records that must be retained).




                                                                                 FINANCE & MARKETS | 26
                                              ANNEX




                      COMPLAINTS-HANDLING AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Pensions     Implement requirement for insurers and brokers to inform
             consumers about the existence of the internal dispute
             resolution scheme, as well as processes for accessing it,
                                                                           BNR                 ST
             both in marketing materials about each product (including
             written materials and on the company’s website) and at the
             time a complaint is made.
             Implement detailed requirements regarding the timeframes
             within which a response should be provided to the BNR                             ST
             consumer after the initiation of a complaint.
             Implement requirements for the insurer or broker to report
             on their scheme and to monitor trends in complaints- BNR                          ST
             handling.
             Include a review of internal and external dispute
             mechanisms (including how these mechanisms are made
             known to members) in BNR’s supervisory oversight as it BNR                        MT
             develops (e.g. it should be noted in off-site, on-site
             supervisory manuals).
             Monitor complaints data received from pension scheme
             providers and service providers, and publish statistics as BNR                    MT
             appropriate.
             Enhance resources and capacity of the Office of the
                                                                           Office of the
             Ombudsman to cover the handling of pensions-related                               MT
                                                                           Ombudsman
             disputes.
Securities   Clarify overlap between the roles of the CMA’s Complaints
             Committee, the Independent Review Panel and the Office
                                                                           CMA/Office of the
             of the Ombudsman regarding capital markets disputes.                              ST
                                                                           Ombudsman
             The CMA and Office of the Ombudsman should enter into
             an MoU regarding their enforcement efforts.
             Set out strong enforcement measures in Regulation No.
             06/2012 of 02/07/2012 on Capital Market Enforcement
             Guidance (Regulation on Enforcement Guidance) that CMA                            ST
             apply where the decision of the CMA Complaints
             Committee is not implemented.
             Introduce requirements for firms to disclose to investors the
             existence of compensation schemes and how to make CMA                             ST
             claims under it.
             Amend the Regulation on the Conduct of Business to
             require firms to send their complaints log to the CMA on a CMA                    ST
             regular basis (e.g. monthly).
             Amend the Regulation on the Compensation Scheme to
             provide for the speedy resolution of clams within a
                                                                           CMA                 MT
             prescribed timeframe in order to provide for a prompt
             payout to investors.




                                                                               FINANCE & MARKETS | 27
                                                ANNEX




                                  FINANCIAL LITERACY/CAPACITY
Pensions     Launch a media strategy on the new Pensions Law, to be
             coordinated with the NFES, with the aim of explaining the
             advantages of occupational pension schemes and                   BNR/MINECOFIN        ST
             encouraging more employers to offer these benefits to their
             employees.
             Continue support of the NFES as part of Rwanda’s FISF
                                                                              BNR                  LT
             program.
             Conduct an education campaign regarding the importance
                                                                              BNR                  LT
             of an insurer’s financial strength.
Securities   Educate members of the media on issues relating to the
             capital markets and investor protection, and encourage           CMA/RSE              MT
             reporting on these issues.
             Provide more market information, in an unbiased manner,
             about the risks and benefits of investing in the capital         CMA/RSE              MT
             markets.
             Provide more information in a clear format on the main
             types of financial products and services to help investors       CMA/RSE              MT
             make investment decisions as the market grows.
             Include the securities sector in the next financial capability
                                                                              CMA                  LT
             survey, if the market has developed sufficiently.




                                                                                    FINANCE & MARKETS | 28
