ISSUE 02 APRIL 2017




Identifying new
growth pathways
Identifying new growth
pathways
The Development Digest is a half-yearly publication that features key
works from teams based at the World Bank Group Global Knowledge
and Research Hub in Malaysia.

           Dieter J. De Smet, Djauhari Sitorus, Fabian Mendez Ramos,
Faris H. Hadad-Zervos, Federica Saliola, Hulya Ulku, Isaku Endo, Jana
Kunicova, Jean Nicolas Arlet, Jose de Luna Martinez, Michael
Woolcock, Mohammad Amin, Nina Paustian, Norman Loayza, Rafael
Muñoz Moreno, Raian Divanbeigi, Sergio Campillo-Diaz, Ulrich
Zachau and Wei Zhang.

          Joshua Foong

Cover Photo attribution: © PramoteBigstock

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the
World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does
not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of the
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Please contact jfoong@worldbank.org if you have questions or
comments with respect to content.


Notes:
In this publication, “$” refers to U.S. dollars.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword ........ .............. ....... ....... ....... .............. ..... ....... ....... ......................        .. 1

The "new normal" for Malaysia                                                                                          ......... 3

The quest for productivity growth                                                                                      . . . . . 11

The PEMAN DU experience                                                                                  ........................ 19

INSIGHT Malaysian exporters ..... ....... ....... ....... ....... ...... ....... ........... 27


Financing for Lao SM Es                                                                                        ................ 35

Regulation in agriculture                                                                                              ......... 42

Patterns of world agribusiness trade .... ....... ...... ....... ....... ... 48


Innovative financial inclusion .......... ..................................... ......... 54


Improving remittance for migrants ...... ....... ....... ...... ....... ........... 60


Should we fear a forex drop?                                                                                   ................ 65

Informality, development & growth                                                        .     ..    .. ..        ..      . .. 71


Building state capability                                                                                      ................ 76
Selamat Datang! (Welcome!)

The World Bank Group Global Knowledge and
Research Hub in Malaysia welcomes you to the
second issue of the Development Digest, a
publication that features frontier research on
selected economic and social development topics
by experts over the previous six months.



1
               economic challenges of today are complex. The World
Bank Group Global Knowledge and Research Hub in Malaysia tries to
bring together great ideas to come up with solutions to address these
challenges. The Development Digest seeks to capture the work of the
Hub, combining frontier research from the Development Economics
(DEC) teams, Global Practices (GP) teams, and the Country
Management Unit based in Malaysia, in one easy-to-read magazine-type
publication.

        The focus of this Digest is to share Malaysia’s
        people-centered developmental expertise and
        to present new policy research on local,
        regional, and global issues.
We begin this issue with an update on the global economy and its
implications for Malaysia. Then, we move into topics like increasing
productivity, public service delivery, trade in Malaysia, and financing
for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Lao PDR. Other articles
include two pieces on agriculture, focusing on trade and regulation,
respectively; innovative financial inclusion, with a spotlight on FinTech
and Islamic Finance; migrant remittances; foreign exchange
depreciation; the informal sector; and effective public sector
implementation.

The collection of articles in the Digest represents the rich diversity of
work from the Hub, and is testimony to Malaysia’s development
experience and growing role as a center of development expertise – a
fitting role for a nation progressing toward high-income status.

I hope you will find moments of inspiration as you read this Digest.



                   is the World Bank Country Director for South East
Asia




                                                                        2
The span of the lingering slump in the global
economy is still unknown. Whether this is a passing
sluggishness in an otherwise healthy path, or a
correction to the rosy course of previous years,
remains to be seen. Whatever the case may be, it is
clear that the listless trade and investment flows
seen across the world masks something else – a
“new normal” in the global economy.




3
              several aspects to this new normal. Global commodity prices
are now widely seen as settling into a new equilibrium, where the peaks
of the past are long gone. China, in its new center stage as one of the key
drivers of global growth, is itself evolving into a mature and
consumption-driven economy with more moderate growth patterns.
Similarly, recent events in the US are likely to lead to Federal Reserve
normalization of interest rates.

All these and other factors – along with the subdued trade and
investment flows – led the World Bank to revise its global GDP growth
to 2.4 percent in 2016, and 2.7 percent in 20171. Another new pattern is
the composition of this growth.

        To the extent that the global economy has
        grown, this was propelled by emerging and
        developing economies, and not the advanced
        economies as was traditionally the case.
Among these emerging economies, growth was mostly driven by
commodity importers, and mitigated by commodity exporters. South
Asia and East Asia are the two main sources of this global growth. A
collection of different countries and economic narratives, these regions
share some common elements, including a growing reliance on domestic
demand to drive GDP, and broadly-sound policies. Within the East Asia
and Pacific (EAP) region, a closer look at the overall positive trend shows
variations across countries.

China’s growth, a key driver of regional and global prospects, is
moderating to a slower-but-more-sustainable pace as the economy
matures, relying less on massive investment and more towards
consumption, services, and higher-value-added activities. China will
likely grow by 6.5 percent in 2017 and ease steadily to 6.3 percent in 2018.2
Other large economies will also drive the regional trend; for example, the
Philippines, Vietnam, and Indonesia.

The economic fate of these countries will depend on continued adoption
of sound fiscal policies, investment, and further enhancements to their




                                                                            4
business climates. Other countries in the region will also undergo some
degree of growth based on a number of factors, including focused public
investment (Thailand), the ability to counteract the drop in commodity
prices (Malaysia and Indonesia), the ability to maintain competitiveness
in exports (Cambodia), and the continued flow of foreign direct
investment (FDI) and public investment (Myanmar).

Among the smaller economies in the region, the story is more varied.
Commodity-dependent countries like Mongolia and Papua New Guinea
are likely to be heavily impacted in 2016 and 2017, as mineral and gas
export prices and/or quantities weaken. Similarly, the small Pacific Island
countries that rely so much on regional fisheries and tourism are highly
vulnerable to natural disasters, climate change, and trade shocks.3

Hence, insofar as the growth patterns vary across countries, so do the
risks and their impact. A sharp global financial tightening, a further
slowdown in world GDP growth, or a greater-than-anticipated
slowdown in China will hit all, but in different ways depending on each
country’s exposure and ability to manage its fiscal and financial
vulnerabilities. This, in turn, depends on their own fiscal space and their
legacy of having so far preserved macro-financial stability, and reduced
financial and fiscal imbalance in recent years.

In summary, a country’s resilience is largely a result of its actions to
balance short-term countercyclical policies with debt sustainability and
focus on medium term growth.

        Countries that have preserved room for fiscal
        manoeuver by broadening their revenue
        sources and spending efficiently can handle
        the downside risks better.
This is particularly important for commodity producers, where low
commodity prices have already had a significant impact on public
revenue.

Another source of both historic opportunity and risk is trade, which has
slowed down considerably in recent years. A cornerstone of global
growth, trade in merchandise alone stood at $16.4 trillion in 2015, three
times larger in volume than in 1990. FDI, increasingly intertwined with
trade, has grown almost seven-fold in the same period.




5
        Developing countries that have ventured into
        greater trade and investment flows saw longer
        periods of sustained growth and poverty
        reduction.
While the recent declines have had more impact on these open
economies, their deep and structural economic gains over the years have
not been reversed. Also, those who have diversified their export base are
likely to mitigate the risks.

Malaysia has fared well in this regard, due to its early path as an open
economy, and the recognition of what needs to be done during economic
cycles. The central bank’s monetary policy has continually been
accommodative. At the same time, macroprudential policies have been
put in place to ensure that risks of financial imbalances remain contained.

Weak external demand was largely offset by robust domestic demand,
bolstered by ongoing income-supporting measures, a stable labor market
and wage growth. The fiscal policy has also been pro-active in
responding to external shocks, particularly the recent decline in global
commodity prices. In addition, the government continues to show its
commitment to fiscal consolidation, and has undertaken necessary
reform measures.




                                                                          6
The efforts of policymakers to stabilize their economies in the current
environment are necessary, but alone, they are not sufficient.
Stabilization should not come at the expense of keeping our eye on the
prize – not just growth, but growth with equality of opportunity.

While shared prosperity cannot come without economic growth, it is
possible for growth to not be accompanied by shared prosperity. Indeed,
many countries have had economic growth, but a large share of the
population remains vulnerable to poverty, and significant rural-urban
income gaps persist. This risk is greater in this “new normal”.

Globally, around 100 million people have been lifted out of poverty
between 2012 and 2013 alone – over a quarter of a million people every
day. Similarly, global inequality has been declining over the past 25
years. Yet, almost 800 million people still live in extreme poverty (living
on less than $1.90 a day). Of these, 80 percent live in rural areas and half
are children. In twenty-three countries, the poorest 40 percent are getting
poorer. In thirty-four countries, the gap has widened between the richest
60 percent and the poorest 40 percent.

While about half live in Sub-Saharan Africa and one-third live in South
Asia, significant challenges remain in the EAP region. In 2015, the share
of the region’s population living in poverty fell to 2.6 percent, but in
several of these countries the poor remain vulnerable, impacted by
shocks ranging from food prices to extreme weather. Poverty continues
to afflict one person in five in Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands,
and Timor-Leste. In several other countries, disadvantaged groups such
as ethnic minorities are lagging behind by an often-increasing margin.
So, while they have not shared fully in their countries’ economic gains,
they share disproportionately in their losses.

        Staying on the long path to inclusive and
        sustained growth across the EAP region
        requires equal attention to managing the
        current    economic      downturn,   while
        addressing vulnerability and equity.




7
Three areas emerge:

        human welfare needs to be at the center of policies on economic
prosperity, and not a byproduct of it. High levels of undernutrition
persist across developing countries in the region. Infant and child
undernutrition in particular generate health and cognitive deficits that
are hard to reverse, leading to lifelong disadvantage. Reducing these
imbalances through early childhood development programs would
increase welfare, inclusion, and economic growth in developing
countries.

           technological developments can be unlocked not only for
productivity-led growth but also for financial inclusion and better
services for the poor. New digital technologies accessed via mobile
platforms, big data, and cloud computing can not only introduce new
products and business models, but also provide better ways to extend
financial and other services to the poor, rural areas and marginalized
groups.

These technologies can facilitate identification, increase people’s voices
in decision-making, facilitate remittances and enhance access to financial
products, among others. While several countries still lack the proper legal
and regulatory framework to exploit these technologies, the region’s
relatively-advanced technological infrastructure and high mobile
penetration can make this a quick win.




         evolving the social protection systems can significantly reduce
vulnerability to shocks and minimize their impact on the poor. In the face
of major shocks, the poor and vulnerable groups are the first to cut
health-care spending or educational investment, and sell productive
assets, amplifying their human-development and income-earning
shortfalls. Natural disasters are a particular concern to the vulnerable.
Well-targeted and adaptive safety nets continue to be lacking in many
countries in the region.


                                                                          8
Malaysia’s economic growth storyline fits squarely within the narrative
of EAP. The World Bank estimates that the country’s GDP will have
grown by 4.2 percent in 2016, moderating from 5 percent the year before,
as a result of the weak external demand for commodities. Driven by
private consumption and both public and private investment, Malaysia’s
well-diversified economy has been able to withstand to a large extent the
challenging external environment.

While solid macroeconomic management has allowed Malaysia to
weather the challenges posed by the global downturn, the country’s
economic storyline goes farther than this period. From commodity
dependence and a poverty rate of almost 50 percent less than fifty years
ago, Malaysia has transformed itself into a diversified economy, nearly
eradicating extreme poverty and narrowing the gap in income equality.

Throughout this period, household incomes of the Bottom 40 percent
(B40) grew faster than those of the overall population. According to
World Bank calculations using data from the Department of Statistics
Malaysia, after adjusting for inflation, incomes of the B40 grew at an
average annual rate of 15.5 percent, compared to 9.9 percent for the total
population between 2009 and 2014.

This positive economic storyline involved much more than simply the
management of economic cycles. It has been deep structural reforms that
propelled Malaysia from low-income to upper-middle-income status.




9
FARIS HADAD-ZERVOS is the World Bank Country Manager for Malaysia
In pursuit of its high-income goal, Malaysia needs
to increase its productivity growth and continue
investing in physical and human capital, by
facilitating the growth of infrastructure, closing the
skills gaps, encouraging both technical and non-
technical innovation, and improving the allocative
efficiency of productivity factors across the
economy.




11
                             has been a key driver of Malaysia’s robust
economic growth over the past 25 years. The country’s labor and real
capital stocks both grew at an annual rate of two percent, which has
contributed significantly to the country’s economic growth. However,
productivity growth over the past 25 years has been below several global
and regional countries.

Malaysia’s total factor productivity (TFP), which measures the efficiency
with which factors of production are used to produce goods and services,
has managed a growth of around 1.8 percent annually. While significant,
TFP growth has been below those in several global and regional
comparators (e.g. an average of 2.2 percent in Korea and Singapore).
Furthermore, this has declined since the 2008 global financial crisis.

        As factor accumulation is expected to slow,
        accelerating productivity growth is the main
        path for Malaysia to achieve convergence with
        high-income economies.
With capital and labor growth expected to slow down, rising
productivity growth, greater female labor-force participation, and
continued investment in physical and human capital will be necessary
for Malaysia to achieve high-income status. Data from the World Bank
Enterprise Surveys (ES) for ASEAN countries have shed light on how
Malaysia stacks up across four major interrelated drivers of productivity;
namely, infrastructure, education, innovation and efficiency.




Malaysia has performed well in terms of the quality of its infrastructure.
Malaysia’s public utilities and logistics services are especially strong by
the standards of comparable countries. This reflects sustained public
investment based on multi-year targets set forth in national economic
plans, efforts to boost private investment in infrastructure through
public–private partnerships, and infrastructure development initiatives
by Non-Financial Public Corporations (NFPCs).

Over the last decade, other middle-income countries have also made
significant efforts to increase their infrastructure stock and improve its
quality. However, while the infrastructure gap between countries is


                                                                         12
narrowing, the same is not true for logistics performance. Malaysia
continues to rank above many of its peer countries on the World Bank’s
Logistics Performance Index (Figure 1), which includes the quality of
trade and transport infrastructure and related services.



     Figure 1: Compared with other middle-income countries, Malaysia
       performs especially well on indicators of logistics performance




Source: World Bank Logistics Performance Index.



Infrastructure strategies that focus on supporting trade are key for
boosting productivity. Infrastructure development can be reinforced by
coordinating the appraisal and planning process for public investment,
bolstering inter-agency collaboration. Maintaining the competitive edge
over other middle-income countries requires trade facilitation
(particularly customs clearance).




An effective education system that provides primary and secondary
education to everyone and promotes higher education in universities and
continuous training in industries is key. About 81 percent of Malaysian
workers have completed secondary school, a higher rate than in some
high-income and OECD economies.


13
However, some firms have reported challenges in acquiring specific
labor skills. According to the 2011 round of the National Economic
Return Survey, more than 15 percent of the surveyed employers report
experiencing deficits of technical skills for technicians. There is also
evidence that firms that innovate, export and invest in R&D are generally
more likely to report skill deficits among their labor force.



Figure 2: Malaysian firms have greater difficulty identifying workers
   with adequate skills in comparison with ASEAN comparators
            Share of firms reporting difficulty finding skilled workers (%)




Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys.



These skills gaps could be remedied though strengthened training
programs. Closer coordination with the private sector (i.e. inputs in the
design of curricula, provision of apprenticeship opportunities) could
improve the effectiveness of existing training, and alleviate skill
mismatches in the labor market.

More intensive usage of labor market information to inform skill
development policies and programs, and a stronger focus on spending
effectiveness and efficiency, could lead to improvements in the skills of
the Malaysian workforce.


                                                                              14
Innovation includes creating and adopting new technologies, products,
and processes which can lead to higher value-added economic activities.
Innovation requires investment in research and development (R&D) and
competent scientists and engineers to create state-of-art technologies, but
also requires strengthening human capacity to be able to learn about
existing technologies, products, and processes, and apply and/or develop
them into new products and processes for business needs.

ES data indicate that more innovative firms tend to be more productive.
While 44 percent of Malaysian firms invest in organizational and
commercial innovation (compared to 32 percent in ASEAN countries),
only 17 percent of Malaysian firms invest in developing new technologies
(compared to 27 percent in ASEAN countries).



  Figure 3: Malaysian firms that innovate tend to be more productive
                               Median sales per worker ($)




Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys.



Building innovation capacity requires strengthening the R&D ecosystem
and facilitating technology absorption. Upgrading technological
capability through technical innovation likely requires improved access
to skills/talents and more liberal investment policies, allowing firms to
deploy cutting-edge production technology with fewer restrictions. It is
also important to ensure that smaller firms have access to such new
technology.




15
Efficiency means how effectively and timely capital and labor are
allocated across firms. Capital and labor need to be reallocated to higher-
value-added economic activities within and across sectors for
productivity growth. For this renewal, flexibility of resource allocation
and use is important.

However, the rigidity of market, labor, and trade regulations has been an
obstacle in many developing countries, and impeded enterprises from
starting and expanding a business and adopting new technologies.
Improving allocative efficiency could increase Malaysia’s TFP.

        Reducing distortions to the level of the most
        efficient economy would boost productivity
        by 23 percent.
Many of Malaysia’s most productive firms could be operating at an even
higher level in an environment of greater allocative efficiency. The
movement of resources from less-productive to more-productive
manufacturing firms would drive the acceleration in GDP growth.

Panel data from 2005, 2010 and 2014 reveal that allocative efficiency
across firms has remained broadly stable over the period, at a level that
is around 22 percent below the U.S. level of efficiency in 1997 (which is
considered as a benchmark of high efficiency) (Table 1).



       Table 1: Summary of potential efficiency gains (percent)

                            Complete elimination   US level of efficiency in
                               of distortions               1997
          2005                     74.95                    22.43
          2010                     75.95                    23.13
          2014                     75.65                    22.92

Source: World Bank staff calculations



If aggregate TFP of Malaysia’s manufacturing sector increased to the
levels of the U.S. economy, the GDP growth rate could exceed the rate
forecast in the 11th Malaysia Plan by 0.1-0.4 percentage points.


                                                                           16
While misallocation in factor markets (capital and labor) does not seem
to be the main reasons holding productivity growth, misallocation in
output markets, where firms sell their final products and services, does.
Some of the main reasons that can explain the distortion in output
markets are competition, the role of Government-Linked Companies
(GLCs), asymmetric tax or subsidy structures, and regulations. Overall,
this finding underscores the importance of accelerating domestic reforms
to boost productivity.

        Addressing distortions in output markets
        where firms sell their goods and services may
        be achieved by reviewing policies that hamper
        competition.
To overcome inefficiencies in output markets, Malaysia can explore
measures to strengthen its competition policy and adopt competitive
neutrality in its regulatory stance, particularly with respect to GLC
operations. From the regulatory perspective, amending existing policies
to open markets for increased foreign private sector participation, mainly
in the services sector, would also help boost productivity, by increasing
the level of competitiveness in the sector.

Regulatory burdens seem to be fine overall, but are perceived by the
private sector as the main business environment obstacles to firm-level
efficiency. While complying with regulations requires only three percent
of managers’ time in Malaysia compared to 11 percent in high income
economies and OECD countries, regulation-related challenges are
among the most important business constraints cited by Malaysian firms.
These include the prevalence of informality and corruption, as well as the
burdens imposed by licensing, tax and labor regulations, among others.




Closing the gap with high-income countries will require accelerated
productivity growth, combined with strong performance of traditional
growth drivers. The scenario analysis indicates that maintaining
productivity, investment and labor force growth at their current rates
would bring Malaysia’s GDP per capita to about 29 percent of the average
GDP per capita of high-income economies in 2050.



17
               is the World Bank’s Senior Country Economist
for Malaysia
                             with PEMANDU is best understood in the
context of the country’s broader development journey and public sector
performance culture. Malaysia’s public sector development, which pre-
dates PEMANDU, has created an enabling environment that set the stage
for PEMANDU. Since the country’s independence in 1957, Malaysia’s
public sector focused on solving development challenges facing the
newly independent country, including providing services to eradicate
poverty and building up infrastructure to enable the diversified growth
of its economy.

In 2010, PEMANDU introduced and implemented the National
Transformation Program (NTP), a set of high-level strategic priorities of
the government broken down into concrete interventions. The NTP was
implemented by ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs), while
PEMANDU helped track, monitor, and de-bottleneck the process. The
focus has been on achieving results from the very beginning. This
performance orientation created elements of a performance culture. As
the public sector developed, it also gave rise to an institutional ecosystem
for performance management. These elements provided the foundations
on which PEMANDU could build.




PEMANDU’s signature methodology, “Eight Steps of Transformation,”
ensured its focus on key tasks at every point in time. High-level priorities
were cascaded into concrete interventions contained in the NTP, and
created stakeholder ownership. PEMANDU’s goals were granular to
create maximum focus and accountability for results. These goals were
defined by the NTP: seven national key results areas (NKRAs), twelve
national key economic area (NKEAs), and six strategic reform initiatives
(SRIs). These were further detailed into projects with specific key
performance indicators (KPIs) and timelines that PEMANDU follows up
on. Responsibility for the implementation of the NTP projects lied with
the MDAs, not PEMANDU. PEMANDU drives the NTP – through its
design, adjustments, monitoring, de-bottlenecking, and communicating.

        “Labs” were one of PEMANDU’s signature
        innovations that created ownership of the
        NTP among a wide variety of stakeholders.


                                                                         20
The lab is a consultative process – with deep focus on a policy area lasting
six to nine weeks, where participants work together to design solutions
to identified policy challenges. The participants include representatives
from the MDAs, both leadership and rank-and-file, as well as
representatives from the business community and civil society. These
labs took strategic priorities of the new government in 2009 and
unpacked them into projects and action items under each NKRA, NKEA,
and SRI. Through the labs, PEMANDU ensured that the NTP was
demand-driven and widely owned by MDAs.




Open Days are crucial to ensure that policy initiatives coming from the lab are communicated to
stakeholders and members of the public


          PEMANDU created incentives at all levels
          through rigorous monitoring and reporting of
          KPIs.
KPI target-setting for the NTP cascaded down from the Minister to the
MDA staff. While the initial KPIs were set during the original labs,
annual targets were revised jointly between PEMANDU and MDAs. The
set of KPIs was then presented in a Minister’s Scorecard. PEMANDU
used a dashboard for KPI tracking that is updated weekly. Weekly
monitoring often revealed implementation problems. PEMANDU would
assist at the first instance of such issues, followed by technical
committees. If unresolved, it was escalated to monthly steering
committee meetings. If the problem persisted, a semi-annual problem-
solving meeting, chaired by the Prime Minister, would then look into the
matter.

PEMANDU’s institutional setup allowed it to attract talent from the
private sector, introducing corporate best practices into public sector
management. As a “special-purpose vehicle” in the Prime Minister’s
Department, PEMANDU commanded flexibility in recruitment.

21
PEMANDU’s pay structure was outside the civil service pay scale and
attracted talent from both the private and public sector. This naturally
allowed for a mix of ideas and best practices to be shared and
implemented.

The implementation of the NTP was enabled by institutional structures,
such as Delivery Management Offices (DMOs) within ministries. These
structures included MDA officials who work alongside PEMANDU staff
to set, track, and adjust the KPIs. The DMOs also assisted PEMANDU to
escalate, coordinate and facilitate the processes associated with the KPI
reporting.

        PEMANDU placed a strong emphasis on its
        communication function, reinforcing the
        ownership of the NTP and government’s
        accountability to the public.
PEMANDU’s communications plan was
designed to keep stakeholders informed
every step of the way: to put the strategic
direction into the global perspective;
highlight the subject matter, findings and
progress of the labs; public engagement and
communication of feedback; illustrate the
accountability, commitment, and built-in
flexibility of the KPI targets; highlight
milestones and challenges during the
implementation; emphasize that the external
validation of results is achieved through the
audit; and summarize what the NTP
delivered in the Annual Report. Although
the NTP Annual Report was one of the key
outputs of PEMANDU’s communication
team,      there    were      also    weekly
communications plans, developed a year
ahead, utilizing a wide range of platforms:
infomercials, social media, radio, editorials,
as well as direct engagement through             A sample infographic showing NTP
roundtables and workshops.                       results in 2014. Content courtesy of
                                                 The Star Malaysia




                                                                             22
The same features that make PEMANDU effective can turn into
challenges when the mix is not right, or the conditions change. This
points to a set of tradeoffs that DUs must balance.

The existence of a robust institutional ecosystem focused on public sector
performance is a strength until the ecosystem becomes too complex.
Aside from PEMANDU’s mandate, which involves reporting on the NTP
KPIs, ministries had a number of other performance tracking obligations.
This resulted in a heavy reporting burden for MDAs. In addition,
different sets of KPIs made performance incentives complex and
sometimes conflicting.

A private sector corporate culture and top talent infused innovation into
the public sector management, but also created a perception that
PEMANDU staff were outsiders with limited public sector exposure. The
salary differential between PEMANDU staff and civil servants
potentially created an additional strain. PEMANDU staff strove to
counter this by focusing on areas where they can add value for MDAs,
such as monitoring, just-in-time problem-solving across MDAs, and
resolving bottlenecks through the escalation process. Overall, the
perception of PEMANDU varies among ministries. In some MDAs, the
relations are cordial and PEMANDU is perceived as an asset; in others, a
more skeptical attitude prevails.

        Rigorous KPI monitoring and reporting can
        drive performance; on the other hand, it is
        limited by the quality of the indicators and the
        data.
PEMANDU’s efforts were not immune to the well-known critiques of
KPI-driven efforts to improve public sector performance. If an indicator
does not measure a desired outcome, then the respective MDA would
have “met the target but missed the point” of a broader reform. Some
parts of the NTP, particularly the NKEAs, yielded themselves to
measurement; yet others, notably the NKRAs such as reducing crime or
controlling corruption, were notoriously hard to measure. There is also a
more general discussion about whether the targets are meaningful, given
that MDAs achieve and overachieve the majority of them. Critics have
called into question the credibility of the underlying data used to


23
measure the KPIs, but PEMANDU’s utility of a third-party audit
assuaged these concerns to some degree.

Designing the transformation program through labs may have missed
some important elements of project design that would allow attributing
results to the NTP and not to other efforts. Because the NTP represents
only a small portion of government efforts under the five-year plan,
questions of attribution of the outcomes were raised. For example, if
literacy improvements in Malaysia was due to the NTP interventions
(i.e., the literacy and numeracy screening), or to one of the many other
non-NTP initiatives (e.g., the revamped curricula, district transformation
program, or others), or a combination of both. Although PEMANDU labs
created stakeholder ownership, they did not build in features into the
project design that would allow impact evaluations of the NTP programs.

        The question often raised is whether the
        overall impact was a result of a narrow
        strategic intervention in the NTP, or of a
        multitude of other programs happening in
        parallel. At the same time, not all impact of a
        transformational set of initiatives such as the
        NTP is measurable.
Impact evaluations of NTP projects that attributed some portion of
national outcomes to the NTP could have extended the credibility of
PEMANDU’s sophisticated communications effort. PEMANDU’s critics
are often skeptical about PEMANDU crediting the NTP for Malaysia’s
aggregate achievements. They emphasize that the NTP represents only a
narrow set of priorities, while many initiatives under the Malaysia five-
year plan worked toward the same goals. Impact evaluations can serve
as the empirical evidence to allay the concerns of critics. This implies that
careful prioritization and thorough communication work of a DU should,
where possible, go hand-in-hand with meticulous evidence to
demonstrate that related interventions are responsible for downstream
outcomes.

At the same time, the NTP interventions are meant to be catalytic and not
all encompassing. Shifting the emphasis to impact evaluations for the
sake of clear attribution may be missing the point of a transformation
exercise. The impact of a transformational program such as the NTP is by
design expected to be more than the sum of the impact of its projects.
Impact evaluations will only be able to show part of the picture.

                                                                           24
However, they can help build the overall support for the DU efforts,
maintain the MDA buy-in, and also establish the cost efficiency of the
priority interventions.




Replicating the whole structure of PEMANDU in its entirety may not be
feasible, but using some of its innovative approaches and tools can serve
as solutions for many countries. Among the existing delivery units
around the globe, PEMANDU is an outlier in size. Few developing
countries will be able to afford such a large DU.

         In addition, many contextual factors, such as a
         relatively developed institutional ecosystem
         and performance culture, contributed to
         PEMANDU’s ability to drive performance.
         Finding the right balance is key.
The features that played to PEMANDU’s strengths and challenges point
to the following lessons and tradeoffs for countries considering
establishing a DU:


     »   Secure strong backing and involvement of top leadership:
         PEMANDU’s success critically depended on the Prime Minister’s
         direct involvement in its routines. Problem Solving Meetings and
         performance reviews with the Prime Minister proved effective
         for implementation and clearing up bottlenecks between MDAs.
         The tradeoff is the potential politicization of the technical
         implementation process.

     »   Create a focused and granular results platform linked to an
         overarching national results framework: Just like PEMANDU
         did with the NTP, successful DUs generally focus on a limited
         number of well-defined and operationalized strategic priorities.
         While this may raise questions about the attribution of national
         outcomes to the narrow interventions facilitated by the DU,
         achieving the transformation outcomes is often more important
         than attributing them. However, building in ways into project
         design to ascertain such contributions ex ante can build the
         credibility of the DU efforts.




25
    »   Combine top-down control with bottom-up voice: PEMANDU
        is embedded within a top-down, command-and-control system.
        Yet through the labs, the desing of the NTP included the voice
        from the rank-and-file MDA staff who became the eventual
        implementers. This process has also built in some responsiveness
        to the line MDAs’ objectives, issues, and challenges.

    »   Create institutional interface between the DU and MDAs:
        PEMANDU’s role as a driver of MDAs’ performance is greatly
        facilitated if there is an institutional interface with MDAs, such as
        DMOs within MDAs or specialized Monitoring and Evaluation
        (M&E) divisions. Because MDAs are the implementers of
        government’s top priorities, the real action takes place on their
        turf, not at the Prime Minister’s office.

    »   Optimize the amount of reporting by MDAs: Whenever
        possible, build KPIs around the existing indicators that MDAs
        already report on. Work across the performance ecosystem to
        create synergies with prevailing reporting structures, such as
        existing performance-based budgeting or national development
        plan reporting. For instance, the Ministry of International Trade
        and Industry (MITI) has a single M&E division responsible for all
        reporting.

    »   Strengthen impact evaluations to ensure credible attribution of
        results and cost effectiveness of interventions: Build in impact
        evaluations into the program design. Impact evaluations can help
        resolve problems of attribution through comparing treatment
        and control groups, as well as cost effectiveness of various
        initiatives. This has implications for program design, as such
        evaluations must be built into the design from the get-go.




This article is adapted from the Executive Summary of the report, “Driving
Performance from the Center: Malaysia’s Experience with PEMANDU” which
will be launched at the World Bank Spring Meetings in April 2017.

                   is Senior Public Sector Specialist at the World Bank




                                                                           26
Malaysia has been one of the biggest beneficiaries of
global economic integration during the past
decades, ranking 14th in 2015 in merchandise trade
share of GDP among 165 economies. But how do
Malaysia’s exporting firms perform in areas key to
the long-term competitiveness of the country, such
as productivity or innovation? What obstacles do
they face? This note aims to provide some insights
into these questions using recent Enterprise Surveys
of the World Bank.


27
                      can be gathered on Malaysian exporters based on
an analysis of the World Bank Enterprise Surveys (ES). For instance, are
they more productive and innovative than non-exporting firms? Is
foreign ownership positively associated with the exports of large and
small firms equally? Are some aspects of business regulations more
troublesome to exporters? Comparisons are drawn between Malaysian
firms and those from ASEAN (excluding Malaysia, Singapore, Myanmar
and Brunei), high-income Eastern Europe, Turkey and Sweden. The
comparator economies are selected based on their comparability to
Malaysia and the availability of recent ES data. Sweden is included in the
analysis as a benchmark for a frontier economy.




About 30 percent of the total annual sales of all formal private
manufacturing firms are exported, higher than Turkey (14 percent) and
Sweden (25 percent), but lower than ASEAN (35 percent) and high-
income Eastern Europe (37 percent). Malaysia's performance here is
average not because it has fewer exporters; in fact, Malaysia has the
highest share of exporting firms compared to other economies in the
study. The average performance is because the exporting activity in
Malaysia is less inclined towards large firms compared with ASEAN and
high income Eastern Europe (Figure 4). The importance of large firms in
exporting activity around the globe is well documented in the literature.



 Figure 4: Exporting activity in Malaysia is less biased towards large
               firms than in some of the comparators




Source: Enterprise Surveys 2013-2015, World Bank Group.
Notes: ASEAN excludes Malaysia, Singapore, Myanmar and Brunei.




                                                                       28
An overwhelmingly large proportion of exporting activity in Malaysia is
done by high-tech firms, which include both traditional exports of
electrical equipment and chemical products. High-tech firms in Malaysia
are more than twice as likely to export than low-tech firms (64 percent of
high-tech vs. 31 percent of low-tech firms’ export), a ratio that is larger
than in other comparators.

Foreign-owned enterprises (i.e. firms with foreign ownership) tend to
improve the productivity of local exporters through demonstration effect
and knowledge spill-overs. These enterprises would also have better
information on foreign markets, thanks to their global distribution
networks and ties with firms abroad. In Malaysia, foreign-owned
enterprises are much more likely to export than firms that are
domestically owned (81 percent vs. 42 percent, respectively).

However, the contribution of foreign-owned firms to exports vis-a-vis
domestically-owned firms is much smaller in Malaysia than in other
economies (Figure 5). There are several potential reasons why this is so.
Foreign investment may simply displace domestic savings, or it may be
concentrated in sectors where the country does not necessarily enjoy a
comparative advantage. It may also be the case that technology transfer
via foreign investment is restricted to low-end technology.



Figure 5: Difference between the exports of foreign-owned and
domestically-owned firms is much smaller in Malaysia than elsewhere




Source: Enterprise Surveys 2013-2015, World Bank Group.
Notes: ASEAN excludes Malaysia, Singapore, Myanmar and Brunei.


29
Literature provides strong evidence for a positive association between
exporting and productivity. Some studies show that productive firms
self-select themselves into exporting, while others demonstrate that
exporting causes firms to become more productive due to greater
competitive pressure and learning-by-exporting.

In Malaysia, large and high-tech exporters are on average two and 1.5
times as productive as their non-exporter counterparts. In contrast, SME
and low-tech exporters are only about two-thirds and half as productive
as SME and low-tech non-exporters, respectively. There are also sharp
differences within the group of exporters in Malaysia. Large and high-
tech firms are about 1.6 and 8.7 times more productive than SMEs and
low-tech firms, respectively – a gap that is more pronounced than in
other countries (Figure 6).



Figure 6: Large and high-tech exporters have the highest productivity
                       among Malaysia’s firms




Source: Enterprise Surveys 2013-2015, World Bank Group.
Notes: ASEAN excludes Malaysia, Singapore, Myanmar and Brunei. Median productivity of
Sweden’s exporting firms are as follows: SMEs: 281, Large firms: 406, High-tech: 262, Low-tech:
503.




                                                                                            30
Available evidence suggests that Malaysia does well in R&D activity,
ranking 33rd out of 129 and 43rd out of 116 countries in terms of average
R&D share of GDP and number of researchers during 2004-2014,
respectively – placing second in ASEAN after Singapore.

Consistent with the literature showing a positive link between exporting,
R&D and innovation activities, the ES data reveal that exporting firms in
Malaysia and elsewhere are at least twice as likely to invest in R&D as
non-exporting firms. Among exporters, large and high-tech firms
outperform SMEs and low-tech firms in all countries. Interestingly,
Malaysia’s large and high-tech exporters have the second-highest share
of firms investing in R&D after Sweden (Figure 7), while large and high-
tech non-exporters have the third-highest share.



  Figure 7: Malaysia’s large and high-tech exporting firms have the
 second highest percentage of firms investing in R&D after Sweden




Source: Enterprise Surveys 2013-2015, World Bank Group.
Notes: ASEAN excludes Malaysia, Singapore, Myanmar and Brunei.




31
ES also provide information on whether a firm is involved in product,
process or organizational innovation during the last three years. All three
types of innovation tend to be more likely among exporters than non-
exporters in Malaysia and comparator economies. Much like the results
on R&D presented above, large and high-tech exporting firms of
Malaysia have the second highest share of innovators after Sweden. One
exception concerns product innovation, where exporters and non-
exporters in Malaysia lag behind other countries.




For exporting firms, the top most commonly chosen business obstacle is
high tax rates (chosen by 19.2 percent of the firms), closely followed by
inadequate power supply (18.7 percent) and obtaining business licenses
and permits (11 percent). High tax rates and inadequate power supply
are not as troubling to non-exporters; 10.9 percent of them see the former
obstacle as their biggest concern and 1.9 percent select the latter.

Firm size and industry seem to play a critical role in exporting decision
and behavior. Hence, it is not surprising that the problems faced by
exporters vary sharply depending on their firm-size and industry (Figure
8). Notably, high tax rates – the most commonly chosen top obstacle by
large exporters and high-tech exporters – does not figure among the top
3 obstacles for SME and low-tech exporters.


 Figure 8: The top obstacles for Malaysian exporters vary depending
                     on size and technology class




Source: Enterprise Surveys Malaysia 2015, World Bank Group.



                                                                         32
Examining further firms’ perceptions of the top obstacle, inadequate
power as an obstacle stands out in sharp contrast between exporters and
non-exporters. For instance, large exporters are about three times as
likely to rank inadequate power supply as the main constraint than large
non-exporters (24 percent vs. 8 percent). This is surprising given that
power outages typically affect all firms in a given area.

A possible explanation is that relative to non-exporters, exporting firms
are disproportionately located in areas with worse reliability. Moreover,
Malaysian exporting firms may be engaged in sectors where electricity is
more critical, arguably industries such as chemicals and chemical
products. The ES data confirm these explanations; once differences in
firms’ location and industry are taken into account, the proportion of
exporting vs. non-exporting firms perceiving electricity as the top
obstacle is similar.




Findings from recent Enterprise Surveys provide interesting insights into
the manufacturing exporters in Malaysia. Surprisingly, a lower share of
Malaysian firms exports their sales than in other countries. This appears
to be mainly driven by the fact that Malaysia’s exporting firms are less
likely to be large businesses, adversely affecting export volumes.



33
Large and high-tech exporters of Malaysia are more productive and more
likely to invest in R&D and introduce innovation than other firms in
Malaysia and in comparator economies, except Sweden. Regarding the
obstacles faced by exporters, inadequate power supply is a much greater
concern to exporting firms in Malaysia compared to non-exporters.

Several questions remain to be explored. For instance, why are
Malaysia’s exporting SMEs and low-tech firms underperforming in
terms of productivity and innovation; why is the contribution to total
exports of foreign-owned firms’ low in Malaysia; and why do electricity
and business licensing stand out as major preoccupations for the
country’s exporters?



This article is based on a more detailed Enterprise Note to be published by
Enterprise Analysis, World Bank Group.

                  is Senior Economist in Enterprise Analysis Unit,
Development Economics, World Bank Group

            is Operations Analyst in Doing Business, Development
Economics, World Bank Group

              is Senior Economist in Doing Business, Development
Economics, World Bank Group




                                                                         34
Developing environments in which SMEs can grow
and excel is pivotal in achieving shared prosperity.
Governments need to strike the right balance
between effective and restrictive regulation of
business activities. A live World Bank project in Lao
PDR looks into bridging access to finance for SMEs.
In February 2016, a delegation led by Lao PDR
Deputy Minister of Planning and Investment Dr.
Khamlien Pholsena visited Malaysia to learn about
the country’s best practices in grooming SMEs.

35
               thriving in Lao PDR. The number of SMEs in the country
has been sharply growing in recent years. According to the Lao PDR
Steering Committee on Economic Census in 2006, there were 126,913
enterprises in the country – 90 percent were SMEs. Furthermore, SMEs
have played an important role in socio-economic development in Lao
PDR, and they provided 63 percent of all jobs in 2013.

However, a large number of these SMEs face difficulties to access
financing and while the ASEAN region is fast integrating as an economic
bloc, SMEs in the country are largely unready for regional and
international integration, as adapting to high competition remains a big
challenge. The Lao government is cognizant of this.

        In recognition of the important roles of SMEs
        the government of Lao PDR is developing a
        policy to promote SMEs and provide aspiring
        entrepreneurs access to finance and other
        facilities.
The World Bank is also working in partnership with the government
towards this end. In 2014, the World Bank’s Board of Executive Directors
approved a $10 million grant and a $10 million credit from the
International Development Association (IDA) to support the growth and
expansion of SMEs in Lao PDR by providing access to long-term credit.

The project will provide long-term funding sources for banks so they, in
turn, can provide long-term credit to SMEs. This will enable SMEs to
purchase new equipment, expand their business premises, upgrade their
technology, and scale up their business operations. The project is
implemented by the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC)
through the Department of Planning and Cooperation (DPC).




                                                                      36
 Project ID                      P131201
 Country                         Lao People's Democratic Republic
 Status                          Active
 Approval Date                   June 9, 2014
 Closing Date                    June 30, 2019
 Total Project Cost              $20 million
 Commitment Amount               $20 million
 Borrower                        Government of Lao PDR
 Implementing Agency             Ministry of Industry and Commerce

The objectives of the project will be achieved by increasing the supply of
long-term finance provided by commercial banks and by strengthening
the capability of the Department for Small and Medium Enterprise
Promotion to formulate and implement public policies that promote
access to finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). This project
comprises two components.

        a line-of-credit facility, which aims to alleviate the lack of long-
term sources of funding that prevents commercial banks from providing
long-term credit (more than two years) to SMEs.

           technical assistance (TA), which will help strengthen the
capacity of the Department for Small and Medium Enterprise Promotion
and other agencies in areas such as formulation and implementation of a
SME development strategy, SME census, design of new SME lending and
non-lending products, impact assessment, SME business advisory
services, as well as project implementation and monitoring and
evaluation, including outsourcing of procurement, financial
management functions to the National Implementation Unit of the
Ministry of Industry and Commerce. The Project will also provide TA to
PFIs and other commercial banks in improving their SME lending
business, such as the design of SME banking strategies and new SME
banking products, and compliance with the Bank’s environmental and
safeguards standards etc. Further, TA will be available to SMEs to
improve their business skills, operations and productivity.

For more information, visit,
http://projects.worldbank.org/P131201/?lang=en



37
In February 2017, a Lao delegation led by Lao Deputy Minister of
Planning and Investment Dr. Khamlien Pholsena visited Malaysia to
observe the internal operations of leading financial institutions and learn
about international trends and best practices in SMEs financing. The
delegation comprised 17 senior officials from the Ministry of Industry
and Commerce, Ministry of Planning and Investment, Ministry of
Finance, Bank of Lao PDR, Prime Minister’s Office, National Assembly,
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and commercial banks.

The study visit program was to enhance the Lao participants’ knowledge
and understanding of SME financing with the particular experience of
Malaysia. This included efficient SME financing tools, strategy, policy,
regulations, banking system and other public support schemes. The
program served as a platform for members to exchange information,
experiences, and best practices in the area of SME financing.

Lao officials spent four days with their Malaysian counterparts, learning
relevant and practical approaches to SME financing and development
through a number of briefings, direct interaction with policymakers,
institutional visits to channels of SME funds, and project site visits. This
has led to a fuller understanding of the significant roles that financial
institutions can play in the development of the SME sector in their
country.

This included visits to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry
(MITI), Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM), SME Corporation Malaysia (SME
Corp.), Credit Guarantee Corporation of Malaysia, Malaysia SME Bank,
and banks as recommended by BNM.




                                                                         38
Like Lao PDR, SMEs in Malaysia are also critical to Malaysia’s economy.
They represent 97 percent of registered businesses and 65 percent of
employment. In 2014, SMEs contributed to 36 percent of GDP. Challenges
faced by SMEs in Lao PDR are not alien to Malaysia. Historically,
Malaysia faced the same challenges and constraints which have been
addressed thanks to forward-thinking policies and programs undertaken
by the government.

In 2004, the Malaysian Government formed the National SME
Development Council (NSDC) which spearheaded the development of
SMEs in Malaysia. Chaired by the Prime Minister and comprising
ministers and the heads of key agencies, SMEs became a feature of the
national economic agenda. SME Corporation was formed as a dedicated
agency for SME development and secretariat to the NSDC.




SME development takes time and requires multi-stakeholder or inter-
agency involvement and collaborations. Malaysia has been successful on
this journey. This experience can be categorized in three main themes:

Firstly, sound policy and planning. It is important to have a clear vision,
target and programs to develop SMEs in the medium- and long-term. In
2012, SME Corp devised a long-term master plan for SME development
in Malaysia (2012-2020). The master plan sets out the vision, goals, and
focus areas of government intervention in developing SMEs which are
then implemented through programs. The strong intervention and
guidance from the government of Malaysia in pursuing the development
agenda of SMEs has resulted in tangible results and outcomes.

Secondly, the SME finance ecosystem. Financing is well-known to be
one of the major constraints of SME growth, but SME finance goes
beyond provision of credit from commercial banks or other lenders.
SMEs require other types of support and services which together form
the ecosystem of SME finance. The Malaysia experience provides
excellent examples of efforts to establish and sustain such an ecosystem.
In this endeavor, Bank Negara Malaysia has clearly identified the
ecosystem of SME financing in Malaysia which consists of five pillars; (1)
financial infrastructure; (2) financing and guarantee schemes; (3) avenues


39
to seek information and redress; (4) debt resolution and management;
and (5) outreach and awareness programs. The ecosystem appears to be
relevant for other countries as well.

Thirdly, a well-developed financial market to complete all pillars of the
SME financing ecosystem. In Malaysia, a wide range of financial
products and other supporting services are offered to cater for different
financing needs of SMEs. The type of financing available can take the
form of a simple working-capital bank loan, or of venture capital funds.
Financing for new businesses in emerging and new sectors (e.g. green
technology) are also provided by both the public and private sector.
Various types of guarantee schemes are also available to meet specific
risk-sharing arrangements for SMEs and commercial banks. Malaysian
banks and other financial institutions have deep experience in serving
SMEs and have provided deep knowledge of SME business models and
their associated business risks. These paved the way for the creation of
an efficient and competitive credit market for SMEs in Malaysia.



                      is Senior Financial Sector Specialist with the World
Bank Group




                                                                       40
                 experience of SME development over the years has been
remarkable. Through the World Bank Global Knowledge and Research
Hub, we have been connected with our counterparts in the Malaysian
government and have observed and picked up useful insights that will
be pertinent in shaping the SME agenda back in Lao PDR.

A particular point that came across through this exchange was on raising
capital for SMEs, which has been traditionally an impediment for SMEs
to flourish. We have seen first-hand new SME lending trends and
mechanisms that will empower our SMEs to expand their products and
services via innovative credit facilities that can be set up in similar
fashion.

This is also contingent on the second learning point that we are going
back with. We have gained a deeper understanding of the banking sector,
with particular emphasis on SME banking practices and responses to
financial criteria. While we recognize the importance of capital extension
to SMEs, we will need to ensure that the financing parameters are robust
and enforced accordingly.

We have seen, with great enthusiasm, Malaysia’s SME Masterplan. It is a
pioneering blueprint which, if implemented correctly, will be the 'game
changer' to accelerate the growth of SMEs to achieve high-income nation
status by 2020. From a public policy standpoint, the Masterplan captures
the critical leverage points that synergizes policies, strategy and
programs for supporting SMEs access to finance and development. This
is an approach that the Government can take to establish a clear agenda
for SMEs in Lao PDR.




41
The agricultural sector has been rediscovered as a
sector with great potential of contributing to
countries’ economic growth. Through a new
examination of both the quality and the efficiency of
business regulations, findings reveal agricultural
productivity is on average higher where transaction
costs are lower and countries adhere to a higher
number of regulatory good practices.




                                                        42
                           is seen to play a role in triggering growth,
reducing poverty and inequality, providing food security, and delivering
environmental services. An important prerequisite is the creation of an
enabling business environment to spur agricultural sector performance.
Government policies and regulations play a key role in shaping the
business environment through their impacts on costs, risks, and barriers
to competition for various players in the value chains.

        The idea behind regulation is to correct
        structural market failures arising from
        informational asymmetries, economies of
        scale in production, fragmented markets, and
        externalities.
Business regulation’s impact on economic performance depends on the
balance between the market failures it is able to correct and the costs it
imposes on economic agents. These include monetary costs of complying
with regulations, which divert resources from productive activities; and
efficiency costs, as regulations influence the allocation of resources across
firms and sectors.

There are unique and evolving dimensions through which agriculture
interacts with relevant laws and regulations. These include regulations
of agricultural input markets such as seed and fertilizer, as well as
regulations that enable small-scale and remote farmers to access finance.
Moreover, they include product quality, sanitary and phytosanitary
standards, as well as trucking licenses. Regulations in these areas play a
particularly critical role in connecting farmers to domestic and
international markets.




The structural transformation or change of an economy marks the change
from an agrarian society to an industrial one. As economies grow and
urbanize, services from commerce, finance, and the state become
increasingly important. However, no country has undergone a successful
structural change towards higher levels of income per capita without also


43
transforming its agricultural sector, which plays a central role in the
broader structural change, by supporting other sectors through strong
growth linkages and multiplier effects.

Agricultural transformation has been shaped by three interrelated
processes:
    »           higher yields and lower costs from farming lands have
        increased productivity. Since 1960, agricultural output has
        expanded by over 250 percent.

    »              the types of agricultural products have changed, from
        subsistence to cash crops; from food staples to intermediate
        inputs; and from low-value/low-risk to high-value/high-risk
        varieties.

    »             agricultural market transactions have become more
        integrated with the rest of the economy, more dependent on
        finance, and more oriented to international trade.

Much of this transformational success has been generated by the
combination of high rates of investment in crop research, infrastructure,
and market development, and appropriate policy support that took place
during the Green Revolution (1966 to 1985) and the two decades that
followed.

The provision of public goods – including physical and institutional
infrastructure – is another driver of agricultural transformation.
Similarly, by setting the right institutional and regulatory framework,
governments can help increase the competitiveness of farmers, enabling
them to integrate in regional and global markets. Land rights and water
property rights are good examples of governments supporting
agricultural competitiveness.

        Sustained trade liberalization over the past
        five decades also supported agricultural
        transformation by expanding opportunities
        for exporters of agricultural products.
In the past 50 years, exports of agricultural products from developing
countries have multiplied eight-fold while those of agriculture-based
manufactured products increased ten-fold. Largely thanks to an increase
in prices, exports of agricultural products nearly tripled between 2000
and 2012, while also increasing in volume by around 60 percent.


                                                                       44
Agriculture’s nature warrants a fresh and comprehensive examination of
what constitutes an enabling regulatory environment. Regulation in
agriculture is critical in a number of areas, including biosafety, food
safety, grades and standards, intellectual property protection,
agricultural input quality, groundwater extraction, and environmental
protection.

Due to agriculture’s importance for human health and food security,
political stability and environmental sustainability, it is not unusual for
governments to implement more stringent agricultural regulations. More
pervasive regulations demand continual evaluation to ensure
effectiveness in correcting market failures and monitor their implications
for firms.

Business regulations for agriculture are also relevant to manage risks and
ensure greater predictability. Farmers face considerable risk due to their
susceptibility to elements such as weather, plague of insects, and
diseases, all of which play a fundamental role in production.
Predictability is critical in the farming business where risk is typically
inherent.

        Regulations can enable businesses to operate
        in a context where the outcomes of their
        decisions are more predictable by setting clear
        and easily enforceable rules.
Well-designed regulations can support farmers by limiting their
transaction costs in accessing transportation, marketing and financial
services. Transport costs can make up one-third of the farm gate price in
some Sub-Saharan African countries, and prevent farmers from
specializing in the goods where they have a competitive advantage. High
marketing costs due to isolation from markets and roads, lack of means
of transport, or inefficient transport services often discourage farmers
from commercializing their production. Finally, credit is often rationed
in rural areas and financial services are often low quality and do not
respond adequately to the demand of producers.

Many elements of an enabling regulatory environment for agriculture are
not sector-specific. A more market-friendly regulatory environment


45
contributes to higher agricultural productivity. Further, private
agroenterprises that provide inputs and other services such as handling,
processing, transportation, marketing, and distribution of food and other
agricultural products, would benefit from secure property rights,
efficient taxation, increased access to finance, and the balanced entry and
operational standards that a supportive investment climate offers. In
light of widespread concerns for quickly growing concentration in the
agribusiness sector, minimizing regulatory barriers to competition is
particularly important.




Economic research is key in guiding evidence-based policymaking
towards more effective regulations. This relies critically on the
availability of firm-level data as well as data on the quality and efficiency
of regulatory practices.

The World Bank Group’s Enabling the Business of Agriculture (EBA)
dataset provides benchmarks on regulations that impact firms along the
agriculture value chain. EBA features two types of indicators. Quality
indicators reflect the text of laws and regulations, assessing their
conformity with a number of global regulatory good practices. Efficiency
indicators measure the transaction costs of firms complying with national
regulations, expressed in time or monetary units.

Both regulatory good practices and transaction costs display substantial
variation across the sample. Averaging them over income groups, there
is a positive association between income levels and the supportiveness of
countries’ regulatory environment.

        Countries with higher income per capita have
        in fact more efficient and higher quality
        agricultural regulations.
On average, the regulatory environment for agriculture is more
supportive in countries that have successfully shifted their economic
activities to services and manufacturing.

The association between regulatory quality and efficiency and
agricultural output are positive and significant. This result suggests that
both dimensions matter. Where regulatory transaction costs are higher
agricultural productivity is on average lower. Similarly, given same
amounts of agricultural inputs, economies that adhere to a higher

                                                                          46
number of regulatory good practices display higher average agricultural
output.




The development of the agricultural sector has been considered a key
priority for all developing countries. Economists and policymakers have
devoted their attention to improving agricultural technologies, physical
infrastructure and education. More recently, interest in the role of
institutions such as governance and regulations on economic
development has increased.

Looking at both quality and efficiency related aspects, and using new
cross-sectional data, the relationship between the heterogeneity in
countries’ agricultural productivity and their policy and regulatory
environment was examined, and the results indicate that agricultural
productivity is on average higher where transaction costs are lower and
countries adhere to a higher number of regulatory good practices.



This paper, which focuses on governance and rural development policy, was
presented at the technical workshop held on 19-20 September 2016 at the
headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in Rome. For
more information, visit bit.ly/fao092016

                       is project coordinator with the Enabling the
Business of Agriculture team in the World Bank Group

                  is a Program Manager in the World Bank Group
Development Economics Vice-Presidency




47
  Figure 9: The links between agribusiness (in the intersection of
agriculture, manufacturing and services) and internationally traded
          agribusiness (yellow text in dark green ellipse)
While growth rates for primary and manufacturing agribusiness have
been high, the primary and manufacturing agribusiness shares of total
trade have been mostly stable over the 1990 – 2014 period. The shares in
total trade shrank by only one percentage point, from 6 to 5 percent, in
the case of primary agribusiness, and by two percentage points, from 16
to 14 percent, in the case of manufacturing agribusiness. The small
decrease in trade shares of agribusiness goods might be associated with
the long-term decline of the contribution from the agricultural sector.

        Agribusiness operations expansion and
        modernization         typically      stimulate
        productivity, process and product innovation,
        as well as ancillary services for domestic and
        export activities that foster competitiveness
        and stronger linkages within the agro-food
        system.




More sophisticated economies tend to favor exporting manufacturing
agribusiness over primary agribusiness goods. Less sophisticated
economies, however, tend to import more manufacturing than primary
agribusiness goods, given their economic and capacity constraints.

As national income increases, countries tend to decrease imports of
manufacturing agribusiness goods and increase their exports of
manufacturing agribusiness goods, relative to primary agribusiness
imports and exports, respectively.

Overall, from 1990 to 2014, the share of manufacturing agribusiness in
exports and imports has been greater than the share of primary
agribusiness goods in high-income and middle-income countries.
Manufacturing agribusiness imports are also higher than primary
agribusiness imports in low-income countries. However, primary
agribusiness exports have played an important role in these economies,
greatly exceeding the export shares of manufacturing agribusiness. As
countries increase their income, the trade balance of both manufacturing
and primary agribusiness narrows.


                                                                     50
Manufacturing agribusiness shares of total imports have consistently
been smaller in high-income and middle-income countries than in low-
income countries, with those in middle-income countries slightly lower
than in high-income countries since the mid-2000s. The share of
manufacturing agribusiness exports in total exports has been more
uniform among income groups, averaging 15.8 percent for high-income
countries, 16 percent for middle-income countries, and 15.5 percent for
low-income countries from 1990 to 2014.

Primary agribusiness export shares have been lower in high-income
countries than in the other two income country groups. Even though low-
income countries’ primary agribusiness share in total exports shows a
decreasing trend over time, their average export shares remain large: 57
percent in 1990 and 31 percent in 2014. Shares of primary agribusiness
imports were mostly consistent across the three income groups, ranging
from 5 to 6 percent from 1990 to 2014.

        Developing countries have the incentive to
        export and import more for a variety of
        reasons, such as to grow faster.
In addition, low-income countries have the economic motivation to
import agricultural products, given low productivity levels in local
production sectors. Furthermore, many low-income economies struggle
with food security concerns; basic and cheap agricultural imports can
augment supplies and reduce food vulnerabilities.

Despite the strong reasons to import, evidence suggests that developing
countries are not making full use of the trade channel; instead, they are
constrained in importing primary agricultural products because of
supply restrictions and high trade costs. In addition, low-income
countries have the highest shares of manufacturing agribusiness imports
across income groups. Some substitution eﬀect of goods might be a
partial explanation of the high import shares of manufacturing
agribusiness and low import shares of primary agribusiness in low-
income countries. The share of manufacturing agribusiness imports
accounts for almost 25 percent of total imports in low-income countries
on average in the 1990 – 2014 period. Despite existing trade constraints,
the high shares of both primary agribusiness exports and manufacturing
agribusiness imports in low-income countries indicate some level of
integration with regional or global trade frameworks.




51
The increasing importance of the agribusiness trade sector for growth
and poverty reduction is associated with the evolution and expansion of
agricultural goods and farm-related activities. The structural
transformation of the agricultural sector is characterized by
improvements in productivity, the change in composition of produced
goods from low-value and low-risk to high-value and high-risk, and the
increased integration of the agricultural sector into regional and global
markets. This development generates demand for agribusiness products
in non-agricultural sectors, particularly for fertilizers, transportation,
commercial services, and machinery.

        Despite        structural       transformation,
        agricultural outputs – and their trade –
        continue to rise in absolute value.
Across all country-income classiﬁcations, the growth rates of imports and
exports of all subcategories have been positive. These growth rates across
varieties of agribusiness subcategories indicate a consistent expansion of
the sector, in keeping with the aggregate global trend, and demonstrate
that all the subcategories are part of the impressive agribusiness trade
expansion.

The expansion of primary and manufacturing agribusiness has been
uneven across goods' subcategories and country-income groups. On
average and across income groups, growth rates in primary and
manufacturing agribusiness imports and exports are higher in low-
income countries than in high-income countries or middle-income
countries, and lowest in high-income countries.




Studying agribusiness trade flows and their patterns across countries and
regions and understanding the reasons behind those patterns can give
governments some indications on major constraints as well as the
potential of the sector and its components. However, more empirical
evidence and analytical work is needed in order to improve respective
policies in the sector. This includes, for instance, the impact of the
regulatory framework on agribusiness trade, the role of infrastructure
and institutions on the business environment in agriculture and the


                                                                        52
effects of trade-partner diversification on trade volume and composition.
The World Bank's Enabling the Business of Agriculture (EBA) initiative
is an example of an attempt to identify laws and regulations that support
agribusiness.



For the full text of the Research Policy Brief, diagrams and reference list, visit
bit.ly/DECRG_agribusiness

                          is an economist in the World Bank
Development Research Group (DECRG)

                 is a private sector development specialist in the World
Bank Global Indicators Group (DECIG)




53
Innovation in financial services has the potential to
enhance financial inclusion in terms of access,
quality, and usage in a cost-effective manner. Two
big themes resonated at the 2016 Global Symposium
on Innovative Financial Inclusion jointly organized
by Bank Negara Malaysia and the World Bank
Group Global Knowledge Research Hub in
Malaysia – FinTech and Islamic Finance.



                                                        54
             changing the way people and firms save their money, make
payments, invest, borrow, and acquire insurance products. Nowadays,
millions of people around the world perform a wide range of financial
transactions through their smartphones with no need to go to a bank
branch. New financial products and mobile wallets targeting low-income
households are emerging in Africa and Asia. Technology is making it
possible to do practically any type of financial transactions – savings,
payments, lending – in remote villages with the use of smartphones.
FinTech can accelerate financial inclusion especially for poor people
around the world.

Technology giants such as Apple, Google, Facebook, Amazon, and
Alibaba are infringing on traditional financial institutions by offering
convenient and well-interconnected financial solutions to their
customers. And new online platforms offer people and SMEs attractive
options to invest and lend with one another in a rapid and cost-effective
manner. All these technological breakthroughs are enabling new
technologies to fill the gaps in SME finance.

        The benefits of FinTech are enormous not only
        for consumers, but also for financial
        institutions in managing risks and securing
        efficiency gains.
For example, with the use of technology, loan applications can be
appraised, approved, and disbursed much faster thanks to new ways to
encode, share and analyze data. FinTech also shortens the time to trade
and settle securities transactions. For financial institutions, it offers
shorter, speedier transaction chains, greater capital efficiency, and
stronger operational resilience.

But FinTech also brings risks and challenges that must be understood
properly. FinTech can be a source of increased risks for stability,
integrity, and market conduct. Risks may present themselves in various
forms. Personal information of customers, for example, may be lost or
stolen. When the IT system of a financial service provider is attacked,
large-scale loss of personal data may occur. IT systems may also be
accessed and manipulated to effect criminal payments.



55
The rapid pace of innovation is not only posing challenges to financial
institutions, but also to financial sector regulators. The legal and
regulatory frameworks in which FinTech players operate can be
outdated, leaving room for regulatory arbitrage and uneven playing
fields. Supervisory capacity may not yet be adequate to understand,
identify, and monitor emerging risks.

        Looking forward, the challenge for financial
        sector authorities is to foster innovation and
        establish an enabling regulatory environment
        for FinTech.
There is a need to properly standardize the regulatory approach for
FinTechs by allowing them to experiment with new technologies in a safe
environment.

Several countries in Asia, such as Australia, Malaysia, Singapore and
Thailand are adopting the regulatory sandbox approach to FinTech. This
is a safe and conducive space to experiment with FinTech solutions, and
where the consequences of failure can be contained. The sandbox cannot
remove all risks, as failure is an inherent characteristic of innovation. In
this regard, the sandbox aims to provide an environment where if an
experiment fails, its impact on consumers and on financial stability will
be limited.

In order for the FinTech industry to succeed, dialogue and collaboration
between emerging FinTech companies and authorities are needed. We all
must understand and be prepared to embrace disruption and innovation
that technology is bringing to our lives. The nascent FinTech industry
requires a proper enabling environment to continue growing.




                                                                         56
                      has grown by double digits in the past decade
despite the weak global economic environment. By 2020, the Islamic
finance industry is projected to reach $3 trillion in total assets with 1
billion users. However, despite its rapid growth and enormous potential,
7 out of 10 adults still do not have access to a bank account in Muslim
countries. This means that 682 million adult Muslims still do not have an
account at a banking institution. While some Muslim countries have high
levels of account ownership (above 90 percent), there are others with less
than 5 percent of their adult population who reported having a bank
account.




The use of financial services is still developing in Muslim countries.
According to the 2014 Global Findex, 40 percent of adults reported
having borrowed and saved any money in the past 12 months. And only
9 percent of adults saved at a formal financial institution. In comparison,
in high-income OECD countries 52 percent of adults saved formally.



                      Figure 10: Adults with a bank account



                                 682 mil
                                 unbanked                                   unbanked

                 of Muslims                                      of world's
                   with an                                    population with
                  account                                       an account




Source: Global Findex Database, World Bank staff estimates.



Thus, Islamic finance can play a significant role in narrowing the gap of
financial inclusion in Muslim countries. Historically, Malaysia has been
a leader in developing innovative savings, credit, and investment
instruments that are Sharia-compliant for low-income households.

57
In the region, Singapore issued FinTech Regulatory Sandbox Guidelines
in June 2016 to encourage more FinTech experimentations. Indonesia is
also preparing its FinTech legislation that will be ready in December
2016.

Another challenge for Muslim countries is to upgrade their financial
standards to common international principles that are applicable in all
Muslim jurisdictions. There is still no consensus on whether a financial
product such as an investment account or bond is compliant in all
Muslim territories. This generates uncertainty in non-Muslim investors
that are willing to finance infrastructure projects but are not sure that
their investments are 100 percent compliant with the generally-accepted
principles of financial securities.

        The Islamic finance industry is well
        positioned to seize the opportunities to
        embrace    new     market  technological
        developments.
The need to create new products to attend the unbanked population,
such as zero-fee accounts, small loans, or family insurance, could open a
new window to provide formal financial services to the unserved
populations in Muslim countries.



Two published works by the Finance and Markets Global Practice team in Kuala
Lumpur – bit.ly/fintechrev and bit.ly/isfinFI – highlighted key ideas raised
at the 2016 Global Symposium on Innovative Financial Inclusion: “Harnessing
Innovation for Inclusive Finance”. For more information on the symposium,
visit bit.ly/GSIFI2016

                              is World Bank Group Lead Financial Sector
Specialist

            is Senior Financial Sector Specialist with the Finance and
Markets Global Practice of the World Bank Group

                            is a Consultant at the Finance and Markets
Global Practice of the World Bank Group




59
“Project Greenback 2.0 – Johor Bahru”, launched in
November 2015, is the product of a partnership
between the World Bank and Bank Negara
Malaysia. The project aims to increase efficiency in
the market for international remittances by
promoting changes inspired by the real needs of the
ultimate beneficiaries of international money
transfers: the migrants and their families at home.




                                                       60
                            15 percent of Malaysia’s workforce, making
Malaysia home to the fourth-largest number of migrants in the EAP
region. The migrant population is diverse and includes workers from
Indonesia, Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar, Vietnam, China and India,
among other countries. They have become an integral part of Malaysia’s
economy and on a yearly basis remit substantial amounts of money to
their dependents in their home country through various remittance
channels. The amount of remittances sent by migrants from Malaysia has
significantly increased since 2006 with growth of more than 500 percent
in the past 10 years, according to BNM data of 2016.

         Johor Bahru is the first Greenback champion
         city in Asia and was selected based on a
         number of factors, including its vibrant
         economic development, especially in property
         development, plantation, and manufacturing
         sectors, which host the third largest migrant
         community in the country.
In 2016, a survey was conducted to explore the migrant workers’ level of
financial inclusion and their prevalent practices and needs in remitting
money to their origin countries. 401 migrants working in urbanized areas
and remote plantations were surveyed to determine their specific
remittance behavior. The main survey results entailed the following:




     On average, urban workers earn 46 percent more than plantation
     workers (RM 1,544 vs. 1,056 per month). However, even though
     plantation workers earn substantially less, they save 11 percent more
     than urban workers. This can be attributed to the fact that the cost of
     living at remote plantations is much lower than in urban areas. For
     both surveyed segments of migrant workers, higher education levels
     are positively correlated with higher incomes, but this positive
     correlation stops at the secondary school level, since the type of work
     performed by migrant workers typically does not require a skill set
     for which a secondary school education is needed.




61
Migrant workers’ main reason to send money home is to support the
purchase of basic goods/services by their dependents back home. The
dominant remittance frequency for plantation workers is once every
three months (35 percent) whereas urban workers mainly remit
every month (55 percent). Word of mouth is the main source of
information on remittance services among migrants. Two-thirds of
the migrant workers use non-bank remittance service providers (e.g.
Western Union, Moneygram etc). Banks are the second-most
preferred remittance option, while money exchangers and post
offices are used by less than 5 percent of the surveyed migrant
workers (Figure 11).



               Figure 11: Remittance channels used




The basic factors in selecting a remittance channel are the same
among all migrants: safety, ease of transaction, speed and reliability.
Nonetheless, the first determining factor for choosing a specific
(regulated or unregulated) remittance channel is the convenience of
location, after price and trust. Noteworthy is the fact that apart from
the standard transaction fee, most migrant workers were not aware
of the other remittance fee cost components, such as the foreign
exchange cost and costs charged to the recipient. The level of
financial inclusion/bank account ownership is low: 22 percent for
plantation workers and 55 percent for urban workers (Figure 12).



                                                                    62
     Certain workers cannot comply with the basic requirements to open
     a bank account due to a lack of proper documentation.



          Figure 12: Bank account ownership among migrants (%)




     However, the factors that had the biggest impact are the habit to pay
     wages in cash and the remoteness of plantations, making traveling to
     banks not only a hazardous (cash is carried on one’s person) but also
     a time-consuming undertaking. This is especially applicable to
     plantation workers, 25 percent of whom replied they had to travel at
     least 30 km to gain access to a bank or other regulated remittance
     channel.

     Those who have a bank account mainly use it to save money, and this
     trend is stronger with urban migrants than plantation workers.
     However, only half of the migrant workers use their bank account to
     remit or receive money. As a result, only one out of every four urban
     workers and one out of every ten plantation workers use banks to
     remit or receive money.



     74 percent of the surveyed migrants own a smartphone and 90
     percent of them access the internet via their smartphone. These
     numbers are high and present a tremendous business opportunity
     for technology-driven remittance services providers who invest in
     educating their consumer base and provide reliable and competitive
     remittance services. To reach out to this large segment of migrant
     workers, the World Bank has developed a smartphone/tablet app
     (“Pick Remit”) to help them make the most advantageous choice
     when sending money back home to their families. By choosing the


63
    most favorable remittance service provider, migrants can save and
    keep more money in their pockets or just send a little more to their
    dependents.




The implementation of Greenback 2.0 in Johor Bahru revealed a number
of important issues which can be addressed by the private sector or the
Malaysian government (e.g. through tailor-made comprehensive
educational and awareness activities or regulatory changes to promote
financial inclusion of migrants) resulting in a greater transparency of the
remittance market to the benefit of migrants and their families.


                 The impact of Greenback 2.0 in Johor Bahru has been
                 substantial. Average remittance fees pre-Greenback 2.0
                 (before December 2015) in Johor Bahru decreased by 40
                 percent from 3.33 percent prior to December 2015 to 2.02
                 percent5 in December 2016.



         As a result, Malaysia is one of the cheapest
         remittance-sending corridors in the world
         today.

This article and all charts depicted are derived from
the report “Migrant Workers’ Remittances from
Malaysia: Preliminary findings of a survey on
migrant workers’ remittance behavior and
financial needs in Johor Bahru, Malaysia”. The
report will be published in Q2 2017.

                  is Senior Financial Sector
Specialist at The World Bank Group

                    is Senior Financial Sector
Specialist, Consultant at The World Bank
Group




                                                                         64
Moderate and gradual changes of the real exchange
rate are beneﬁcial for the economy to help it attain
domestic and external equilibrium, and should not
be feared. However, large and sharp devaluations
can lead to insolvency and even systemic crisis.
They should be prevented by macroprudential
policies and by avoiding unsustainable ﬁxed-
exchange-rate regimes. Central bank intervention to
avoid a secular depreciation is useless: it only leads
to massive losses of foreign reserves.


65
                       around the world across all national development
tiers have depreciated with respect to the U.S. dollar in the last few years.
Governments, entrepreneurs, and households are concerned because
drastic depreciation of the national currency could lead to bankruptcy
and even economic crisis. Below, the reasons and evidence for both
potentially negative and positive eﬀects of real exchange rate (RER)
depreciation are examined; and the effectiveness of policies in reversing
depreciation or mitigating its negative impact are discussed.



Figure 13: Real exchange rate (RER) has depreciated in most countries,
                     and sharply so in some cases




Source: Haver Analytics monthly data and World Bank staff estimates6.




                                                                          66
Sudden and drastic depreciations of national currencies can generate a
chain of liquidity constraints and insolvency at diﬀerent economic levels,
from households to ﬁrms and governments. These eﬀects can be
compounded as diﬀerent sectors aﬀect one another, decreasing
consumption, restricting credit, increasing interest rates, and limiting
investments.

For consumers or users of foreign products, a depreciation of the RER
will increase their costs, often without a matching increase in their
revenues. For them, a depreciation will likely have a negative impact on
income, inducing a substitution away from foreign goods and services
and toward domestic ones.

For people and institutions that owe foreign currency debts,
depreciation increases the real value of their debt, possibly resulting in
repayment diﬃculties, a deterioration of their balance sheet, and the risk
of bankruptcy.

The eﬀect on ﬁrms seems to depend on their intrinsic characteristics. If
they are importers, the eﬀect will tend to be negative; if they are
exporters, the eﬀect will tend to be positive. A 2002 Forbes study suggests
that ﬁrms in crisis countries have lower rates of capital growth, and
worse stock return performance after devaluations, if they are capital-
intensive and if their cost of capital increases.

Governments can also be negatively aﬀected by sharp devaluations, but
this depends on their exposure to foreign currency.




A sharp depreciation can cause more than isolated cases of illiquidity and
insolvency. It can produce a systemic crisis if these instances of
insolvency are closely connected, or if it suﬃciently aﬀects the ﬁnancial
system, which in many economies is the center of interconnection
between businesses, consumers, and government. A ﬁnancial system is
vulnerable to a depreciation shock directly if its assets and liabilities are
mismatched in terms of currency of denomination, and indirectly if its
debtors become insolvent.




67
Governments can be the source of a systemic crisis if they are unprepared
to absorb the depreciation shock and become insolvent or strapped for
liquidity. Governments with high levels of foreign debt or with
contingent liabilities on foreign exchange movements are particularly
vulnerable to a depreciation shock; those that insulate against exchange
rate ﬂuctuations (by keeping a ﬁxed exchange rate or by providing price
and proﬁt guarantees in foreign exchange) are among the most
vulnerable.

Evidence suggests that currency crises are sometimes related to banking
crises and sovereign debt crises. In the 1980s, currency crises were
especially linked to sovereign debt crises, while in the 1990s currency
crises occurred in closer connection with banking crises. Importantly, the
frequency of these crises decreased markedly in the 2000s, despite the
strong international shocks experienced in the second half of the decade.

Currency crises and systemic crises disrupt employment, induce
poverty, and create uncertainty, being associated with negative eﬀects on
output growth, as well as on its components related to public and private
consumption and investment. A 2006 study by Hutchison and Noy7 ﬁnds
that after a currency crisis, GDP declines around 2–3 percent. However,
if the currency crisis is accompanied by a sudden stop of foreign
investment, and if it leads to a systemic ﬁnancial crisis, the cumulative
eﬀect is a 10–15 percent decline.




However, not all depreciations should be avoided. Gradual and
moderate depreciations (and appreciations) usually denote an orderly
movement toward a new domestic and external equilibrium.

This entails restoring potential employment and growth, and resolving
balance of payments gaps when there are changes in fundamental factors
(such as productivity growth and demographic changes) and shocks of
various types (such as terms of trade, commodity prices, and global
ﬁnancial crisis). Thus depreciations can help reduce trade deﬁcits and
prompt domestic growth.

In the face of exchange rate ﬂuctuations, it should be kept in mind that
the RER is a relative price whose ﬂexibility and movement is essential to
avoid large imbalances and distortions. To obtain this ﬂexibility, the




                                                                       68
exchange rate, as a national currency price, can serve the function of
coordinating a (very) large set of individual prices in both labor and
output markets. An exchange rate depreciation, for instance, can achieve
the same objective as a reduction of domestic prices in a large variety of
goods and services.

        Flexible exchange rates are shock buﬀers and
        eﬀective coordinating mechanisms, and both
        currency depreciations and appreciations are
        just a reﬂection of such ﬂexibility. Countries
        with ﬂexible exchange rates tend to adjust
        better to external or internal economic shocks.
The ﬂexible-exchange-rate regime allows a faster and more sustainable
recovery from trade and current account imbalances; from natural
disasters; and from a variety of shocks that produce internal and external
imbalances. Moreover, this regime is less vulnerable to speculative
attacks, especially as they become ﬁnancially developed.




On balance, moderate and gradual depreciations and appreciations of the
RER are beneﬁcial for the economy to help it attain domestic and external
equilibrium. These are long-term phenomena and a reﬂection of a
healthy economy. It can be argued that the best policy in this case is to
allow the exchange rate to move in a ﬂexible way, without undue
interference by monetary or ﬁscal authorities.

However, when RER ﬂuctuations are abrupt or highly volatile as a result
of either a large and sudden shock or the unraveling of an unsustainable
policy, they can cause insolvency for various economic agents (from
households and ﬁrms to banks and governments) and even systemic
ﬁnancial crises. They should be mitigated through short-term crisis
management measures, including deploying previously determined
prudential policies such as short-term capital controls and central bank
interventions as lender of last resort. In addition, if adverse international
conditions exacerbate ﬁnancial frictions, the central bank’s sale of foreign
currency (held as international reserves) can be eﬀective—albeit only in
the short run—in preventing negative real impacts and systemic crises.




69
Beyond these short-term crisis management measures, the evidence
indicates clearly that there is no large or long-lasting impact of foreign
exchange interventions on the real exchange rate.

         In the face of fundamental forces driving the
         exchange rate, “defending” the national
         currency does not prevent its depreciation and
         only leads to massive losses of foreign
         reserves.
Although little can be done to avoid large external shocks, much can be
done to prevent crises. This starts by avoiding unsustainable policies. For
exchange rate matters, the worst of these policies are keeping a ﬁxed-but-
misaligned exchange rate (sooner or later, it will burst), and providing
implicit or explicit insurance on undue or excessive risk taking (by
intervening against a clear exchange rate trend, by subsidizing foreign
exchange transactions, and by bailing out ﬁnancial institutions). These
only invite speculative attacks, unwarranted risk taking, and losses of
foreign reserves.



For the full text of the Research Policy Brief, diagrams and reference list, visit
bit.ly/DECRG_forex

                    is Lead Economist in the Development Research
Group at the World Bank

                          is an economist in the World Bank
Development Research Group (DECRG)




                                                                               70
The informal sector forms 35 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP) and employs 70 percent of
the labor force in developing economies. There are
trade-offs between formality and informality in
terms of labor, capital, and productivity growth.
Formal firms confront higher labor costs, while
informal firms face higher capital costs and lower
productivity. Informality, regulations, migration,
and economic growth are all interlinked, and
government intervention should be in the form of
making formal organization more attractive.

71
                      a term used to describe the collection of firms,
workers, and activities that operate outside legal and regulatory
frameworks or outside the modern economy. While it offers the benefits
of avoiding the burden of regulation and taxation, its participants suffer
the costs of not having the protection and services that the law and the
State can provide.

Informality is a fundamental characteristic of underdevelopment. A
complex, multifaceted phenomenon, it is determined by both the
inherent characteristics of developing economies (such as low physical
and human capital) and by the relationship that the State establishes with
private agents (through regulation, monitoring, and the provision of
public services). The evidence suggests that the relative size of the
informal sector declines with overall development, rises with the burden
of regulation, and decreases with the strength of enforcement.

Informality implies misallocation of resources and entails losing the
advantages of legality, such as police and judicial protection, access to
formal credit institutions, and participation in international markets,
which can then lead to slow capital accumulation, low economic growth,
and sluggish migration to more productive areas. Informal firms tend to
be smaller and have lower productivity, and differences in the size of the
informal sector can account for a significant portion of differences in
output per capita between rich and poor countries.

Informality is widespread in the majority of developing countries. It is
a substantive and pervasive phenomenon that must be explained and
addressed, particularly in the design of development policies. The goal
of reducing informality can shed new light on the relevance of short-run
policies – such as streamlining regulations and strengthening monitoring
and enforcement – and long-run strategies – such as improving judicial
services, providing public infrastructure and services, and contributing
to human capital formation.

        Informality is likely to appear as one of the
        most difficult challenges facing developing
        countries, and is often at the top of
        policymakers’ priorities.


                                                                        72
There remains much confusion on basic definitions and measurement of
informality and about its causes and consequences. In turn, confusion on
definitions and causes can lead to misguided advice about confronting
informality. For instance, if it is perceived as solely the result of weak
enforcement, the advice may be to strengthen monitoring and harden
penalties against informal firms, which could result in worse problems –
unemployment, self-employment, and further reductions in the size of
firms. Likewise, if informality is perceived as purely the result of State
regulations, the recommendation may be to lift them, only to realize that
the consequent reduction in informality is limited and small.

In the late 1980s, the informal sector had been presented as the private
sector´s response to an over-regulated economy and an inefficient State.
This approach departed from the then-prevailing one, in which
informality was regarded as merely a symptom of underdevelopment,
rather than the result of misguided policies. This tension between
development and policies as determinants and constraints of informality
is present, in one way or another, in all modern studies of the subject.

Studies on informality can generally be divided in two basic strands,
according to the trade-offs that generate the informal sector. One strand
takes a public finance perspective, emphasizing the trade-off between
taxes and public services; informal firms avoid taxes at the cost of
reduced access to public services and being subject to penalties. The other
takes a labor perspective, focusing on the trade-off between labor and
capital costs; informal firms avoid mandated labor costs at the cost of
higher capital costs. The two trade-offs are related, but choosing one of
them provides tractability and emphasis: if the interest is in
understanding tax evasion, the first trade-off is the obvious choice; if
informal labor is the primary interest, the second approach is more
suitable.




Consider the case of a policy-driven urban bias and a permanent
minimum wage. This case can represent labor markets in developing
countries in the last 50 years in regions as diverse as Africa, East Asia,
Latin America, the Middle East, and South Asia. In the 1960s, these
countries were characterized by a large rural population, most of which
was employed in a rudimentary, subsistence economy. In contrast, the


73
modern economy, where industrialization was taking place, was mostly
based in urban areas. The most significant migration consisted of people
moving from rural to urban areas. There are three phases that can be
described in terms of the relative size of the informal economy in the
modern economy.

                          there is an expansion of modern informal
employment. Urban-bias policies are gradually implemented by pushing
down the rural-urban terms of trade and decreasing the urban cost of
living. This encourages rural-urban migration, and an urban labor force
that grows faster than capital. In turn, the declining capital-labor ratio
produces an expansion of the relative (and absolute) size of modern
informal employment.

                             the relative size of the modern informal sector
remains stable. As urban-bias policies are curbed, rural-urban migration
continues, but at a slower pace. When the adjusted rural wage is stable,
the urban labor force grows at the same rate as the capital stock does.
Thus, the urban capital-labor ratio remains constant, even in the face of
capital accumulation, for as long as rural-urban migration continues.
During this period, the relative size of informal employment remains
unchanged. The greater the pool of rural workers, the larger will be the
phase of stability in the relative size of the informal sector.

                         there is a contraction of informal employment.
Provided that the rate of natural increase in the rural population is not
greater than the migration rate, rural-urban migration comes to a halt. At
first, the formal and informal sectors coexist. The capital stock
accumulates at a constant rate; and, as long as the rate of natural increase
in urban population is not too large, the aggregate capital-labor ratio
steadily increases. This produces a gradual decline in the relative (and
absolute) size of the modern informal sector until it disappears, when the
minimum legal wage is no longer binding.

        When the economy is fully formal, capital
        accumulation produces a decrease of the
        capital rental rate, reflecting the relative
        scarcity of labor. Capital growth slows down
        as the rental rate approaches the subjective
        rate of time preference plus the depreciation
        rate.

                                                                          74
To understand how informality changes in size and type, it is necessary
to relate it to the long-run phenomena of labor migration and economic
growth. It is also necessary to realize how informality derives from both
lack of development and biased policies. Informality should then be
understood as both a symptom and a consequence in the process of
economic development.

Different types of policies to address informality have different outcome
possibilities and limitations.

For instance, improving financial and contractual participation for
informal firms will increase informal wages, but will also cause an
expansion of the informal sector. Streamlining labor regulations will
expand the formal sector in the modern economy, but will not eliminate
informal labor in the rudimentary economy in the short run. Sustained
improvements in labor productivity in the modern economy, through
capital accumulation and total factor productivity growth, will lead to a
reduction in informality across all areas, but only in the long run.

Taking into account that informality can also manifest in the rudimentary
economy (as self- or sub-employment) should make policy makers
realize the futility of formalization plans based on penalties to firms. It
should help them understand the advantages of programs that make
formality more attractive to both workers and firms



This paper was presented twice in 2016. The first was held at the World Bank
headquarters in Washington D.C as part of the Policy Research Talks in June.
The second was held at the World Bank Group Global Knowledge and Research
Hub in Malaysia in October. Both engagements were organized by the
Development Economics Research Group (DECRG). To download the full paper,
visit bit.ly/DECRG_informality

                    is Lead Economist in the Development Research
Group at the World Bank




75
Articulating a reasonable policy is one thing;
actually implementing it successfully is another.
Rarely is there a follow-up on who will implement
these “implications,” or if an administration
charged with implementing any policy can
actually do so, or whether a given policy success
or failure actually stems less from the quality of
its “design” and more from the willingness and
ability of the prevailing apparatus to implement
it.



                                                     76
       the great paradoxes of contemporary development is that this
wondrous project – to bring a measure of prosperity and peace to the
whole world – has both succeeded spectacularly and failed miserably.

It has succeeded spectacularly because, by many measures, the world has
never been in better shape. Despite what one might infer from the daily
headlines, on average we live longer, have higher incomes, are better
educated, enjoy more political freedoms, and are physically safer than at
any point in human history.




Large-scale famines, pestilence, and plagues, long the scourge of human
existence, have mostly been consigned to history books. Even wars are
smaller scale, resulting in vastly fewer deaths than those of the first half
of the twentieth century (and before). But we have also failed miserably,
because we have done the easy part, and because the key to taking the
next vital steps – building institutions able to implement increasingly
complex and contentious tasks, under pressure and at scale – is not only
not improving, but in most developing countries steadily declining.

The "easy” part of development entailed stopping doing awful things
(genocide, gulags, apartheid, exclusion) and then going from nothing to
something in the provision of positive things: from essentially no public
services of any kind to the provision of a building called a school,
occupied by a person called a teacher deploying some resources called
textbooks. Such provisions constituted, mathematically speaking, an
infinite improvement and together they generated correspondingly real
advancements in human welfare. As important as these achievements
have been, however, they are the beginning, not the end, of
“development”.

77
We need to ensure that buildings, teachers, and textbooks routinely
combine to produce actual learning, generating the knowledge and
problem-solving skills that enable students to become functioning
members of the twenty-first-century global economy, and to become
informed citizens meaningfully participating in domestic political
debates. Having defined education as enrollment, and gender equality as
enrollment equality, it has been possible to declare victory.

These “inputs,” however, are necessary but very insufficient for taking
the next steps toward establishing a high-capability education system,
one able to assure the reliable provision of high-quality public services
for all. Moreover, beyond services that enjoy broad support,
development also entails the crafting of a state able to legitimately and
equitably impose difficult obligations – taxation, regulation, criminal
justice – that everyday citizens (let alone powerful interest groups) may
have occasion to actively resist.

        Delivering on such tasks requires a mutually
        binding and broadly legitimate “social
        contract” between citizen, state and provider,
        and a state that itself has the organizational
        capability to implement such tasks.
On these development tasks, unfortunately, the empirical record in
recent years is much less sanguine; indeed, in most developing countries,
the quality of institutions presiding over such tasks is flatlining or
actively declining. Even delivering the mail – a non-controversial and
almost entirely logistical task – seems to be beyond the capability of many
countries (and not just the poorest ones).

Too often, countries are being asked to run before they can walk. They
are being tasked to implement “green growth”, to build an effective
justice system, and to introduce a progressive tax code and pension
systems before they even have the resources or capability to fix potholes
in the roads. In the face of such challenges, the prevailing development
literature and policy discourse is conspicuously silent or at best confused.

Reports, papers, and memoranda are of course replete with strident calls
for enhancing “development effectiveness” and “good governance” for


                                                                         78
promoting “the rule of law,” “social accountability,” “transparency,”
“participation,” and “inclusion” as a basis for building “sound
institutions,” but relatively little attention is paid to the mechanisms and
logics by which such activities are justified, enacted, and assessed.

Even if seasoned practitioners readily concede that bona fide “tool kits”
for responding to these challenges remain elusive, our collective
response seems to have been to double down on orthodoxy – on
measuring success by inputs provided, resources transferred, “best
practices” replicated, rules faithfully upheld – rather than seeking to
forge strategies that respond to the specific types of development
problems that “building effective institutions” necessarily requires.

We contend that such strategies produce administrative systems in
developing countries that look like those of modern states but do not
(indeed, cannot) perform like them; reforms yield metrics that satisfy
narrow bureaucratic scorecards in donor capitals (and thus enable funds
to continue to flow and legitimacy to be sustained), but mask a clear
inability to actually implement incrementally more complex and
contentious tasks.

What systems look like (their form) and what they can actually do (their
function) are often conflated; the claim or hope, in effect, is that good
form will get you good function. We argue, on the contrary, that success
(effective functioning) stems less from “good institutions” (form) but that
success builds good institutions. The challenge is thus how to enhance
the frequency, quality, and robustness of this success.

        Beyond mere critique of orthodoxy, we seek to
        outline a strategy and collection of tactics that
        we believe – on the basis of the historical
        record, contemporary evidence, and our own
        hard-won experience – offers a coherent and
        supportable strategy for nurturing this
        success.
Rather than “selling solutions” (or a “tool kit” of universal “best
practices” as verified by “rigorous evidence”), strategies that begin with
generating locally nominated and prioritized problems are proposed to
identify customized “best fit” responses (sometimes by exploiting the
existing variation in implementation outcomes), in the process working
with an expanding community of practice to share and learn at scale.

79
